Deadlock in Durban
NEW YORK – The 17th conference of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change , popularly known as COP-17 , is taking place in Durban , South Africa , at a critical moment , as the historic 1997 Kyoto Protocol is set to expire next year .
But , like the climate-change conferences in Copenhagen in 2009 and in Cancún in 2010 , COP-17 can be expected to spend much and produce little .
Indeed , the extravagance of these conferences seems to grow , rather than shrink , as their dismal results become more apparent .
COP-15 in Copenhagen lasted 12 days , and is estimated to have attracted 15,000 delegates and 5,000 journalists .
The carbon emissions created by so many people flying to Denmark was real , while the emissions targets that the conference sought remained beyond reach .
That will be true in Durban as well – and on an even greater scale .
The real problem is that the expectations concerning meaningful action on climate change , as opposed to gimmicks such as US President Barack Obama ’ s last-minute arrival and minuscule gestures in Copenhagen , are now lower than ever .
There are two problems that cannot be wished away .
First , the United States under Obama ’ s ineffective leadership has drifted yet further into a “ What ’ s in it for me ? ” attitude on key issues requiring international action .
In place of what the economist Charles Kindleberger once called an “ altruistic hegemon , ” the America that the world now faces is what I call a “ selfish hegemon . ”
Thus , the US has virtually pulled out of the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations , with Obama acquiescing to greedy business lobbies that will not settle unless more of their demands are met .
But not only has Obama abandoned Doha ; he has also seriously endangered the multilateral trading system by diverting US efforts and resources to discriminatory bilateral trade deals and , most recently , to the Trans-Pacific Partnership , which will principally aid countries that are worried about an aggressive China and seek political security rather than increased trade .
The same is true of environmental action : after Australia ’ s belated ratification of the Kyoto Protocol in 2007 , the US remains the only country that has not ratified the agreement .
The second problem is that the sheer weight of the US in international affairs , though diminished nowadays , has nonetheless led to a corruption of the principles that should underpin a new climate-change treaty to succeed the Kyoto Protocol .
For example , unlike the World Trade Organization , whose dispute-settlement mechanism imposes penalties for abandoning negotiated reductions of trade barriers , the targets for emission reductions are not binding and enforceable commitments .
The US has not agreed to accept such sanctions for failing to meet emissions targets ; but , without penalties , the exercise is largely futile and only encourages cynicism about the effort to combat climate change .
Moreover , abandoning the Kyoto Protocol ’ s exemption of developing countries from obligations for current emissions , the US has insisted on obligations from China and India that reflect a common form of “ taxation ” of emissions .
But there are persuasive reasons why these countries insist that the obligations must instead reflect per capita emissions , a criterion that would require far greater emission cuts by the US than its leaders now contemplate .
Besides , these countries correctly argue that the tradeoff between action on climate change and poverty reduction is more compelling for them at their level of per capita income , unless they can access newly emerging technologies at low cost .
This demand suggests that the US should subsidize the flow of technology to India and China from US firms holding patents , which is highly impractical .
That is where the $ 100 billion Global Climate Change Fund , promised at the Cancún COP-16 conference , comes in .
Unfortunately , even environmental icons like Al Gore in the US are so heavily invested in new green technology that their self-interest is tied up in this fund being spent on developing privately owned new technologies that are protected by patents .
The new “ Green Revolution ” seeds that the Nobel laureate agronomist Norman Borlaug developed with public money were freely available to all users anywhere .
The technology developed by the money spent from the Global Climate Change Fund also should be equally available to all , including India and China , which would then enable them to agree to more emissions cuts .
Indeed , even the contributions to the Fund should have reflected the past damage by the developed countries over the course of a century of carbon emissions – an obligation based on the well-established tort principle that the US has accepted for domestic pollution .
But here , too , the US has rejected the idea outright .
Several such sensible ways to design the Kyoto Protocol ’ s successor treaty have been undermined by efforts to accommodate inappropriate US-led demands and objections , resulting in the impasse that became evident at the COP conferences in Copenhagen and Cancún .
Those who do not believe in magic know better than to hope that it will somehow disappear in Durban .
