We Should Not Be Afraid
PARIS – Europe is facing an historic moment .
By the end of this year , the number of people applying for asylum in the European Union will exceed one million . The human cost of this refugee crisis is appalling .
Yet , in all but a handful of cases , the response of Europe ’ s governments has been tentative , at best : acknowledging the need to do more , while fearing the implications .
Some politicians fear the burden that migrants will impose on local communities and taxpayers .
Others fear extremists masquerading as genuine refugees .
Above all , many are scared of public opinion , which – for all the heart-warming scenes of welcome and support for asylum-seekers – remains hesitant and even hostile to the prospect of still more migrants from war-torn , troubled countries , especially if they practice a different religion .
European leaders cannot afford to be afraid .
The refugee crisis is not one from which they can opt out .
No magic wand will empower leaders to transport more than a million people back across the Aegean and the Bosphorus to Mosul and Aleppo , or across the Mediterranean to Eritrea , Somalia , and Sudan .
The reintroduction of border controls and the construction of fences may buy time for over-stretched countries , but no one can seriously expect to keep out people who are so desperate to move .
Given the dire conditions in the countries from which they are fleeing , perhaps half of the asylum-seekers will qualify for residency under even the strictest rules .
So , whatever the sensitivity or ambivalence of public opinion , European leaders will have to find a bold , coordinated , and unified response .
There are three challenges .
The first is to agree on a fair allocation of refugees within Europe ; despite their vast numbers , these desperate people must be provided with shelter , food , and support .
This will be difficult enough .
The second challenge is to start the process of integrating refugees into Europe ’ s societies and economies .
Some refugees will find it relatively easy to find jobs .
A university-educated Syrian civil engineer arriving in Munich will need to learn some German ; but , once this is done , he or she is unlikely to have to wait too long before employers come knocking .
Other asylum-seekers have lower levels of education , and many may well be traumatized by their experience of war and exodus .
It will take time and effort to integrate them – and many voters will be skeptical of the process , especially given that successful integration or assimilation will not come cheap .
However , paying the price to accept and integrate today ’ s asylum-seekers could reap significant benefits for the Europe of tomorrow .
Our work at the OECD shows that migration , if well managed , can spur growth and innovation . Unfortunately , in the past , migration has not always been well managed : migrants have been concentrated in ghetto-like conditions , with few public services or employment prospects .
Even so , the evidence from the OECD ’ s 34 member countries is that immigrants generally pay more in taxes and social security contributions than they receive in individual benefits .
Today , we ’ ve released a policy brief on the current refugee crisis .
Put simply , Europe needs migrants and the new skills they can bring .
Otherwise , as its population falls , it will struggle to pay pensions and health-care costs in the future ( already in the decade to 2010 , immigration accounted for 65 % of the increase in the EU workforce ) .
Many will argue that refugees who lack the skills that the economy demands will be harder to integrate than other newcomers .
Perhaps so .
But , because we now know a great deal about what has worked in resettling migrants , we can hope to avoid the mistakes of the past – not least by documenting and sharing the experiences of the countries that have managed migration well .
This brings us to the third , and greatest , challenge that European leaders have to overcome : the fear of migrants .
Integration is a precondition for the public acceptance of future legal flows .
The presumption is that “ we ” are integrated , whereas “ they ” are not .
And yet almost everyone has a migrant somewhere in their family tree , often not many generations back .
The distinction between “ us ” and “ them ” is not as sharp as we might assume .
None of today ’ s leaders expected to face a human tragedy on the scale of what we now see in the Mediterranean and across Europe .
But how they respond will determine how they are judged by their citizens and by history .
This is not a numbers game .
Leaders should shift their attention from questions concerning “ how many ” and “ where ” to the “ what ” of the crisis – namely , what they should be doing to integrate these newcomers into their societies and economies .
They must exercise their leadership to convince the public that migrants – above all , those most in need of protection – give more than they take .
In this moment of crisis , we should all heed the words of the Mexican novelist Carlos Fuentes : “ Recognize yourself in he and she who are not like you and me . ”
