Fiscal Apocalypse Now
As support for President George W. Bush in the United States has crumbled over the past year , perhaps the most surprising element is the revolt of economists and observers of economic policy .
Last week , Peggy Noonan , a speechwriter for both President Reagan and the first President Bush declared in the Wall Street Journal that had she known what George W. Bush ’ s fiscal policy would be , she would have voted for Al Gore in the 2000 presidential election .
“ If I ’ d thought [ that George W. Bush ] was a big-spending Rockefeller Republican .... I wouldn ’ t have voted for him ... , ” Noonan wrote .
Bush “ did present himself as a conservative ... conservatism is hostile , for reasons ranging from the abstract and philosophical to the concrete and practical , to high spending and high taxing .... ”
And then she falls into near-complete despair : “ Mr. Bush will never have to run again , and he is in a position to come forward and make the case , even if only rhetorically , to slow and cut spending .
He has not . And there ’ s no sign he will ... ”
Noonan is not quite correct .
George W. Bush presented himself not as a normal conservative , but as something he called a “ compassionate conservative , ” thus preserving a certain amount of ambiguity .
Some focused on the “ conservative ” : they expected the Bush administration ’ s fiscal policy to keep a tight rein on spending and to eliminate many programs in order to finance significant tax cuts .
Others focused on the “ compassionate ” : they expected Bush ’ s fiscal policy largely to eschew tax cuts and to adopt largely Democratic spending priorities , including expanded federal aid to education and a prescription drug benefit , thereby showing that Republicans could run a more cost-effective version of the social-welfare state .
Still others interpreted “ compassionate conservatism , ” as the commentator Andrew Sullivan put it , as a “ smokescreen ... necessary for any vaguely successful retrenchment of government power in an insatiable entitlement state . ” They expected tax cuts to be followed by a fangs-bared attack on social-welfare spending once deficits reemerged .
As a result , in 2000 and 2001 nobody was really sure of the Bush administration ’ s policy direction .
Was it traditional fiscal conservativism ?
Was it to do what Democrats do , but do it better ?
Was it to “ starve the beast ” by pumping up government debt to the point that social programs would have to be cut ?
The first two priorities , if well designed and well implemented , are certainly honorable goals for a government to pursue .
The third is less honorable , and likely to fail : it relies on the dangerously weak premise that the party in power ’ s political adversaries will be more public-spirited and less ruthless when they return to government .
Of course , conservatives and Republicans could hope that their own favorite policy priorities would emerge as the administration ’ s preferred strategy .
Or they could be content with whichever of the three strategies that they expected to see , agreeing that , in any case , fiscal policy was always going to be much better than it would have been under Democratic rule .
But then a strange thing happened : the Bush administration did not order any of the three options that were thought to be on the menu .
Moreover , the Bush administration combined its policies with an extraordinary reluctance to veto anything coming out of Congress , and , after the year or two that it took for this to become obvious , an inability to restrain Congress at all .
What emerged was neither traditional fiscal conservatism nor Democratic policies without Democrats nor starve-the – beast populism , but something that has no name .
An exchange between two characters in a scene from the movie “ Apocalypse Now ” captures an anti-ethic that characterizes the Bush administration ’ s policies as well :
Willard : “ They told me that you had gone totally insane , and that your methods were unsound . ”
Kurtz : “ Are my methods unsound ? ”
Willard : “ I don ’ t see any method at all , sir . ”
It is not that Republicans and conservatives think that the Bush administration has adopted the wrong method , but that they don ’ t see any method at all that has driven them into their ( late ) fiscal-policy revolt .
And that is why so many of them now wish that they had had a different candidate to vote for back in 2000 .
