The Middle East ’ s Arc of Prosperity
PRINCETON – As Egypt trembles on the brink of civil war , with alarming levels of violence and hardening divisions on all sides , it is hard to find a truly bright spot anywhere in the Middle East or North Africa .
Syria ’ s agony continues unabated ; sectarian attacks in Iraq are becoming more frequent and deadly ; the threads of Lebanon ’ s fragile peace are fraying ;
Jordan is awash in refugees ; Libya ’ s militias are running rampant and distorting its politics ;
Tunisia faces political crisis ; and Turkey ’ s star as the embodiment of Islamic democracy has dimmed .
Yet even with this litany of problems , US Secretary of State John Kerry has decided to focus on Israel and Palestine .
His justification – “ if not now , never ” – is almost certainly true .
But there is another , equally strong ( albeit often overlooked ) rationale : the tremendous potential for an Israeli-Palestinian-Jordanian economic zone that would drive the entire region ’ s growth and development .
In the immortal words of James Carville , Bill Clinton ’ s campaign manager in 1992 , “ It ’ s the economy , stupid . ”
The dismal failure of Middle Eastern and North African economies to deliver the prosperity that their people desperately want is a constant factor pushing people into the streets .
It is not the only factor , but rising food prices helped to spread revolutionary fervor from a small group of activists to much of Egypt ’ s population in 2011 , and again this year in June , when the most frequent grievance against former President Mohamed Morsi concerned not his ideology but his indifference to ordinary Egyptians ’ needs .
Against this backdrop , Israel and the Palestinian territories are relatively stable places .
Israel ’ s high-quality infrastructure could easily be extended to the West Bank and Gaza if security could be assured , and a young generation of entrepreneurs and technologists has grown up on both sides of the border .
Forbes magazine reports that “ hundreds of Israeli [ s ] and Palestinians are becoming actual business partners and colleagues in startups that are slowly transforming the Palestinian economy , at least in the West Bank . ”
This is most true in high-tech industries , the sector in which the Middle East lags the most .
The author of the Forbes article describes a scene in Ramallah that is “ indistinguishable from one in Austin or San Francisco , ” where “ twentysomething Palestinians sip cocktails , their laptops open , their smartphones on . ”
All of this activity is taking place against the odds .
Alec Ross , a former senior adviser for innovation to former US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton , argues that the best way to reinvigorate the peace process is to provide 3G Internet connectivity to the West Bank .
He quotes a young woman in the audience at Palestine Polytechnic University , who said , to loud applause , “ We must have a better economy to have better lives , and we must have 3G to have … a better economy . ”
Without high-speed Internet , foreign investment and indigenous entrepreneurship are almost impossible .
The human capital for rapid economic growth is there ( roughly 2,000 Palestinians graduate every year with technical skills , yet only 30 % of them find a way to use such skills in a paying job ) , as is the will and the investment capital ; but the necessary infrastructure is lacking .
A vision of a very different Palestine , and of the Israel beside it , is not hard to find .
In 2005 , the Rand Corporation , a US research institute , developed the “ Arc , ” a genuinely inspiring plan to build a transportation corridor that would link Palestine ’ s principal business and population hubs in the West Bank , then curve across Israel into Gaza , where a long-planned airport and seaport would be built .
The concept behind this vision is that the size and population density of a future Palestine will be roughly the same as in extended urban regions like the San Francisco Bay area or greater Cairo .
Thus , the West Bank should be viewed as “ an integrated urban region of independent but connected cities . ”
Anyone who spends nine minutes watching the video presentation of the Arc will see that its potential is nothing short of breathtaking .
While Palestine would gain economically , Israel would gain politically and socially .
The costs of not reaching a peace settlement may not show up in Israel ’ s economic statistics or in formal diplomatic interactions .
But young Israelis , in particular , are increasingly aware of the invitations to meetings and conferences that they do not receive – and of the increasing frequency with which their own are not accepted , even by sincere friends of Israel .
Bernard Avishai , a distinguished Israeli professor of business and government who divides his time between Israel and the US , notes that whatever Israel ’ s young people may think of the Palestinians , they “ expect to fly off from Ben-Gurion Airport and land , accepted , in the Western world . ”
Now they know that the stakes are rising .
So are the opportunities .
Whereas the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has long been an island of violence and turmoil in a relatively stable ( if oppressed ) region , now the tables are turned .
An Israel and Palestine that could resolve their differences and live side by side as democracies would become an island of stability and sanity in a sea of political disorder and economic retrenchment .
Add a free-trade agreement , or even a customs union with Jordan , and you have the makings of a Middle Eastern Benelux ( the grouping of Belgium , the Netherlands , and Luxembourg that formed the economic kernel of what became the original European Community ) .
A late summer night ’ s dream ?
Perhaps .
But , Iran aside , all of the region ’ s major players – Saudi Arabia and its fellow Gulf states , Turkey , and both sides in Egypt – have plenty of reasons to want to see it realized .
And Israelis and Palestinians themselves , with actual or potential civil war on three of their four borders , need no reminders of what could happen if they do not start spreading peace from the inside out .
