Europe ’ s Economic Groupthink
FRANKFURT – During the recent hearing on the constitutionality of the European Central Bank ’ s measures to prevent the eurozone from falling apart , Andreas Vosskuhle , President of Germany ’ s Constitutional Court , raised an important question : Do non-German economists condemn the ECB ’ s outright monetary transactions ( OMT ) as unequivocally as all but one of the German experts testifying ?
Of course , there are German economists ( not to mention Chancellor Angela Merkel ’ s government ) who support ECB President Mario Draghi ’ s policies .
Still , an overwhelming majority of German ( and possibly Dutch and Finnish ) economists seem to favor keeping the ECB on the sidelines in the eurozone crisis .
It ’ s a fiscal issue , the typical German economist says , and monetary policy will not help ; on the contrary , activating it will only make matters worse .
Of course , everyone would prefer it if the line between monetary and fiscal policy had not become blurred as a result of the crisis .
But blindly sticking to principle would have been a highly risky option for the ECB .
It would have meant accepting in 2012 what has been called “ redenomination risk ” – economic newspeak for a eurozone breakup .
Nonetheless , by launching its OMT scheme , the ECB has committed German ( and other northern European ) taxpayers , without their parliaments ’ approval , to a potential obligation to bail out – well , whom , exactly ?
Indeed , it appears that the typical northern European taxpayer supports the typical stakeholder in northern European banks that are over-exposed to southern European debtors .
Likewise , German legal scholars interpret the ECB ’ s activities as being incompatible with European treaty provisions that prohibit bailouts and monetary financing of the debt of eurozone members .
And one can easily understand civil servants ’ strong reluctance to disregard legal obligations and risk criminal liability for breach of trust .
Germany ’ s Constitutional Court , of course , does not write the rules .
But its obligation is to render a dispassionate reading of legal agreements , and it is renowned for doing so , which is one reason why it is the country ’ s most trusted institution .
Nonetheless , the ECB is right that it is faced with very different monetary conditions in different member states ; indeed , the eurozone is akin to a badly working fixed-exchange-rate system , with all of the attendant risks .
Ultimately , limiting the ECB to its conventional tool kit amounts to accepting the risk of a eurozone collapse .
Against this backdrop , institutional investors self-insured – quite rationally – against a eurozone breakup by withdrawing behind safer borders .
With fiscal policy incapable of responding , the ECB was stuck with a second intermediation role : mitigating with its Target2 system the effects of European financial markets re-segmenting along national lines .
This is fiscal dominance in its purest form .
It is here that Vosskuhle ’ s question matters the most .
Debates within eurozone member states typically converge on what legal scholars call herrschende Meinung ( “ dominant opinion ” ) , which , in turn , appears to reflect their countries ’ status as creditors or debtors .
Reinforcing this , the typical career-conscious economist has little incentive to deviate .
The media are no remedy , as competition for ratings forces them to favor oversimplification over differentiation , complexity , and nuance .
In terms of substance – which the German Constitutional Court explicitly and intentionally avoids – the case for OMT has always been about preventing a liquidity crisis from morphing into a solvency problem , especially on the eurozone ’ s periphery . From an investor ’ s perspective , the mechanics of this are simple : all are reluctant to hold private or public debt from a country that is vulnerable to redenomination .
This by itself creates a rollover risk , which is why , for example , a small firm in Bozen ( Bolzano , in Italy ’ s South Tyrol ) is subject to higher financing costs than its competitor in Innsbruck ( in Austria ’ s northern Tyrol ) .
The OMT scheme ’ s success depends on an unlimited capacity to intervene – to do “ whatever it takes , ” as Draghi famously put it .
Legally constraining this capacity would be self-defeating .
So , if the OMT scheme is not feasible under current treaty provisions , these provisions – which , after all , are of human , not divine , origin – must be amended .
But a treaty change would require engaging the European public – and , in several member states , submitting the proposed revisions to popular referenda .
Given how often such referenda have been defeated in recent years – for example , in France , the Netherlands , and Ireland – that is a scenario that everyone wants to avoid .
What is dispiriting is that we ponder these arguments so infrequently .
In fact , the minimal prerequisites for a working monetary union are not discussed upfront and transparently anywhere .
With politicians focused on the median voter , and a groupthink-generating media , the eurozone muddles through , just barely surviving .
But , if the eurozone is to be a sensible long-term proposition , mere survival is not enough .
The main justification for a monetary union cannot be the possibly disastrous consequences of its falling apart .
Even less convincing is the neo-mercantilist point that the eurozone would allow for indefinite current-account surpluses ( it does not ) .
Originally , Europe ’ s monetary union was supposed to provide a stable framework for its deeply integrated economies to enhance living standards sustainably .
It still can .
But this requires acknowledging what the crisis has revealed : the eurozone ’ s institutional flaws .
Remedying them calls for a minimum of federalism and commensurate democratic legitimacy – and thus for greater openness to institutional adaptation .
