Alexievich ’ s Achievement
NEW YORK – It was 1985 , and change was in the air in the Soviet Union .
Aging general secretaries were dropping like flies .
Elem Klimov ’ s cinematic magnum opus “ Come and See ” depicted World War II without the heroics on which we were reared , highlighting the tremendous human suffering instead .
Klimov ’ s approach echoed that of Svetlana Alexievich – this year ’ s Nobel laureate in literature – in her first book , War ’ s Unwomanly Face , published the year before .
But , whereas many rushed to see Klimov ’ s film , Alexievich ’ s book did not seem to excite readers .
The Soviet Union , supposedly progressive , remained rooted in patriarchy .
Women had jobs , but rarely careers .
Women writers wrote exquisite poetry and prose , and they were officially recognized as the equals ( well , almost ) of their male peers ; but they tended to avoid certain topics – and war was a man ’ s business .
And thus Alexievich begins War ’ s Unwomanly Face , “ There had been more than 3,000 wars in the world , and even more books .
But all we know about war is what men told us . ”
And men told us a lot . “ We always remembered the war , ” Alexievich recalled , “ at school , at home , at weddings and christenings , during holidays and funerals .
War and post-war lived in the home of our soul . ” Indeed , I had heard so much about the war by the time War ’ s Unwomanly Face came out , I had little interest in hearing more about it – whether the suffering and sacrifice or the heroism and triumph – from any perspective .
Fast-forward almost a decade .
America was big on gender politics , and , as a graduate student there , I was embarrassed to be behind .
So I finally read War ’ s Unwomanly Face .
To my surprise , it was not WWII that I learned about ; rather , I got my first glimpse into the emotions that my own relatives experienced , as they fought and survived the war .
People like my grandmother had recounted only the oft-repeated male story , completely denying her own experience .
But her experience mattered , and Alexievich recognized that .
I was so inspired by War ’ s Unwomanly Face that a few years ago I wrote my own book detailing the endurance of women in my family in the war-ravaged Soviet Union .
Other books by Alexievich were similarly inspiring .
Zinky Boys : Soviet Voices from the Afghanistan War ( 1991 ) spoke of a distant fight – the nine-year Soviet war in Afghanistan – that eroded Russian culture and humanity , while Voices from Chernobyl : The Oral History of a Nuclear Disaster ( 1997 ) meditated on the global significance of the nuclear disaster .
Public reaction to both was mixed .
Neither the state nor the people quite knew how they felt about Afghanistan or Chernobyl – one a lost war , the other an incomprehensible catastrophe .
Alexievich has described herself as “ an ear , not a pen . ”
She listens and builds a story , before writing it down .
Her talent is to make the private public , to expose the thoughts that people are afraid to think .
Alexievich does not shy away from the horrific aspects of her subject matter , exemplified in a passage from War ’ s Unwomanly Face : “ We didn ’ t just shoot [ prisoners ] … we pinned them up , like pigs , with ramrods , cut into pieces .
I went to observe … I waited for that moment when their eyes would start bursting from pain . ” While this brutally matter-of-fact tone can make readers uneasy ( indeed , it was one reason why I took so long to read the book ) , we cannot afford to be ignorant of the truth , even – or perhaps especially – if it makes us squirm .
Honest , daring , and sad , Alexievich ’ s books – containing stories in which life , broken and stolen , is worse than death – show how a woman ’ s perspective can humanize world problems and make them understandable to all .
In some ways , Alexievich ’ s literary contribution , which the Nobel committee called “ a monument to suffering and courage in our time , ” is equal to that of the Austrian novelist and playwright Elfriede Jelinek , whom the committee recognized in 2004 for her work ’ s feminist critique of Austria ’ s Nazi past and patriarchal present .
Now , like Jelinek , whose work was largely unknown to non-German readers until she won the Nobel , Alexievich is finally being recognized for her profound impact .
Her award sends a powerful message – not only about her talent , but also about the importance of the female perspective in the public sphere .
To be sure , Alexievich was far from invisible before .
Her books have been translated into 20 languages , with millions in circulation .
And , like many other Nobel laureates , including Jelinek , she has played an active role in civil society , most recently taking a stand against Russia ’ s annexation of Crimea .
Interestingly , the frequency with which Nobel Prizes have been awarded to women has been increasing .
In 1991 , Nadine Gordimer was the first woman in more than a quarter-century to receive the literature prize ; now , women receive it every 2-3 years .
Moreover , this summer , the writer and literary critic Sarah Danius became the first woman in 200 years to serve as the permanent secretary of the Swedish Academy , which chooses the Nobel laureate in literature .
But the patriarchal culture from which Alexievich emerged is far from dead .
Recognizing the ways in which she has enriched people ’ s thinking about difficult – and historically masculine – subjects can only be good , not only for the women she inspires , but also for the men she influences .
I have just finished Alexievich ’ s latest dreadful masterpiece , Secondhand Time , a brutal account of the chaotic Russian capitalism of the 1990s .
In recent interviews , Alexievich has said she is working on two more books – one about love , the other about aging .
