Europe \ u0027s New Model Economy
CAMBRIDGE : The world 's economists are scurrying about , trying to discover and explain the reasons for America 's record boom .
Despite eight years of growth , no signs of accelerating inflation are to be found in the US .
Moreover , no one in America seems to care about traditional economics ; its all the ‘ new economy ' , internet or die .
Traditional US investors are at a loss to explain why a company earnings are suddenly a poor way to predict what stocks will be hot and which likely to fail .
Any company without a " .com " in its name or future seems doomed .
Establish a new economy link and you are bound to soar , stick to the " old economy " ways and your stock is trash .
Gurus of the old school claim that all this profitless prosperity cannot last ; soon , if not very soon , the stock market will get back its senses .
When that happens , the glamour of America 's long boom will vanish , the notion of the " new economy " will be as forgotten as last year 's fashions .
There is now an entirely new angle to all this that is worth contemplating ; namely that America is not so unique , that Europe is joining the new economy game .
Perhaps only Europe 's stock markets are the only ones participating yet , but that is a start .
Why does Europe seem hesitant ?
The Euro is weak ; it has none of the glamour hoped for at its launch last year .
Besides , European governments remain defensive : no important labor market reforms nor initiatives aimed at deregulation are underway .
True , Germany is putting on the books an important tax deal that will allow large financial institutions to sell-off their vast share holdings in the corporate sector without punitive capital gains taxes .
But , at best , Europe 's governments have only consented to allow rationalization in their banking industries and some cross border mergers .
Despite these small steps from government , new economy stocks are becoming the big game on Europe 's stock markets .
This not only reflects the large number of mergers – within countries and cross border – of late , but increasingly reflects the new economy content of established businesses .
Siemens is carving out a choice filet in the form of its semiconductor business to be offered as one of the largest European IPOs on record .
Already it is oversubscribed and trading in the gray market at a triple the likely issue price .
Not to be left out , other companies are looking at their business holdings to ask what can be carved out and sold off .
Similarly , large financial institutions like Deutsche Bank , as they free up the huge pots of money now tied up in industrial holdings , are thinking of little else but participating in a US-style scene of venture capital , start-up financing and IPOs .
So far all of this has been a sideshow focused on Germany 's ‘ Neumarkt ' , but it is becoming a general focus of attention .
And not just in Germany , a country otherwise slow in freeing its economy .
The new economy enjoys at least equal hype in Switzerland , Italy , Spain and France .
Technology and the new economy are immensely popular across Europe because they provide a much better route to prosperity than waiting for government , unions , and bureaucrats to agree on restructuring the old economy .
Indeed , it won 't take long before European governments embrace the new economy 's quintessential wealth creation and even claim credit .
As European new economy stocks soar into the stratosphere , the rest of the world will eagerly join the game .
Equity capital will come from the US and from the Far East to claim a piece of the action , which may be a replay for anyone that missed the show in the US or just wants to see it once more .
Such robust stock market growth will drive up the Euro , increasing the returns of foreign investors over and above what they can get just from capital gains .
That is exactly what happened in Japan last year ; corporate restructuring was just the first pass in the revival of stocks .
Then high technology and new economy became the buzz words in getting valuations higher than in the US .
Of course , the value of the Yen soared too .
This prospective stock market boom is heaven-sent for a European economy stuck in a rut .
Europe has formidable wealth , but that wealth is sleeping ; it has formidable human capital , but it is shackled from lack of initiative , counterproductive regulation , bureaucracy , and by insufficient profit motivation – call it a lack of greed .
European leaders should embrace the liberation which will make their lives so much easier and Europe so much freer .
Europe 's new economy is coming on .
The wealth it creates may shock governments enough to set the rest of Europe 's economy free .
