Renewing American Leadership
MADRID – December always provides an opportunity to pause and reflect on what was and what will be .
This year , one of the conclusions that such reflection yields is that the United States remains firmly at the center of the liberal world order .
Another is that the US needs to do more to lead in the way that its international standing demands .
Doubts about America ’ s continued global leadership have been proliferating for years .
But , though the much-discussed multi-polar world order may well be in the cards , the reality is that , for now , efforts to address global challenges – from climate change to conflict in the Middle East – demand US engagement .
Unfortunately , the narrative of American decline has gained so much traction in recent years that even US officials seem to have started to believe it , pursuing weak and piecemeal policies ( or , in some cases , doing nothing at all ) .
President Barack Obama ’ s restrained foreign-policy approach appears to be fueling , not reducing , global instability .
The reasons for this lack of strong action are disputed .
Some blame Obama ’ s own fears about repeating his predecessors ’ mistakes ; others blame a hostile Congress for tying his hands .
In fact , both factors may be at work .
It may well be true that Obama would rather exercise caution – even when bold action is called for – than act impulsively and potentially cause more damage .
But the negative impact of an obstructionist , highly partisan US Congress should not be underestimated .
For example , by blocking reforms to International Monetary Fund governance that were agreed in 2010 , Congress has damaged , perhaps irreparably , the legitimacy and relevance of the Bretton Woods institutions .
Likewise , by refusing to ratify the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea , the US Congress has undermined America ’ s credibility as it attempts to reaffirm international law in the South China Sea , where China is acting with increasing audacity .
And , by opposing the inclusion of legally binding climate commitments , it weakened the global climate agreement that was reached this month in Paris , leaving compliance and implementation uncertain .
Stalemate has become the name of the game in US politics in recent years .
That is why next year ’ s presidential election is so crucial .
It offers an opportunity for a fresh start , a new approach that produces the type of policy actions that the world needs .
The key is engagement – among branches of the US government , between the US government and the public , and between the US and the rest of the world .
For starters , to avoid the kind of obstructionism that prevailed in the last eight years , the next president must engage Congress directly and actively .
And , in fact , two of the Obama administration ’ s recent wins – the passage of so-called trade promotion authority ( fast-track negotiating authority to conclude the Trans-Pacific Partnership ) and the reauthorization of the small but vital Export-Import Bank – were the result of dedicated outreach , education , and , yes , cajoling of lawmakers .
The Iran nuclear agreement , one of Obama ’ s hallmark achievements , involved similar efforts to engage Congress , from protracted trips to Capitol Hill by Obama administration officials to a creative approach that allowed legislators to display their displeasure for the deal , without blocking its progress .
Even in America ’ s highly divisive political atmosphere , it seems , where there is a will , there is a way .
America ’ s next president must also improve engagement with citizens , whose widespread disaffection constrains – or allows – US leaders to pursue a weak foreign policy .
Like many Europeans today , most Americans do not seem to understand – or care to understand – that the crumbling of the liberal world order would have dire consequences for all of them .
It was not always this way .
Immediately after World War II , the memory of war , together with the enduring threat posed by the Soviet Union , made plain the importance of building and maintaining a liberal world order .
Today , though the need for such an order is just as great , the argument is not nearly as comprehensible or emotionally powerful .
Discussion of rules and institutions comes across as bloodless .
It is up to political leaders – and especially the president – to figure out how to make a compelling case about what is at stake .
Only this approach can secure the mandate from the public that the next US president will need to engage effectively with other world leaders .
And make no mistake : Such engagement is indispensable .
While the US must play an integral role in addressing global challenges , from ending the Syrian civil war to following through on the promises of the Paris climate agreement , it cannot do it alone .
Real progress will demand real cooperation .
In the second half of the twentieth century , the US showed that committed leadership could help to ensure widespread stability and prosperity .
In the twenty-first century , it has showed how devastating a lack of such leadership can be .
Finger pointing will not fix anything .
Only by pursuing genuine , deep , and sustained engagement , both at home and abroad , can the next administration ensure that the coming years will be better than the last .
