A New Chance for Greece
ATHENS – On September 20 , Greek voters will go to the polls – yet again – in a snap election called by Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras .
The early poll was no surprise : almost a third of Tsipras ’ s colleagues in his leftist Syriza Party refused to endorse the bailout he had negotiated with the country ’ s creditors .
In a parliamentary vote on the deal last month , Tsipras , in office since January , was forced to rely on support from the opposition .
So was the international community ’ s sigh of relief after the latest financial rescue – additional money from Greece ’ s creditors in exchange for structural reforms – premature ? Will Greece , the twenty-first century ’ s “ sick man of Europe , ” persist in refusing to reform ?
The underlying issue is whether Europe ’ s monetary union needs greater integration to manage crises such as Greece ’ s , or whether it can maintain the current approach , founded on national responsibility and sanctions for those who break the rules .
Germany ’ s finance minister , Wolfgang Schäuble , has suggested that those sanctions should include expulsion from the eurozone – something that was never envisaged in the European Union ’ s 1992 Maastricht Treaty .
Nor , of course , was it ever envisaged that Greece would face its current economic trauma .
Admittedly , the country ’ s economic performance after the oil shock of the early 1970s was poor , marked by slow growth , high inflation and unemployment , huge fiscal deficits , increasing debt , a declining currency , and inadequate infrastructure .
Indeed , until the mid-1990s , the government ’ s lack of macroeconomic discipline and its tendency to succumb to populist demands and vested interests accounted for much of the country ’ s economic weakness .
But entering Europe ’ s economic and monetary union was meant to induce the political system to pursue longer-term goals such as productivity growth and enhanced competitiveness .
At first , events played out according to plan .
During the period of Greece ’ s accession to the eurozone , from 1994 to 2001 , its economy stabilized .
Both inflation and the fiscal deficit fell rapidly ; businesses and consumers became more confident ; investment picked up ; and the government put in place an ambitious package of liberalizing reforms .
Annual GDP growth jumped from -1.6 % in 1993 to over 4 % in 1997 – and stayed around this level until 2007 .
Hubris was perhaps understandable ; but , as every Greek schoolchild knows , hubris leads to nemesis .
Excessive borrowing created a credit bubble , which burst when the global financial crisis erupted in 2007-2008 , leading to the current social and economic catastrophe .
A fashionable view is that Greece did not fulfill the eurozone ’ s entry criteria and so falsified statistics in order to secure membership .
This is nonsense .
Greece ’ s budget deficit for 1999 – the year when its application was assessed – was indeed shown several years later to have exceeded marginally the Maastricht-imposed ceiling of 3 % of GDP .
But this calculation was the result of a politically motivated statistical revision , initiated by the government that won the 2004 elections .
The political ruse was to change retroactively the accounting methods for defense spending .
Greece had been following the standard practice of registering expenditures when military purchases were actually delivered .
But an alternative accounting method could also be used , registering expenditures when payments – in accordance with front-loaded schedules – were actually made .
Choosing this alternative meant the transfer of substantial amounts of spending from the date of expected deliveries to the time when orders were placed .
The obvious arithmetical result was to inflate past deficits – including for the year 1999 .
Accounting foibles aside , Greece ’ s real error was to forget – once it had become the 12th member of the eurozone on January 1 , 2001 – the imperative to modernize the state through liberalization and privatization ; instead , it fell back into its old bad ways .
Vested interests prevailed : business groups attempted to capture specific markets , and public-sector workers fought to preserve their privileges .
Taxes were evaded on a massive scale , and the welfare state was characterized by endemic waste .
In short , bad governance and weak institutions are to blame for the 2010 debt crash .
Previous bailout programs failed because they entailed excessive austerity .
There was no counter-balancing move to increase demand by publicly funding infrastructure investment ; domestic reforms were inadequate ; and the creditors offered no substantial debt restructuring or debt forgiveness .
So why should last month ’ s deal succeed ?
Optimists will note that the underlying fiscal situation in Greece is healthier .
Moreover , debt relief is being considered ; the euro and the price of oil are both – helpfully – weaker ; and , despite China ’ s economic slowdown , international economic developments remain broadly favorable .
On the other hand , Greek society is exhausted by the huge sacrifices it has been forced to accept .
The civil service is weakened and dispirited after painful pay cuts .
The political system has been strained by the rise of populism and extremist forces on both the left and the right – and now , as the coming election highlights , there is the risk of renewed government instability .
Greece ’ s problems are not new .
Other countries have gone through difficult periods and recovered ( Germany , our leading creditor , is a good example ) .
Greece ’ s location , together with existing strengths such as tourism , shipping , renewable energy resources , and a pool of scientists at home and abroad , provides real potential for the country to grow .
But to realize that potential requires both stability and genuine reform .
That means that after the election ( which is unlikely to produce a single political force capable of undertaking this task ) , Greece ’ s center-left and center-right parties must learn to collaborate in the cause of effective governance .
Just going from one crisis to the next will ruin the economy for decades to come – and will exhaust the patience of even the most sympathetic of Greece ’ s partners .
