Eastern Europe ’ s Crisis of Shame
BERLIN – As thousands of refugees pour into Europe to escape the horrors of war , with many dying along the way , a different sort of tragedy has played out in many of the European Union ’ s newest member states .
The states known collectively as “ Eastern Europe , ” including my native Poland , have revealed themselves to be intolerant , illiberal , xenophobic , and incapable of remembering the spirit of solidarity that carried them to freedom a quarter-century ago .
These are the same societies that clamored before and after the fall of communism for a “ return to Europe , ” proudly proclaiming that they shared its values .
But what did they think Europe stands for ?
Since 1989 – and particularly since 2004 , when they joined the EU – they have benefited from massive financial transfers in the form of European structural and cohesion funds .
Today , they are unwilling to contribute anything to resolve the greatest refugee crisis facing Europe since World War II .
Indeed , before the eyes of the entire world , the government of Hungary , an EU member state , has mistreated thousands of refugees .
Prime Minister Viktor Orbán sees no reason to behave otherwise : the refugees are not a European problem , he insists ; they are a German problem .
Orbán is not alone in this view .
Even Hungary ’ s Catholic bishops are following Orbán ’ s line , with Laszlo Kiss-Rigo , Bishop of Szeged-Csanad , saying that Muslim migrants “ want to take over , ” and that the Pope , who has called on every Catholic parish in Europe to take in a refugee family , “ doesn ’ t know the situation . ”
In Poland , a country of 40 million people , the government initially expressed a readiness to accept 2,000 refugees – but only Christians ( Slovakia proposed a similar stipulation ) .
Refugees are not an Eastern European problem , a Polish journalist told National Public Radio in the United States , because these countries did not participate in the decision to bomb Libya ( neither did Germany ) .
Have Eastern Europeans no sense of shame ?
For centuries , their ancestors emigrated in droves , seeking relief from material hardships and political persecution .
And today their leaders ’ heartless behavior and callous rhetoric play to popular sentiment .
Indeed , the electronic version of Poland ’ s largest newspaper , Gazeta Wyborcza , now publishes a stunning notice at the end of every article about refugees : “ Because of the extraordinarily aggressive content of remarks advocating violence , contrary to the law , and calling for racial , ethnic , and religious hatred , we will not allow readers to publish comments . ”
Not so long ago , in the immediate postwar years , Eastern European Jewish Holocaust survivors fled from the murderous anti-Semitism of their Polish , Hungarian , Slovak , or Romanian neighbors to the safety of displaced persons camps in , of all places , Germany .
“ Safe Among the Germans ” proclaimed the title of an important book by the historian Ruth Gay about these 250,000 survivors .
Now Muslim refugees and survivors of other wars , having found no refuge in Eastern Europe , also are fleeing to safety among the Germans .
In this case , history is not a metaphor .
On the contrary , the root cause of the Eastern European attitudes now on grim display is to be found in World War II and its aftermath .
Consider the Poles , who , deservedly proud of their society ’ s anti-Nazi resistance , actually killed more Jews than Germans during the war .
Although Poland ’ s Catholics were cruelly victimized during the Nazi occupation , they could find little compassion for the fate of Nazism ’ s ultimate victims .
In the words of Józef Mackiewicz , a conservative , anti-Communist Polish writer with impeccable patriotic credentials : “ During the occupation there was not , literally , a single person who would not have heard the saying – ‘ One thing Hitler has done correctly is to wipe out the Jews . ’
But one should not talk about this openly . ”
Of course , there were Poles who helped Jews during the war .
Indeed , the number of Polish “ Righteous Among Nations , ” recognized by Israel ’ s Yad Vashem for their wartime heroism , is the largest among all European countries ( unsurprisingly , given that prewar Poland had Europe ’ s largest Jewish population by far ) .
But these remarkable individuals typically acted on their own , against prevailing social norms .
They were misfits who , long after the war had ended , insisted on keeping their wartime heroism a secret from their neighbors – afraid , it seems , that their own communities would otherwise shun , threaten , and ostracize them .
All occupied European societies were complicit to some degree in the Nazi effort to destroy the Jews .
Each made a different contribution , depending on country-specific circumstances and conditions of German rule .
But the Holocaust played out most gruesomely in Eastern Europe , owing to the sheer number of Jews in the region and the incomparable ruthlessness of the Nazi occupation regimes .
When the war ended , Germany – because of the victors ’ denazification policies and its responsibility for instigating and carrying out the Holocaust – had no choice but to “ work through ” its murderous past .
This was a long , difficult process ; but German society , mindful of its historical misdeeds , has become capable of confronting moral and political challenges of the type posed by the influx of refugees today .
And Chancellor Angela Merkel has set an example of leadership on migrants that puts all of Eastern Europe ’ s leaders to shame .
Eastern Europe , by contrast , has yet to come to terms with its murderous past .
Only when it does will its people be able to recognize their obligation to save those fleeing in the face of evil .
