Democracy versus the Eurozone
BRUSSELS – The European Union is a voluntary quasi-federation of sovereign and democratic states in which elections matter and each country seeks to determine its own destiny , regardless of the wishes of its partners .
But it should now be apparent to everyone that the eurozone was designed with a very different institutional arrangement in mind .
Indeed , that design gap has turned out to be a major source of the monetary union ’ s current crisis .
Last October , Greece ’ s then-prime minister , George Papandreou , proposed a popular referendum on the second rescue package that had just been agreed at the EU ’ s summit in Brussels .
He was quickly told off by German Chancellor Angela Merkel and former French President Nicolas Sarkozy , and Greeks never voted on it .
But , less than a year later , the referendum is de facto taking place anyway .
In a union of democracies , it is impossible to force sovereign countries to adhere to rules if their citizens do not accept them anymore .
This has profound implications : all of those grandiose plans to create a political union to support the euro with a common fiscal policy cannot work as long as EU member countries remain both democratic and sovereign .
Governments may sign treaties and make solemn commitments to subordinate their fiscal policy to EU rules ( or to be more precise , to the wishes of Germany and the European Central Bank ) .
But , in the end , the “ people ” remain the real sovereign , and they can choose to ignore their governments ’ promises and reject any adjustment program from “ Brussels . ”
In contrast to the United States , the EU cannot send its marshals to enforce its pacts or collect debt .
Any country can leave the EU , and thus the eurozone , when the perceived burden of its obligations becomes too onerous .
Until now , it had been assumed that the cost of exit would be so high that it would never be considered .
That is no longer true , at least for Greece .
But , more broadly , EU commitments have now become relative , which implies that jointly guaranteed Eurobonds cannot be the silver bullet that some hope .
As long as member states remain fully sovereign , no one can fully reassure investors that in the event of a eurozone breakup , some states will not simply refuse to pay , or at least refuse to pay for the others .
It is not surprising that bonds issued by the European Financial Stability Facility ( the eurozone ’ s rescue fund ) are trading at a substantial premium over German debt .
All variants of Eurobonds come with supposedly strong conditionality .
Countries that want to use them must follow strict fiscal rules .
But who guarantees that these rules will actually be followed ?
François Hollande ’ s victory over Sarkozy in France ’ s presidential election shows that an apparent consensus on the need for austerity can crumble quickly .
What recourse do creditor countries have if the debtor countries become the majority and decide to increase spending ?
The recently agreed measures to strengthen economic-policy coordination in the eurozone ( the so-called “ six pack ” ) imply in principle that the European Commission should be the arbiter in such matters , and that its adjustment programs can formally be overturned only by a two-thirds majority of the member states .
But it is unlikely that the Commission will ever be able to impose its view on a large country .
Spain ’ s experience is instructive in this respect .
After the recent elections there , Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy ’ s new government announced that it did not feel bound by the adjustment program agreed to by the previous administration .
Rajoy was roundly rebuked for the form of his announcement , but its substance was proven right : Spain ’ s adjustment program is now being made more lenient .
The reality is that the larger member states are more equal than the others .
Of course , this is not fair , but the EU ’ s inability to impose its view on democratic countries might actually sometimes be for the best , given that even the Commission is fallible .
The broader message from the Greek and French elections is that the attempt to impose a benevolent creditors ’ dictatorship is now being met by a debtors ’ revolt .
Financial markets have reacted as strongly as they have because investors recognize that the “ sovereign ” in sovereign debt is an electorate that can simply decide not to pay .
This is already the case in Greece , but the fate of the euro will be decided in the larger , systemically important countries like Italy and Spain .
Only determined action by their governments , supported by their citizens , will show that they merit unreserved support from the rest of the eurozone .
