Europe and the Rising Powers
KYIV – The world ’ s center of gravity is heading eastward so fast that we Europeans can almost feel the ground moving beneath our feet .
Because almost all major actors on the international stage are redefining their roles in response to this tectonic shift , Europe must do the same .
So it is right that the EU Council of Ministers is meeting to grapple with this challenge .
For decades , however , Europeans have been more concerned with unification and constitutional arrangements than with traditional diplomacy .
Europe ’ s historic rivalries have , of course , been civilized into a political model that European diplomats often see as applicable across the international arena .
To be sure , consensus , compromise , and a pooling of sovereignty are the only ways to resolve many of the great issues – climate change , nuclear proliferation – that bedevil our world .
But on the great issues of war , peace , and the balance of power , Europe seems trapped between an insufficiently cohesive foreign policy and uncertainty among individual countries about how to define and secure their national interests .
By contrast , the world ’ s rising powers – Brazil , China , India , and Russia – insist not only on the primacy of their national interests , but , as the failed climate negotiations in Copenhagen last December demonstrated , on sovereign freedom of action as well .
To them , geopolitics is not anathema ; it is the basis of all their external actions .
Defending the national interest still rallies their publics ; the exercise of power remains at the heart of their diplomatic calculations .
In the face of this new / old reality , Europe must not merely make itself heard on the great global issues of trade and fiscal imbalances , important as they are .
Instead , Europe must recognize which of its strategic assets matter to the world ’ s rising powers and leverage those assets to gain influence .
Unfortunately , one of Europe ’ s key strategic assets – the European countries , in particular Ukraine , that straddle the great energy corridors that will deliver more and more of the fossil-fuel resources of the Middle East and Central Asia to the world – is probably its most neglected .
Indeed , ever since the Russia-Georgia war of 2008 , Europe has mostly averted its eyes from developments in the region .
This neglect is both unwarranted and dangerous .
The countries that lie between the European Union and Russia are not only a source of geopolitical competition between Europe and Russia , but now intersect with the national interests of the world ’ s rising powers , particularly China .
The Russia-Georgia war showed just how much this region matters to the wider world .
In its wake , China began a systematic effort to buttress the former Soviet countries ’ independence by offering them huge aid packages .
Countries from Belarus to Kazakhstan have benefited from Chinese financial support .
China cares about this region not only because it is concerned with maintaining the post-Cold War settlement across Eurasia , but also because it recognizes that it will provide the transit routes for much of the energy wealth of Iraq , Iran , and Central Asia .
Indeed , China has been pouring billions of dollars into developing the oil and gas fields of Iraq and Iran .
Given that security issues will likely prevent most of this energy from being transported eastward to meet China ’ s domestic needs , Chinese energy concerns will need to become players in international energy markets – which means shipping Chinese-developed oil and gas in Iraq and Iran westward for sale .
But two countries essential to this trade – Turkey and Ukraine – are increasingly estranged from the EU .
For Turkey , tensions reflect the lack of progress on the country ’ s application for EU membership .
Ukraine is another matter .
Until Viktor Yanukovych bludgeoned his way into Ukraine ’ s presidency earlier this year , Ukraine was becoming emphatically European in its orientation .
Now , Yanukovych seems determined – for the most shortsighted of motives – to weaken Ukraine fatally as an energy-transit country .
Indeed , his latest gambit is an effort to sell Ukraine ’ s transit pipelines to Russia ’ s Gazprom in exchange for cut-rate gas .
That idea is foolish economically and strategically .
Ukraine ’ s industries need to modernize , not become more addicted to cheap gas , and gas transit will become almost as monopolistic as gas supply – a dismal prospect , given past cut-offs of gas supplies between Russia and Europe .
Moreover , Ukraine ’ s politics is fracturing .
A witch hunt is under way against opposition politicians .
Crusading journalists disappear without a trace .
The country ’ s biggest media baron , who happens to be the head of state security , expands his media empire by abusing the courts .
Yanukovych ’ s systematic dismantling of Ukraine ’ s democratic institutions is damaging the country ’ s potential as a European strategic asset .
Of course , it is up to Ukrainians to defend their democracy , but Europe is at fault as well , because the EU lacks a grand strategy toward the East .
The moral and strategic vision of the 1990 ’ s , which culminated in the EU ’ s “ big bang ” of eastward expansion , has exhausted itself .
Nowadays , Europe is full of whispers that “ neo-Finlandization ” might be a reasonable compromise for countries like Ukraine and Georgia .
Rebuilding the EU ’ s relations with Ukraine and the other countries to the Union ’ s east would , however , also help shape relations with Russia , which today is facing a series of strategic challenges : relations with the USSR ’ s former republics ; the proximity of a dynamic China ; the exposed emptiness of Siberia ; the future of Central Asia ’ s energy resources , around which the nineteenth-century “ great game ” between Russia , China , India , and America is restarting .
The EU can play a constructive role through permanent dialogue that is sensitive to Russia 's concerns without acquiescing in all of Russia 's answers to them .
Today , the art of diplomacy is to translate power into consensus .
This requires better relations with all of the world ’ s rising powers .
But it also implies , above all , a unifying vision , not only concerning the challenges that affect all countries – weapons proliferation , terrorism , epidemics , and climate change , for example – but also concerning one ’ s strategic assets .
If the EU is to craft a successful policy toward the world ’ s rising powers , it must speak in a strategic language that they understand .
