American Funk
NEW YORK – The eccentric Bengali intellectual Nirad C. Chaudhuri once explained the end of the British Raj in India as a case of “ funk , ” or loss of nerve .
The British had stopped believing in their own empire .
They simply lost the will , in Rudyard Kipling ’ s famous words , to fight “ the savage wars of peace . ”
In fact , Kipling ’ s poem , “ The White Man ’ s Burden , ” which exhorted the white race to spread its values to the “ new-caught sullen peoples , half devil and half child , ” was not about the British Empire at all , but about the United States .
Subtitled “ The United States and the Philippine Islands , ” it was published in 1899 , just as the US was waging a “ savage war of peace ” of its own .
Chaudhuri had a point .
It is difficult to sustain an empire without the will to use force when necessary .
Much political rhetoric , and a spate of new books , would have us believe that the US is now in a dangerous state of funk .
For example , Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney likes to castigate President Barack Obama for “ apologizing for America ’ s international power , ” for daring to suggest that the US is not “ the greatest country on earth , ” and for being “ pessimistic . ”
By contrast , Romney promises to “ restore ” America ’ s greatness and international power , which he proposes to do by boosting American military force .
Romney ’ s Kipling is the neo-conservative intellectual Robert Kagan , whose new book , The World America Made , argues against “ the myth of American decline . ” Yes , he admits , China is growing in strength , but US dominance is still overwhelming ;
American military might can still “ make right ” against any challenger . The only real danger to US power is “ declinism ” : the loss of self-belief , the temptation to “ escape from the moral and material burdens that have weighed on [ Americans ] since World War II . ”
Like Chaudhuri , Kagan is an engaging writer .
His arguments sound reasonable .
And his assessment of US firepower is no doubt correct .
True , he has little time for domestic problems like antiquated infrastructure , failing public schools , an appalling health care system , and grotesque disparities in income and wealth .
But he is surely right to observe that no other power is threatening to usurp America ’ s role as the world ’ s military policeman .
Less certain , however , is the premise that the world order would collapse without “ American leadership . ”
France ’ s King Louis XV allegedly declared on his deathbed : “ Après moi , le déluge ” ( After me , the flood ) .
This is the conceit of all great powers .
Even as the British were dismantling their empire after World War II , the French and Dutch still believed that parting with their Asian possessions would result in chaos .
And it is still common to hear autocratic leaders who inherited parts of the Western empires claim that democracy is all well and good , but the people are not yet ready for it .
Those who monopolize power cannot imagine a world released from their grip as anything but a catastrophe .
In Europe after World War II , Pax Americana , guaranteed by US military power , was designed “ to keep the Russians out and Germany down . ”
In Asia , it was meant to contain communism , while allowing allies , from Japan to Indonesia , to build up economic strength .
Spreading democracy was not the main concern ; stopping communism – in Asia , Europe , Africa , the Middle East , and the Americas – was .
In this respect , it succeeded , though at great human cost .
But , now that the specter of global communist domination has joined other fears – real and imagined – in the dustbin of history , it is surely time for countries to start handling their own affairs .
Japan , in alliance with other Asian democracies , should be able to counterbalance China ’ s growing power .
Similarly , Europeans are rich enough to manage their own security .
But neither Japan nor the European Union seems ready to pull its own weight , owing in part to decades of dependency on US security .
As long as Uncle Sam continues to police the world , his children won ’ t grow up .
In any case , as we have seen in Iraq and Afghanistan , “ savage wars of peace ” are not always the most effective way to conduct foreign policy .
Old-fashioned military dominance is no longer adequate to promote American interests .
The Chinese are steadily gaining influence in Africa , not with bombers , but with money .
Meanwhile , propping up secular dictators in the Middle East with US arms has helped to create Islamist extremism , which cannot be defeated by simplysending more drones .
The notion promoted by Romney and his boosters that only US military power can preserve world order is deeply reactionary .
It is a form of Cold War nostalgia – a dream of returning to a time when much of the globe was recovering from a ruinous world war and living in fear of communism .
Obama ’ s recognition of America ’ s limitations is not a sign of cowardly pessimism , but of realistic wisdom .
His relative discretion in the Middle East has allowed people there to act for themselves .
We do not yet know what the outcome there will be , but “ the greatest country on earth ” cannot impose a solution .
Nor should it .
