Europe ’ s Russia Question
BRUSSELS – Friend or foe , or something uneasily in-between ?
That ’ s the question Europe is asking about Russia , and Russia about a newly aggressive Europe .
President Vladimir Putin ’ s choice of Dmitri Medvedev , Chairman of Gazprom , the gas company with an emerging stranglehold on European energy supplies , only throws this question into an even starker light .
Relations between Europe and Russia have been deteriorating for several years , but once manageable economic issues , including energy , are now being aggravated by much more volatile political differences .
The risk is a climate of undisguised hostility , with potentially greater costs than during the nadir of the Cold War .
The most obvious and imminent flashpoint is Kosovo .
The likelihood is that early next year most of the European Union ’ s member nations will recognize the Albanian-majority enclave on Serbia ’ s southern edge as an independent state .
This is certain to enflame not just Serbia , but also the Kremlin .
Then there are rising tensions over plans by the United States to based a missile defense system in Poland and the Czech Republic , as well as the growing likelihood that further NATO enlargement will include Georgia , the increasingly prosperous neighbor with which Russia has fractious relations .
Russia continues to fan secessionist flames there by encouraging the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
Tempers are rising in both Russia and Europe , yet , paradoxically , when it comes to the major challenges they face , their interests are largely identical .
Both are threatened by Islamic extremism and growing unrest .
Both have much to lose if the Middle East erupts into fresh violence .
And both face serious demographic problems , given shrinking and aging populations , as well as the challenge of Asia ’ s rising superpowers .
The breakdown in relations has been gradual and undramatic – more a morose and resentful refusal to see each other ’ s point of view than a succession of rows .
This owes much to the humiliations that Russia suffered when the end of communism forced its economy to its knees , and to Western short-sightedness about Russia ’ s fundamental strengths and resilience .
The EU is as much to blame as the Kremlin .
In the years since the collapse of the Soviet Union , neither EU nor European national policymakers have devised a coherent strategy setting out the relationship that Europe wants with the Russian Federation .
Today , it is more important than ever that the EU , which now includes not only former Soviet satellites but countries that were part of the USSR , should create a strategic policy framework .
This reflects not only worries about energy and shared security concerns , but also the need to head off any looming crisis in the Middle East that could plunge large parts of the world into turmoil , if not armed conflict .
There , and in the volatile Caucasus , a significant improvement in Europe ’ s relations with Russia is crucial to defusing tensions .
For its part , Europe needs to mount a charm offensive to persuade Putin and Medvedev that Russia ’ s real interest is in improving bilateral relations .
Russia needs to collaborate on energy in ways that bring genuine security .
In the Middle East , it needs to persuade Iran to hold in check the military elements of the nuclear program that Russia has made possible .
None of this will be easy , not only because Europe ’ s relationship with Russia has grown so chilly , but also because Putin is understood to despise the EU as politically impotent .
Russian leaders may have misinterpreted as a sign of weakness Europe ’ s representation at last month ’ s EU-Russia summit by two Portuguese politicians – European Commission president Jose Manuel Barroso and Prime Minister Jose Socrates , whose government currently holds the revolving EU presidency .
Most telling in Russian eyes has been EU countries ’ competition for oil and gas contracts , which has done much to convince the Kremlin that Europe is not a political force to be reckoned with .
On the European side , engineering a new spirit of détente will be tough .
There is widespread disapproval of Putin ’ s autocratic style and of his government ’ s human rights record .
Extending an olive branch to Russia will have little or no voter appeal in most EU countries , and Putin ’ s efforts to retain power de facto if not de jure after Medvedev wins his likely victory next March are certain to make matters worse .
The question , therefore , is whether Europe and Russia can establish a new framework for talking to one another .
There are plenty of well-worn diplomatic paths , so it ’ s not structures that are lacking .
What ’ s needed is a more positive frame of mind , and specific ideas about what to do .
