Defaulting to Big Government
WASHINGTON , DC – Leading United States congressmen are determined to provoke a showdown with the Obama administration over the federal government ’ s debt ceiling .
Ordinarily , you might expect House Republicans to blink at this stage of the negotiations , but there is a hardline minority that actually appears to think that defaulting on government debt would not be a bad thing .
These representatives – with whom I 've interacted at three congressional hearings recently – are convinced that the US federal government is too big relative to the economy , and that drastic measures are needed to bring it under control .
Depending on your assessment of “ Tea Party ” strength on Capitol Hill , at least a partial debt default does not seem as implausible as it did in the past – and recent warnings from ratings agencies reflect this heightened risk .
But the consequences of any default would , ironically , actually increase the size of government relative to the US economy – the very outcome that Republican intransigents claim to be trying to avoid .
The reason is simple : a government default would destroy the credit system as we know it .
The fundamental benchmark interest rates in modern financial markets are the so-called “ risk-free ” rates on government bonds .
Removing this pillar of the system – or creating a high degree of risk around US Treasuries – would disrupt many private contracts and all kinds of transactions .
In addition , many people and firms hold their “ rainy day money ” in the form of US Treasuries .
The money-market funds that are perceived to be the safest , for example , are those that hold only US government debt .
If the US government defaults , however , all of them will “ break the buck , ” meaning that they will be unable to maintain the principal value of the money that has been placed with them .
The result would be capital flight – but to where ?
Many banks would have a similar problem : a collapse in US Treasury prices ( the counterpart of higher interest rates , as bond prices and interest rates move in opposite directions ) would destroy their balance sheets .
There is no company in the US that would be unaffected by a government default – and no bank or other financial institution that could provide a secure haven for savings .
There would be a massive run into cash , on an order not seen since the Great Depression , with long lines of people at ATMs and teller windows withdrawing as much as possible .
Private credit , moreover , would disappear from the US economic system , confronting the Federal Reserve with an unpleasant choice .
Either it could step in and provide an enormous amount of credit directly to households and firms ( much like Gosbank , the Soviet Union ’ s central bank ) , or it could stand by idly while GDP falls 20-30 % – the magnitude of decline that we have seen in modern economies when credit suddenly dries up .
With the private sector in free fall , consumption and investment would decline sharply .
America ’ s ability to export would also be undermined , because foreign markets would likely be affected , and because , in any case , if export firms cannot get credit , they most likely cannot produce .
The Republicans are right about one thing : a default would cause government spending to contract in real terms .
But which would fall more , government spending or the size of the private sector ?
The answer is almost certainly the private sector , given its dependence on credit to purchase inputs .
Indeed , take the contraction that followed the near-collapse of the financial system in 2008 and multiply it by ten .
The government , on the other hand , has access to the Fed , and could therefore get its hands on cash to pay wages .
With the debt ceiling unchanged , this would require some legal sleight of hand .
But the alternative would clearly be a collapse of US national security – soldiers and border guards have to be paid , the transportation system must operate , and so on .
Issuing money in this situation would almost certainly be inflationary , but the Fed might conclude otherwise , because the US has never been in this situation before , credit is now imploding , and the desperate credit-expansion measures implemented in 2008 proved not to be as bad as the critics feared .
So this is what a US debt default would look like : the private sector would collapse , unemployment would quickly surpass 20 % , and , while the government would shrink , it would remain the employer of last resort .
The House and Senate Republicans who do not want to raise the debt ceiling are playing with fire .
They are advocating a policy that would have dire effects , and that would accomplish the opposite of what they claim to want , because a default would immediately make the government more , not less , important .
The only law that Congress cannot repeal is the law of unintended consequences .
