Alexander Hamilton ’ s Eurozone Tour
PRINCETON – Europe ’ s debt crisis has piqued Europeans ’ interest in American precedents for federal finance .
For many , Alexander Hamilton has become a contemporary hero .
Perhaps one day his face should appear on the € 10 banknote .
Specifically , for European states groaning under unbearable debt burdens , Hamilton ’ s negotiation in 1790 of the new federal government ’ s assumption of the states ’ large debts looks like a tempting model .
Indeed , after Thomas Sargent won the Nobel Prize in Economics last year , he cited it as a precedent in his acceptance speech .
Hamilton argued – against James Madison and Thomas Jefferson – that the debts accumulated by the states during the War of Independence should be assumed by the federation .
There were two sides to his case , one practical , the other philosophical .
Initially , the most appealing argument for his plan was that it would provide greater security to creditors , and thus reduce interest rates , from the 6 % at which the states financed their debt to 4 % .
Hamilton emphasized the importance of a commitment to sound finance as a prerequisite to public economy . “ When the credit of a country is in any degree questionable , ” he argued , “ it never fails to give an extravagant premium upon all the loans it has occasion to make . ”
While that logic certainly appeals to Europeans today , Hamilton insisted on a stronger reason for pursuing sound finance than merely the pursuit of expediency .
There is , he maintained , “ an intimate connection between public virtue and public happiness . ”
That virtue consisted in honoring commitments , and it would build solidarity in the new political community of the United States .
Indeed , public virtue made federal finance what he called “ the powerful cement of our union . ”
The condition for success in the American case was that the US raised its own revenue , with federally administered customs houses initially providing the bulk of its receipts .
The logic of a need for specific revenue applies also in modern Europe , where a reformed fiscal system might include common administration of value-added tax ( with the additional benefit of eliminating a considerable amount of cross-border fraud ) .
In the American case , however , unity carried a price : a ceiling was imposed on Virginia ’ s exposure to the common debt .
Only this inducement to the most powerful state in the union persuaded Madison to drop his opposition to the proposal .
That compromise ( which also led to the US capital ’ s relocation to the District of Columbia , on the border of Virginia and Maryland ) may serve as a precedent for limiting Germany ’ s liabilities if Eurobonds , or some other debt-mutualization scheme , are introduced .
The US experiment in federalized finance was not immediately successful .
Two important components of Hamilton ’ s financial architecture were not realized , or were realized imperfectly .
He proposed a model of joint-stock banking on a national scale , which ran into immediate opposition ( curiously , his proposal was much more influential in Canada ) .
Second , opponents eventually blocked his proposal for a national central bank .
The charter of the First Bank of the United States was allowed to lapse in 1811 ; a generation later , in 1836 , President Andrew Jackson successfully opposed the charter of the Second Bank of the United States .
Nor did the Hamiltonian scheme of federal finance guarantee a peaceful commonwealth .
In fact , the fiscal union proved to be explosive rather than adhesive .
As international capital markets developed in the early nineteenth century , state governments borrowed on a large scale , quickly turning them from creditors into debtors .
A wave of state defaults followed in the late 1830 ’ s .
A generation later , in the 1860 ’ s , the Civil War between northern and southern states resulted in large part from a dispute about the character of financial burdens – amp at least from the South ’ s perspective .
Abraham Lincoln ’ s original proposal to end the immoral practice of slavery by compensating slave owners for manumission was unacceptably expensive , so the Union , according to the slave-holding Confederacy , was determined to expropriate the South .
The federal assumption of states ’ debts by itself could not guarantee political order .
The Civil War revealed the centrality of a common foundation of morality to Hamilton ’ s approach to debt and public finance .
As a result , his approach foundered on the differences between the different states ’ conception of morality .
Europeans today have latched onto the practical side of Hamilton ’ s argument – that is , the idea that debt mutualization might be a means to cheaper credit ; but they have worked out neither the political institutions , nor the shared public virtue , that Hamilton deemed crucial .
The extended and politicized debate about debt restructuring has made a Hamiltonian solution more difficult , because the credit of the countries that would be party to it has become questionable .
An obvious starting point for a Hamiltonian Europe would be to set some standard limit for federalized national debt – perhaps the tarnished threshold of 60 % of GDP that was mandated ( without adequate enforcement ) by the Maastricht convergence criteria , or perhaps a lower limit .
Debt exceeding that amount would be left to the responsibility of the member states .
Collective burden-sharing is in the long run the only non-catastrophic way out of Europe ’ s current crisis , but that requires a substantially greater degree of political accountability and control on a European level .
The lesson to be learned from Hamilton and the US is that the necessary institutions will not function without a greater degree of moral consensus as well .
