America ’ s Constrained Choice
NEWPORT BEACH – The conventional wisdom about the November presidential election in the United States is only partly correct .
Yes , economic issues will play a large role in determining the outcome .
But the next step in the argument – that the winner of an increasingly ugly contest will have the luxury of pursuing significantly different policies from his opponent – is much more uncertain .
By the time the next presidential term starts in January 2013 , and contrary to the current narratives advanced by the Obama and Romney campaigns , the incumbent will find himself with limited room for maneuver on economic policy .
Indeed , the potential differences for America are elsewhere , and have yet to be adequately understood by voters .
They center on the social policies that would accompany a broadly similar set of economic measures ; and , here , the differences between the candidates are consequential .
Whoever wins will face an economy growing at a sluggish 2 % or less next year , with a nagging risk of stalling completely .
Unemployment will still be far too high , and almost half of it will be hard-to-solve , long-term joblessness – and even more if we count ( as we should ) the millions of Americans who have dropped out of the labor force .
The financial side of the economy will also be a source of concern .
The fiscal deficit will continue to flirt with the 10 % -of-GDP level , adding to worries about the country ’ s medium-term debt dynamics .
The banking sector will still be “ de-risking , ” limiting the flow of credit to small and medium-size companies and undermining hiring and investment in plant and equipment .
And the household sector will be only partly through its painful de-leveraging phase .
The policy front will be equally unsettling .
Having dithered and bickered for too long , the US Congress will find it increasingly difficult to postpone action on these challenges .
Meanwhile , the Federal Reserve ’ s unusual activism , including an ever-expanding list of experimental measures , will yield fewer benefits and entail growing costs and risks .
The US economy will also be operating in a more difficult global environment .
In the next few months , Europe ’ s debt crisis will most likely worsen .
With emerging economies ( including China ) slowing , and with meaningful multilateral policy coordination remaining inadequate , protectionist pressures will mount as major trading powers compete for a stagnant pie .
So , whether President Barack Obama or Mitt Romney prevails in November , the next president will be constrained by the twin need for urgent economic stabilization and longer-term reforms .
And , with headwinds from Europe and a synchronized global slowdown , the candidates will have no choice but to pursue , at least initially , similar economic policies to restore dynamic job creation and financial stability .
In striking the right balance between immediate economic stimulus and medium-term fiscal sustainability , the most urgent step will be to counter properly the looming fiscal cliff , as temporary tax cuts expire and deep , across-the-board spending reductions kick in automatically .
Failure to do so would significantly increase the risk of an outright American recession .
Serious medium-term budget reforms are needed to deal with the legacy of repeated congressional failures .
And , if provided with realistic numbers , the next president will soon recognize that the right mix of tax and spending reforms falls into a much narrower range than today ’ s competing political narratives suggest .
It is certainly not an either / or proposition .
Fiscal reforms work best in a dynamic economy .
To this end , Obama and Romney will need to lift the impediments to growth and job creation .
Here again – in areas like housing , the labor market , credit intermediation , and infrastructure – there is less room for maneuver than most politicians would like us to believe .
But this does not mean that there is no scope for differences .
There is , and they reflect the fact that general economic tendencies will be accompanied by multi-speed dynamics at many levels .
From persistent differences in unemployment rates depending on skills and education to record-high income and wealth inequalities , each economic decision will be accompanied by the need for social judgment – whether explicit or , more likely , implicit – regarding its distributional impact .
After an “ age ” of excessive leverage , debt creation , and credit entitlement that culminated in the 2008 global financial crisis , America still faces the tricky challenge of allocating cumulative losses that continuously inhibit investment , jobs , and competitiveness .
Until now , Congress ’ s excessive political polarization has translated into an approach that has pushed more of the burden of adjustment onto those who are less able to bear it .
In an ideal world , America ’ s next president would rapidly embark on a two-step approach to restoring job dynamism and financial soundness .
First , he would devise a comprehensive set of economic-policy initiatives that are both feasible and desirable – and , again , the scope for major differences here is limited .
Second , he would accompany this with an explicit set of social policies – and here the potential differences are profound – that addresses the need for equitable burden-sharing .
This is not really an election about such hotly-debated issues as outsourcing , tax increases versus entitlement reforms , government control of production versus unfettered private sector activity , or job creators versus free riders .
It is much more about the accompanying concepts of social fairness , entitlement , equality and , yes , standards of behavior for a rich and civilized society .
This is an election about social responsibility – a society ’ s obligation to support those who are struggling , through no fault of their own , to find jobs and make ends meet .
It is about protecting the most vulnerable segments of society , including by providing them access to proper health coverage .
It is about reforming an education system that fails America ’ s young people ( and about providing appropriate retraining to those who need it ) .
Among the numerous issues of fairness and equality , it is about the rich giving back to a system that has brought them unimaginable wealth .
It is here where the differences between Obama and Romney are important .
The sooner the campaign debate pivots to this , the greater the probability that Americans will make a more informed choice and , thus , buy into the collective effort needed to escape national malaise .
