Croatia after Tudjman
ZAGREB : Franjo Tudjman ’ s death , like his life , was a bizarre parody of Marshal Tito .
Comparisons between Tudjman and Tito , however , are undermined by anachronism .
In Tito ’ s day it was still possible to have strongmen in gleaming white uniforms command European states , albeit in the Balkans .
It was possible to establish authority through collectivist myths , to assert your separate road against global trends , to molest neighbors in the teeth of international censure .
No longer .
Retrograde regional satraps are outdated in a uniting Europe .
And , unlike in Tito 's time , whenever the West played Tudjman as a proxy for its interests the results were very mixed .
Tudjman probably did not wish to be independent Croatia ’ s Tito clone , but he could not help himself .
Tito provided the only leadership model that resonated with him .
Under the guise of democratic verbiage and a facade of democratic institutions , Tudjman promoted the monopoly of his nationalist party / movement , the HDZ .
Tudjman ’ s excuse was that Croatia needed to concentrate power for its struggle with Serbian aggression .
The truth is that he used a negotiated hostility with Slobodan Milosevic to solidify personal rule and a Russian-style plunder of state properties by his coterie of loyalists .
In order to accomplish this with a minimum of fuss he muzzled the press and electronic media .
Despite enmity between Serbia and Croatia , dealing dictator to dictator with Milosevic was simple .
Because both Tudjman and Milosevic believed in ethnically homogeneous states , they fomented forced population transfers ( ie , ethnic cleansing ) and a division of territory between each other .
The chief victim of their land-grab was Bosnia , which they divided and ravaged through various proxies .
The Dayton agreement represented not so much the defeat of their plans as the international legitimation of their division of Bosnia , with Bosnian Muslim enclaves left in a nervous see-saw with Tudjman 's vicious Hercegovinian minions .
The consequence of Tudjman 's policies – always projected in a harsh , bullying style – led to Croatia 's isolation from Europe and America .
It is not that Tudjman , on occasion , did not prove useful – the Croatian army 's blitzkreig in 1995 led to Dayton – but ultimately his arrogance galled more than his cooperation helped .
The tightrope turns that characterized the last several years of his encounter with the West ( threats of sanctions for non-cooperation with the Hague war crimes tribunal , holding back Western assistance – EU aid programs , Partnership for Peace , etc . ) reflect this bitter antagonism .
It would be a mistake to imagine that Tudjman 's style was entirely unrepresentative .
Croatia 's economy and traditional access to Europe could have placed it among the first candidates for European integrations had its political and social elite any notion that this was advantageous .
Instead , lack of opposition to Tudjman points to a broad consensus , in which a wink toward Western values disguises fundamental self-satisfaction with things as they are , or were .
This was not a case of mere nationalism but of a class monopoly fearing competition from outside .
Croatia 's opposition was for a long time limited to NGO 's such as the Helsinki Committee , which challenged the government on the slippery terrain of human and minority rights , an area where the parliamentary opposition kept its collective mouths shut .
In recent years , however , as the political battle shifted to the deteriorating economy , the public accepted more direct anti-Tudjman critiques , allowing parliamentary opposition to follow .
Because Tudjman created a highly-centralized political system with vast prerogatives vested in the president , the opposition 's best bet was to stick together in hope of mustering the two-thirds majority needed to change the constitution .
Unfortunately , this course was abandoned in the summer of 1998 when two opposition parties – the Social Democrats ( ex-Communists , SDP ) and the right-of-center Social Liberals ( HSLS ) – developed a special relationship that was formalized as a coalition this summer .
In response , other opposition parties , the traditional Croat Peasant Party ( HSS ) , the center-left Liberal Party ( LS ) , the populist Croat National Party ( HNS ) , and the regionalist Istrian Democratic Assembly ( IDS ) , formed their own coalition ( the Four ) .
Formally , the SDP-HSLS and the Four function as a broad opposition alliance ( the Six ) .
In fact , they are bitter rivals and will divide opposition vote at the January 3 elections for the lower house of the Parliament ( Sabor ) .
So it is risky to claim that the opposition will soon rout HDZ .
More likely , there will be ground for various coalition manoeuvres , including between parts of the opposition and HDZ .
Tudjman 's death opens the additional question of presidential elections , which must be held within 60 days after his passing .
HDZ has as many candidates as it has factions , and these are numerous .
It is possible that HDZ can win should it nominate Mate Granic , the Western-backed foreign minister .
His moderate reputation is more a matter of style than substance , but it goes a long way outside Croatia .
The question is whether key HDZ leaders prefer losing the presidency ( and that is where real power in Croatia lies ) to Granic 's ascending the throne .
As for the opposition , various presidential ambitions have been manifested , perhaps most especially those of Drazen Budisa ( HSLS ) , a former dissident and political prisoner , and his Social Democratic partner Ivica Racan , the last head of Croatia 's Communists .
It is possible that the opposition ’ s awkward coalition will be tested by their rival presidential dreams .
Croatia 's course will be tested by the consequences of Tudjman 's death and the forthcoming electoral rounds .
The results might be more complicated than anyone wishes .
Unless the constitution and the political system is reformed , kleptocracy checked , and relations with the West mended , Tudjman-era themes may continue .
That is a luxury that Croatia cannot afford .
Without fundamental change now , there is a real possibility of mass popular protests , and not just against Tudjman 's direct heirs .
