Football is War
NEW YORK – The flags are already flying , from Holland to Argentina , from Cameroon to Japan .
Soon the drums will be beating , the trumpets blowing .
Colors will be unfurled , and battle cries will sound .
It ’ s that time again : the World Cup is upon us .
The late Rinus Michels , also known as “ the General , ” coach of the Dutch team that narrowly lost to Germany in the 1974 final , famously said , “ Football is war . ” When the Dutch had their revenge in 1988 and beat Germany to go on to become European champions , more people danced in the streets in Holland than on the day that the real war ended in May 1945 .
On one occasion , in 1969 , a football match between Honduras and El Salvador actually led to military conflict , known as the Soccer War .
Tensions between the two countries were already high .
But then fans of the Honduras team were set upon , and even worse , the Honduran national anthem was insulted , and the country ’ s white and blue flag defiled .
Of course , soccer wars are rare ( indeed , I can ’ t think of another example ) , but the notion that international sporting competitions inevitably inspire warm fraternity – an idea advanced by Baron de Coubertin , founder of the modern Olympic games – is a romantic fiction .
The violence of British football hooligans , for example , reflects a peculiar nostalgia for war .
Life in peaceful times can be dull , and British glory seems a long way in the past .
Football is an opportunity to experience the thrill of combat , without risking much more than a few broken bones .
Even when football doesn ’ t lead to actual bloodshed , it inspires strong emotions – primitive and tribal – evoking the days when warriors donned facial paint and jumped up and down in war dances , hollering like apes .
The nature of the game encourages this : the speed , the collective aggression .
Tennis does not create frenzy on a national scale .
Not even boxing does , except on very rare occasions , such as when Joe Louis , the “ Brown Bomber , ” beat Max Schmeling , the Nazi favorite , in 1938 .
After all , these forms of combat are between two individuals , not two tribes .
Arthur Koestler was right when he said that there is nationalism , and there is football nationalism – and that the latter is the more deeply felt .
Koestler himself , born in Budapest but a proud British citizen , remained a Hungarian football nationalist all his life .
It helps to have traditional enemies , old hurts , and humiliations that need to be redressed , if only symbolically .
It would be hard for Americans , who are neither very good at soccer , nor cursed by great historical hatreds , to share the joy of the Dutch , say , when the Germans were defeated in 1988 , or that of the Koreans when they defeat Japan .
Perhaps the best example of this type of sporting nationalism was not a football game , but the world ice hockey final in 1969 , when Czechoslovakia beat the Soviet Union just one year after Soviet tanks rolled into Prague .
The Czech players pointed their hockey sticks at the Russians like guns , and their victory provoked anti-Soviet riots back home .
Clearly , then , whatever de Coubertin might have hoped , cosmopolitanism and cross-cultural brotherhood comes less naturally to human beings than the raw emotions of the tribe .
The tribe can be a club , a clan , or a nation .
Before World War II , football clubs often had an ethnic or religious component : Tottenham Hotspur in London was “ Jewish , ” while Arsenal was “ Irish . ”
Vestiges of these markings remain : Ajax of Amsterdam is still taunted by provincial opponents as the “ Jew club . ”
And the Glasgow clubs , Celtic and Rangers , are still divided by religious affiliation , Celtic being Catholic and Rangers Protestant .
But a common race or religion is not essential .
The French football heroes who won the World Cup in 1998 included men of African and Arab origin , and they were proud of it .
Most successful modern football clubs are as mixed as Benetton advertisements , with coaches and players from all over the globe , but this seems to have done nothing to diminish the enthusiasm of local supporters .
In some countries , football is the only thing that knits together disparate people , Shia and Sunnis in Iraq , or Muslims and Christians in Sudan .
Of course , most right-thinking people are a bit like de Coubertin .
Tribal emotions are embarrassing , and dangerous when given free reign .
After World War II , for obvious reasons , the expression of nationalist emotions was virtually taboo in Europe ( not least in Germany ) .
We had all become good Europeans , and nationalism was for racists .
And yet , since Koestler was right , these emotions could not simply be crushed .
They had to find some outlet , and football provided it .
The football stadium became a kind of reservation where taboos on tribal frenzy and even racial antagonism could be relaxed , but only up to a point : when the taunting of Ajax supporters as rotten Jews degenerated into actual violence , sometimes accompanied by a collective hiss , mimicking escaping gas , the city authorities decided to step in .
Some games have had to be played without the presence of rival supporters .
Not all football games are fraught with negative feeling and violence .
This year ’ s World Cup might well be a festival of brotherhood and peace .
Few people even care anymore when Germany wins .
But the fact that sport can unleash primitive emotions is not a reason to condemn it .
Since such feelings cannot simply be wished away , it is better to allow for their ritual expression , just as fears of death , violence , and decay find expression in religion or bull fighting .
Even though some football games have provoked violence , and in one case even a war , they might have served the positive purpose of containing our more savage impulses by deflecting them onto a mere sport .
So let the games begin , and may the best team win .
Which is Holland , of course , the country of my birth .
