Farewell to the Neo-Classical Revolution
LONDON – The looming bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers , and the forced sale of Merrill Lynch , two of the greatest names in finance , mark the end of an era .
But what will come next ?
Cycles of economic fashion are as old as business cycles , and are usually caused by deep business disturbances . “ Liberal ” cycles are followed by “ conservative ” cycles , which give way to new “ liberal ” cycles , and so on . & # 160 ;
Liberal cycles are characterized by government intervention and conservative cycles by government retreat .
A long liberal cycle stretched from the 1930 ’ s to the 1970 ’ s , followed by a conservative cycle of economic deregulation , which now seems to have run its course .
With the nationalization of America ’ s two giant mortgage banks , Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , following the nationalization earlier this year of Britain ’ s Northern Rock , governments have started stepping in again to prevent market meltdowns .
The heady days of conservative economics are over – for now .
Each cycle of regulation and de-regulation is triggered by economic crisis .
The last liberal cycle , associated with President Franklin Roosevelt ’ s New Deal and the economist John Maynard Keynes , was triggered by the Great Depression , though it took World War II ’ s massive government spending to get it properly going .
During the three-decade-long Keynesian era , governments in the capitalist world managed and regulated their economies to maintain full employment and moderate business fluctuations . & # 160 ;
The new conservative cycle was triggered by the inflation of the 1970 ’ s , which seemed to be a product of Keynesian policies .
The economic guru of that era , Milton Friedman , claimed that the deliberate pursuit of full employment was bound to fuel inflation .
Governments should concentrate on keeping money “ sound ” and leave the economy to look after itself .
The “ new classical economics , ” as it became known , taught that , in the absence of egregious government interference , economies would gravitate naturally to full employment , greater innovation , and higher growth rates .
The current crisis of the conservative cycle reflects the massive build-up of bad debt that became apparent with the sub-prime crisis , which started in June 2007 and has now spread to the whole credit market , sinking Lehman Brothers .
“ Think of an inverted pyramid , ” writes investment banker Charles Morris . “ The more claims are piled on top of real output , the more wobbly the pyramid becomes . ”
When the pyramid starts crumbling , government – that is , taxpayers – must step in to refinance the banking system , revive mortgage markets , and prevent economic collapse .
But once government intervenes on this scale , it usually stays for a long time .
At issue here is the oldest unresolved dilemma in economics : are market economies “ naturally ” stable or do they need to be stabilized by policy ?
Keynes emphasized the flimsiness of the expectations on which economic activity in decentralized markets is based .
The future is inherently uncertain , and therefore investor psychology is fickle .
“ The practice of calmness , of immobility , of certainty and security , suddenly breaks down , ” Keynes wrote . “ New fears and hopes will , without warning , take charge of human conduct . ”
This is a classic description of the “ herd behavior ” that George Soros has identified as financial markets ’ dominant feature . It is the government ’ s job to stabilize expectations .
The neo-classical revolution believed that markets were much more cyclically stable than Keynes believed , that the risks in all market transactions can be known in advance , and that prices will therefore always reflect objective probabilities .
Such market optimism led to de-regulation of financial markets in the 1980 ’ s and 1990 ’ s , and the subsequent explosion of financial innovation which made it “ safe ” to borrow larger and larger sums of money on the back of predictably rising assets .
The just-collapsed credit bubble , fueled by so-called special investment vehicles , derivatives , collateralized debt obligations , and phony triple-A ratings , was built on the illusions of mathematical modeling .
Liberal cycles , the historian Arthur Schlesinger thought , succumb to the corruption of power , conservative cycles to the corruption of money .
Both have their characteristic benefits and costs .
But if we look at the historical record , the liberal regime of the 1950 ’ s and 1960 ’ s was more successful than the conservative regime that followed .
Outside China and India , whose economic potential was unleashed by market economics , economic growth was faster and much more stable in the Keynesian golden age than in the age of Friedman ; its fruits were more equitably distributed ; social cohesion and moral habits better maintained .
These are serious benefits to weigh against some business sluggishness .
History , of course , never repeats itself exactly .
Circuit-breakers are in place nowadays to prevent a 1929-style slide into disaster .
But when the financial system , left to its own devices , seizes up , as it now has , we are clearly in for a new round of regulation .
Industry will be left free , but finance will be brought under control .
The cycles in economic fashion show how far economics is from being a science .
One cannot think of any natural science in which orthodoxy swings between two poles .
What gives economics the appearance of a science is that its propositions can be expressed mathematically by abstracting from many decisive characteristics of the real world .
The classical economics of the 1920 ’ s abstracted from the problem of unemployment by assuming that it did not exist .
Keynesian economics , in turn , abstracted from the problem of official incompetence and corruption by assuming that governments were run by omniscient , benevolent experts .
Today ’ s “ new classical economics ” abstracted from the problem of uncertainty by assuming that it could be reduced to measurable ( or hedgeable ) risk .
A few geniuses aside , economists frame their assumptions to suit existing states of affairs , and then invest them with an aura of permanent truth .
They are intellectual butlers , serving the interests of those in power , not vigilant observers of shifting reality .
Their systems trap them in orthodoxy .
When events , for whatever reason , coincide with their theorems , the orthodoxy that they espouse enjoys its moment of glory .
When events shift , it becomes obsolete .
As Charles Morris wrote : “ Intellectuals are reliable lagging indicators , near-infallible guides to what used to be true . ”
