Europe ’ s Time to Learn
PRINCETON – Crises are a chance to learn .
For the past 200 years , with the exception of the Great Depression , major financial crises originated in poor and unstable countries , which then needed major policy adjustments .
Today ’ s crisis started in rich industrial countries – not only with sub-prime mortgages in the United States , but also with mismanagement of banks and public debt in Europe .
So what will Europe learn , and what relevance will those lessons have for the rest of the world ?
Europe ’ s contemporary problems offer striking parallels with previous problems on the periphery of the world economy .
In successive waves of painful crisis – in Latin America in the 1980 ’ s , and in East Asia after 1997 – countries learned a better approach to economic policy and developed a more sustainable framework for managing public-sector debt .
Today it is Europe ’ s turn .
The European crisis is coming full circle .
Initially a financial crisis , it morphed into a classic public-debt crisis after governments stepped in to guarantee banks obligations .
That , in turn , has created a new set of worries for banks that are over-exposed to supposedly secure government debt .
Sovereign debt no longer looks stable .
One of the most important precedents is the debacle of Latin American debt almost 30 years ago .
In August 1982 , Mexico shocked the world by declaring that it was unable to service its debt .
For most of that summer , Mexico , with a projected fiscal deficit of around 11 % of GDP , was still borrowing on international financial markets , though at an increasing premium .
Banks had reassured themselves with the belief that countries could not become insolvent .
But then a wide range of inherently different countries seemed to line up like a row of dominos .
While Mexico had a petroleum-based boom in the wake of the second oil-price shock of the 1970 ’ s , Argentina suffered from economic mismanagement under a military dictatorship that then staged its disastrous invasion of the Falkland Islands / Malvinas .
Brazil had experienced an earlier version of its current economic miracle , with stunning growth rates financed by capital imports .
But in the end , these very different circumstances produced a common and inherently simple problem : over-indebtedness .
A Latin American default would have brought down the banking systems of all the major industrial countries , causing something like a replay of the Great Depression .
Exposure to Mexican debt alone represented some 90 % of the capitalization of major US banks .
The solution that was eventually adopted was considered brilliant at the time , because it avoided formal default by any of the big Latin American borrowers ( though Brazil briefly defaulted five years later , in 1987 ) .
It involved a combination of three elements : immediate international assistance , through the International Monetary Fund ; severe domestic retrenchment , enforced by the highly unpopular conditionality of IMF programs ; and additional financing provided by the banks .
There was no institutionalized write-down of Latin American debt until five years after the crisis , when a haircut no longer threatened banks ’ stability .
It was only at this moment that real lending for new projects could really begin .
In the meantime , Latin America remained mired in what became widely known as “ the lost decade . ”
The contemporary European solution seems to be repeating the same time-buying tactics of the lost decade of the 1980 ’ s in the developing world .
There is the same combination of international support , highly unpopular domestic austerity measures ( which are bound to set off major protests ) , and the apparent absolution of banks from financial responsibility for problems that they produced .
Major European banks – in the United Kingdom , Germany , and France – have , like their 1980 ’ s predecessors , built up a gigantic exposure to what they erroneously thought was safe debt .
A substantial immediate haircut on the sovereign debt of the vulnerable eurozone countries would be so destructive that it would set off a new round of bank panics .
Recognizing this problem , banks can hold their host governments to ransom .
That is why the crisis has become a challenge for the UK , Germany , and France .
The Franco-German initiative unveiled at Deauville in early November , which would require some possible measure of restructuring for debt issued after 2013 , tried to avoid the immediate shock of a haircut .
But the pre-announcement of possible write-downs still led to a major wave of uncertainty about banks .
A long-term alternative requires some capacity to write down debt where it has reached excessive levels .
But it is also necessary to establish an iron-clad guarantee of some part of the outstanding debt , in order to remove fear of a complete write-down .
A mechanism for dealing in an orderly way with sovereign bankruptcy would be a major contribution to global governance , and to solving a longstanding problem of sovereign-debt markets .
Such proposals were widely discussed in the 1990 ’ s and early 2000 ’ s , and IMF Deputy Managing Director Anne Krueger pushed a Sovereign Debt Restructuring Mechanism that would have offered a legal path to imposing general haircuts on creditors , thereby ending the collective-action problems that impede the efficient resolution of sovereign bankruptcy .
If Europe could show – in the worst possible scenario of sovereign default – how such a process might operate , uncertainty would be reduced and markets would be reassured .
And , in the longer term , we would have a viable international model of how to tackle severe sovereign-debt problems .
