Daniel Ortega Rides Again
With the left on the march in much of Latin America , it is no surprise that Nicaragua ’ s Sandinista leader Daniel Ortega is trying to make a comeback .
But Ortega is creating a state of emergency in his party as he tries to diminish the threat posed by Herty Lewites , the former mayor of Managua and the country ’ s most popular politician .
With one demarche , Ortega dismissed the need for a party primary and designated himself as the Sandinistas ’ nominee for next year ’ s presidential election .
What ’ s striking about Ortega ’ s move is that he is ready to risk so much political capital , not only expelling Lewites from the party but canceling his challenger ’ s permits to hold political rallies and forbidding him to use Sandinista party symbols .
Yet , despite all this , Ortega has yet to diminish Lewites ’ s ability to rally the masses .
Ortega ’ s display of raw power is thus merely a reminder of his autocratic ways .
This will be Ortega ’ s fifth run for the presidency , having lost his last three attempts .
It plays handily into the Bush administration ’ s recall to office of veterans of the anti-Sandinista “ Contra War ” of the 1980 ’ s , including Elliot Abrams , John Negroponte , Roger Noriega , Dan Fisk , and Otto Reich .
In a reminder of that confrontation , Ortega accused his old enemies in the United States of drafting a plan to assassinate him .
US Undersecretary of State for Latin America Roger Noriega responded by calling Ortega a “ hoodlum . ”
Ortega is wagering that attacking Bush will resonate with the Sandinistas and provoke them to close ranks , thereby stifling internal party dissent .
But in an already polarized environment , an Ortega-Bush standoff is nothing more than a self-fulfilling prophecy .
In arguing for his candidacy , Ortega wants supporters to believe that his presidential campaign is part of the wave of recent victories won by the Latin American left .
But this is only half right .
A new Latin American left is developing , but Ortega is not part of it .
In the context of the new Latin American left , Ortega resembles a shoddy imitation of Fidel Castro without the oil wealth of Hugo Chávez .
The standard bearer of Nicaragua ’ s new left is Lewites .
Like Vázquez , Lagos , Kirchner , and Lula elsewhere in the region , Lewites offers the possibility of a modern and democratic left , socially committed and at the same time capable of orchestrating national solutions while recognizing and negotiating profound differences with the US and the IMF .
These new leaders seek to deal with the US in a manner that avoids alienating a superpower and isolating their countries .
To Ortega , such a posture reeks of betrayal , social democratic aberrations and imperialist tendencies .
But despite Ortega ’ s anachronistic politics , he has a good chance of winning the election in November 2006 .
He has only to keep his party united and the anti-Sandinista vote divided .
Ironically , his principal ally in this adventure will be his old enemy , former President Arnoldo Alemán , who is under house arrest for corruption .
Between them , the two caudillos control 90 % of the parliament , the Supreme Court , and the Electoral Commission .
Together , they can keep Nicaragua ’ s current president , Enrique Bolaños , in check indefinitely .
Alemán , too , faces a rebellion in his Liberal Constitutional Party ( PLC ) , led by former Treasury Minister Eduardo Montealegre , a presidential hopeful popular in the party ’ s liberal wing .
If Alemán blocks Montealegre ’ s candidacy in the PLC and pushes him to form another political party , Ortega ’ s chances for winning the presidency increase sharply .
The business interests that finance political campaigns face a difficult dilemma : Is it preferable to align with a PLC dominated by a corrupt Alemán or support a new democratic force and risk helping Ortega win ?
Although a three-way race is pure speculation at this point , it ’ s clear that it offers Ortega the best of all electoral worlds .
It ’ s so tempting that Ortega is likely to help rehabilitate Arnoldo Alemán , betting that freeing him will serve his political interests .
The main glitch in this scenario , however , is Lewites .
Polls show that an overwhelming majority of Sandinista voters prefers the former Managua mayor – 72 % versus 18 % for Ortega .
If Lewites is able to organize nationally and maintain a presence in the streets , he could quickly become unbeatable .
A poll conducted in January projected that in a four-way race , Lewites would come in first , followed by Montealegre .
Ortega would manage only a third-place finish .
Alemán , or his candidate , would run dead last .
If voters continue to lean toward Lewites and Montealegre , the two candidates could elect more deputies to the National Assembly than the Sandinistas and the PLC combined .
Such an outcome would be a welcome end to the dominance of Alemán and Ortega , who have served Nicaraguans poorly .
While it ’ s premature to make definitive predictions , the Lewites and Montealegre rebellions have already done more in eight weeks to change the country ’ s political landscape than anything else in the last two years .
As a result , Nicaragua ’ s people , not its strongmen , may yet choose the next president .
