Failing the Syria Test
MADRID – On October 2nd in Istanbul , Syria ’ s disparate opposition movements gave the go-ahead for the formation of a “ Syrian National Council . ”
This is the most important step yet taken by the fragmented forces that have been trying since May to lead a peaceful uprising against President Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime . The Council ’ s formation boosted the morale of those who have been demanding stronger and more unified representation .
But a mere two days after its creation , the embryonic Council suffered its first big setback .
France , the United Kingdom , Germany , and Portugal , in collaboration with the United States , presented a draft resolution before the United Nations Security Council seeking to condemn repression in Syria and put an end to the use of force against civilians .
The draft was a sugarcoated version of a previous text , proposed last June .
This one contained nebulous terms such as “ specific measures ” or “ other options . ”
It stressed the sovereignty , independence , and territorial integrity of Syria , and emphasized the need to resolve the current crisis peacefully , by means of an inclusive political process – and called for a national dialogue led from within the country .
The draft called for a 30-day period to study the options , up from 15 days in the earlier draft .
The object was plain : to gain a Russian , and consequently , a Chinese abstention .
But Russia and China vetoed the proposal anyway , and only nine members of the Security Council voted in favor , with Brazil , India , South Africa , and Lebanon abstaining .
There are three key implications of the Security Council ’ s vote .
First , violence will increase .
Since the protests erupted last March , there have been an estimated 2,700 deaths , more than 10,000 people displaced to Turkey , and thousands more arrested .
The Assad government does not hesitate to fire on civilians , lay siege to cities , or shut off their electricity and water .
And a few days ago , it was reported that some 10,000 Syrian soldiers had defected , with several hundred joining rival movements such as the Free Syrian Army and the Free Officers Movement .
Unless some international protection arrives , a movement that began peacefully risks entering a new and dangerous phase .
Second , there will be grave consequences for regional security .
Syria is a strategic hinge in the Middle East .
It has been one of the countries most hostile toward Israel , mainly through its support of Hamas , Iran , and Hezbollah .
Chaos in Syria would threaten Lebanon ’ s stability and alter Iran ’ s geopolitical influence in the region .
Iraq , governed by Shia political forces , also keeps close tabs on Syria ’ s evolution , as does Turkey , which , until fairly recently , considered Syria a keystone of its regional policy .
Finally , the Security Council vote exposed a clear division within the international community .
Among the BRICS – Brazil , Russia , India , China , and South Africa , all of which happen to be on the Security Council currently – two vetoed and the rest abstained ( along with Lebanon , for obvious reasons ) .
In the case of the resolution on military intervention in Libya , the BRICS decided " to let " Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi be overthrown .
Not so with Syria , where none aligned itself with the positions supported by the European Union and the US .
The Security Council ’ s composition wouldn ’ t be substantially different if an “ ideal ” distribution of seats were to be achieved .
So the fact that no agreement has been reached on Syria forces us to reflect on the future difficulties that we will face in managing global security .
Of course , there is no “ one size fits all ” model for intervention , but that does not justify evading our “ responsibility to protect ” – a fine concept promoted by former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan and adopted by all UN member states in 2005 .
Support for the resolution would have weakened Assad ’ s position , as it would have revealed him as isolated from his traditional allies , Russia and China .
It would also have shown the international community to be unanimous in its rejection of repression and committed to protecting the Syrian people ( though the draft made no mention of military intervention ) .
The sanctions adopted by the EU and the US against Assad ’ s regime are not enough .
But , unless further measures are channeled through – and thus legitimized by – the Security Council , other alternatives are limited .
In recent years , with countries such as China , India , and Brazil taking their rightful place on the international scene , the G-7 has given way to the G-20 .
Likewise , an ambitious reform of the International Monetary Fund was adopted in 2010 to reflect changes in the global distribution of power .
But this change in global governance must not be limited to economic policymaking .
After all , globalization has brought many overall benefits , but also less friendly aspects , such as the ones dealing with global security .
Despite our growing interconnectedness , the UN Security Council has not yet been unable to achieve sufficient consensus to resolve pressing matters such as Syria .
Nobody ever said that the road to stronger global governance would be straight or simple to navigate .
But there are no detours : without effective structures of power and a genuine commitment from all players , the future does not look promising for global stability and prosperity .
