Germany ’ s Sunshine Daydream
COPENHAGEN – One of the world ’ s biggest green-energy public-policy experiments is coming to a bitter end in Germany , with important lessons for policymakers elsewhere .
Germany once prided itself on being the “ photovoltaic world champion ” , doling out generous subsidies – totaling more than $ 130 billion , according to research from Germany ’ s Ruhr University – to citizens to invest in solar energy .
But now the German government is vowing to cut the subsidies sooner than planned , and to phase out support over the next five years .
What went wrong ?
There is a fundamental problem with subsidizing inefficient green technology : it is affordable only if it is done in tiny , tokenistic amounts .
Using the government ’ s generous subsidies , Germans installed 7.5 gigawatts of photovoltaic ( PV ) capacity last year , more than double what the government had deemed “ acceptable . ”
It is estimated that this increase alone will lead to a $ 260 hike in the average consumer ’ s annual power bill .
According to Der Spiegel , even members of Chancellor Angela Merkel ’ s staff are now describing the policy as a massive money pit .
Philipp Rösler , Germany ’ s minister of economics and technology , has called the spiraling solar subsidies a “ threat to the economy . ”
Germany ’ s enthusiasm for solar power is understandable .
We could satisfy all of the world ’ s energy needs for an entire year if we could capture just one hour of the sun ’ s energy .
Even with the inefficiency of current PV technology , we could meet the entire globe ’ s energy demand with solar panels by covering 250,000 square kilometers ( 155,342 square miles ) , about 2.6 % of the Sahara Desert .
Unfortunately , Germany – like most of the world – is not as sunny as the Sahara .
And , while sunlight is free , panels and installation are not .
Solar power is at least four times more costly than energy produced by fossil fuels .
It also has the distinct disadvantage of not working at night , when much electricity is consumed .
In the words of the German Association of Physicists , “ solar energy cannot replace any additional power plants . ”
On short , overcast winter days , Germany ’ s 1.1 million solar-power systems can generate no electricity at all .
The country is then forced to import considerable amounts of electricity from nuclear power plants in France and the Czech Republic .
When the sun failed to shine last winter , one emergency back-up plan powered up an Austrian oil-fired plant to fill the supply gap .
Indeed , despite the massive investment , solar power accounts for only about 0.3 % of Germany ’ s total energy .
This is one of the key reasons why Germans now pay the second-highest price for electricity in the developed world ( exceeded only by Denmark , which aims to be the “ world wind-energy champion ” ) .
Germans pay three times more than their American counterparts .
Moreover , this sizeable investment does remarkably little to counter global warming .
Even with unrealistically generous assumptions , the unimpressive net effect is that solar power reduces Germany ’ s CO2 emissions by roughly eight million metric tons – or about 1 % – for the next 20 years .
When the effects are calculated in a standard climate model , the result is a reduction in average temperature of 0.00005oC ( one twenty-thousandth of a degree Celsius , or one ten-thousandth of a degree Fahrenheit ) .
To put it another way : by the end of the century , Germany ’ s $ 130 billion solar panel subsidies will have postponed temperature increases by 23 hours .
Using solar , Germany is paying about $ 1,000 per ton of CO2 reduced .
The current CO2 price in Europe is $ 8 .
Germany could have cut 131 times as much CO2 for the same price .
Instead , the Germans are wasting more than 99 cents of every euro that they plow into solar panels .
It gets worse : because Germany is part of the European Union Emissions Trading System , the actual effect of extra solar panels in Germany leads to no CO2 reductions , because total emissions are already capped .
Instead , the Germans simply allow other parts of the EU to emit more CO2 .
Germany ’ s solar panels have only made it cheaper for Portugal or Greece to use coal .
Defenders of Germany ’ s solar subsidies also claim that they have helped to create “ green jobs ” .
But each job created by green-energy policies costs an average of $ 175,000 – considerably more than job creation elsewhere in the economy , such as infrastructure or health care .
And many “ green jobs ” are being exported to China , meaning that Europeans subsidize Chinese jobs , with no CO2 reductions .
Germany ’ s experiment with subsidizing inefficient solar technology has failed .
What governments should do instead is to focus first on increasing research and development to make green-energy technology cheaper and more competitive .
Production should be ramped up later .
In the meantime , Germans have paid about $ 130 billion for a climate-change policy that has no impact on global warming .
They have subsidized Chinese jobs and other European countries ’ reliance on dirty energy sources .
And they have needlessly burdened their economy .
As even many German officials would probably attest , governments elsewhere cannot afford to repeat the same mistake .
