France ’ s Ghetto Economy
The youngsters who are ravaging France realize that they don ’ t have a future .
That is why they are burning cars .
But how many French politicians realize that their beloved “ social model ” is partly to blame ?
Poor second-generation immigrants in France have no economic prospects for two main reasons .
First , the economy is growing far too slowly .
As in most of continental Europe , economic performance has been enormously disappointing over the last two decades .
But France managed to do even worse than its neighbors .
During the period from 1980 to 2000 , only two OECD countries , Germany and Greece , recorded slower growth in income per capita than France .
But Germany had to go endure the huge costs and trauma of re-unification with East Germany . Greece was hurt by the wars in the Balkans .
What ’ s France ’ s excuse ?
Second , whatever growth there is in France does not trickle down to the poor .
Many young second-generation immigrants are virtually excluded from the labor market .
Average unemployment has been stuck at around 10 % for several years – one of the highest rates in the OECD .
But the unemployment rate is more than double among the young . And it reaches 40 % and over amongst those who drop out of school in the banlieues , which have become no-go zones of hopelessness .
Unemployment is high and concentrated amongst French minorities because of specific labor-market institutions .
France has strict hiring and firing regulations that make it costly to dismiss workers and thus reduce job creation .
Those with a job are protected , those without one are hurt .
Moreover , salaries cannot fall below a legislated minimum wage , which is so high that the least productive and least skilled workers remain shut out of the labor market .
Wages are set in centralized negotiations by monopolistic unions , and apply throughout the economy .
But the unions don ’ t care if the sons and daughters of immigrants living in ghettos have no opportunity of even starting a working life .
These French social institutions are designed with a purpose : to protect the French labor market ’ s “ insiders . ”
Regular workers enjoy secure and well-paid jobs , with much leisure time and little stress , particularly in the public sector .
The poor minorities that remain excluded are provided with some social assistance .
But too little is done to integrate them into society and increase their opportunities .
The economic harm done by this corporatist social model is aggravated by widespread state intervention in all parts of the economy .
Services are sheltered from competition , hindering both productivity growth and job creation in these sectors .
Government intervention distorts the prices , leading to inefficient allocation of resources in areas such as healthcare , education , and agriculture .
French civil servants , convinced that they can spot profit opportunities better than the market , engage in a proactive industrial policy with a variety of tools , including the retention of minority or controlling stakes in a number of large enterprises .
All of this results in an economy that grows too little , where the weakest are condemned to a life of exclusion and are deprived of any opportunity for upward mobility .
Why has France fallen into this trap ?
Not only the myopic pursuit of insiders ’ economic interests is to blame .
France is also burdened by strongly held ideological convictions .
According to opinion polls collected in many countries by the World Value Surveys in 1999-2000 , the French on average fear income inequality much more than citizens of other industrial countries .
Compared to other countries at about the same level of development , France stands out as being highly suspicious of the benefits of competition ( only Belgium fares slightly worse in this regard ) .
French political institutions also bear heavy responsibility .
France is a stable democracy , and large majorities in Parliament often support its governments .
But this stability comes at the expense of change .
Barriers to entry into the French political elite are exceptionally high .
The current president , Jacques Chirac , was elected 10 years ago ; he was already in government in 1969 .
His predecessor , Francois Mitterand , was elected president for the first time in 1981 , and made his first appearance in government in 1956 .
France is also a heavily centralized State , were most civil servants are recruited from a close circle of policy advisers to the top politicians , often educated at the same institution .
Little wonder that change occurs so seldom in France .
To be sure , the corporatist welfare state is not the only causes of today ’ s Gallic intifada .
Violent riots by immigrants and ethnic minorities have taken place in other countries as well , from London to Los Angeles .
But , ultimately , the best way to address them and prevent their resurgence is to make sure that economic opportunities are available to those who are determined to try .
Social assistance with no hope of individual improvement is not enough .
It is time that France starts questioning its economic model .
In a recent statement about the burning suburbs , Chirac declared : “ We will have to draw all the lessons from this crisis , when the time comes and order has been restored , and with a lot of courage and lucidity . ”
