The Federal Reserve ’ s Escape from New York
WASHINGTON , DC – The US Federal Reserve System is the world ’ s most important central bank .
Its decisions about interest rates and financial regulation reverberate through global markets and affect millions of lives .
Yet its governance structure is of another age – antiquated , increasingly problematic , and urgently in need of sensible reform .
The Fed made major mistakes in the run-up to the global economic crisis of 2007-08 , most notably by adopting a lax approach to the supervision of key financial institutions , and by allowing some very large banks to become extremely fragile .
In one of the great ironies of modern American politics , the post-crisis Dodd-Frank financial reforms of 2010 actually gave more power to the Fed , mostly because other US regulatory agencies were regarded as having done a worse job .
In view of the Fed ’ s decidedly mixed track record since the Dodd-Frank reforms , some officials evidently regarded that default by Congress as a mandate to conduct business as usual .
Recent press reports have highlighted lapses in supervision , particularly in and around the Federal Reserve Bank of New York – one of 12 regional banks in the Fed System , which also has a Board of Governors in Washington , DC .
This regional structure is the result of legislative compromise in 1913 , when the Fed was created , and again in the mid-1930s , when its governance was last overhauled .
Whereas members of the Fed ’ s Washington-based Board of Governors are nominated by the US president , subject to Senate confirmation , the presidents of the regional Federal Reserve banks are appointed by local boards .
In reality , the New York Fed has always had disproportionate sway ; not all regional Fed presidents are created equal .
The president of the New York Fed is a permanent voting member and vice chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee , which sets interest rates , whereas other regional Fed presidents are voting members only on a rotating basis .
The New York Fed also has a particularly important role in bank supervision – most of America ’ s “ too big to fail ” banks are located in its jurisdiction ( and most global banks have a presence there ) .
And the New York Fed has long been the Fed System ’ s eyes and ears on Wall Street .
Or perhaps it has become the other way around .
At least over the past decade , senior New York Fed officials have consistently sided with the interests of very large banks .
( To be clear , I also know many Fed officials who are outstanding public servants ) .
Though Wall Street interests have long been well represented on the board of the New York Fed , under Timothy Geithner , its president from 2003 to 2009 , the big players became even more powerful – with some rather unfortunate consequences for the rest of us .
In his recent memoir , Stress Test , Geithner says , “ I basically restored the New York Fed board to its historic roots as an elite roster of the local financial establishment . ” His choices included Dick Fuld , CEO of Lehman Brothers , which failed spectacularly in September 2008 , and Stephen Friedman , a Goldman Sachs board member , who resigned as chair of the New York Fed ’ s board after being accused of inappropriately trading Goldman stock during the financial crisis .
Geithner also established a tangled web of connections between the New York Fed and JPMorgan Chase , some of which linger to this day .
Some senior Fed officials become angry when pressed about this reality .
But the Fed ’ s legitimacy – and its ability to make sensible policy – is not boosted by having major banks represented , directly or indirectly , on a board that chooses and oversees a key policymaker .
Now , finally , US politicians on both the left and the right are focusing their attention on a long-overdue reform of the Fed ’ s governance .
One important proposal comes from Senator Jack Reed , a Democrat from Rhode Island , who proposes , quite reasonably , that the president of the New York Fed should be nominated by the president and confirmed by the Senate , just like members of the Board of Governors – or any other important economic policymaker .
The president of the New York Fed would also be required to testify before Congress on a regular basis .
The Fed ’ s defenders will respond that it would be dangerous to alter the status quo .
But it is the Fed ’ s current governance that has become dangerous .
Senators Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Joe Manchin of West Virginia argue , entirely convincingly , that the composition of the Fed ’ s Board of Governors should be tilted away from people who are connected with big Wall Street firms .
Meanwhile , House Republicans are preparing their own Fed governance reforms , which would be even more radical – and would likely constrain monetary policy unwisely .
In any case , it is time for change at the Fed .
And , as is often the case with finance , the place to start is New York .
