Europe ’ s Movement Against Moving
PRINCETON – The largest unresolved issue in the European Union is mobility .
The integration process was intended to make it easier and more attractive for Europeans to move from one country to another .
According to this vision , the EU ’ s inhabitants had the nation to lose and a continent to gain .
But some recent election results indicate that they are more worried about losing the nation .
Ever since the 1986 Single European Act removed restrictions on working in other member countries , the continent has been a single labor market – at least in theory .
It was a policy that fit well with other parts of the integration agenda .
The euro ’ s ability to function as a common currency would require a flexible labor market , in which workers could adjust to regional shocks by moving .
But it was only after the global financial crisis that European migration really took off .
And the result has been a backlash against it , first in destination countries , and now , as Poland ’ s just-concluded presidential election suggests , in countries of origin .
As the debate over migration has heated up , both those who moved and those who stayed behind have ended up feeling more nationalistic , not more European .
At first glance , the results of recent elections in France and England might give the impression that European migration is on the wane as a hot-button issue .
The French National Front did badly in regional elections compared to the mainstream and pro-European right .
It then descended into scandal and acrimonious infighting between the party ’ s president , Marine Le Pen , and its founder , her father , Jean-Marie Le Pen ( who was ultimately expelled ) .
Meanwhile , Britain ’ s anti-European United Kingdom Independence Party ( UKIP ) performed poorly in the general election earlier this month , and then promptly fractured .
Germany ’ s right-wing populist Alternative for Germany is also splintering and disintegrating .
Italy ’ s Five Star Movement is in abeyance as well .
This sequence of failures has led some to predict the end of protest politics .
That view is not quite right .
The far-right political parties that seemed to be the main beneficiaries of the euro crisis may have stumbled .
But the issue of labor mobility is not going away .
Until now , the discussion about European migration has taken place mostly within rich destination countries , like France and the UK .
Little attention has been given to its effects in the countries of origin .
But in Poland ’ s presidential election , the issue was front and center , where it generated the greatest resonance with voters and contributed to the victory of Andrzej Duda , the head of the right-wing Law and Justice Party .
It also provided the theme for the campaign of Paweł Kukiz , a rock musician who finished third in the election ’ s first round .
Both Duda and Kukiz complained that too many young Poles were leaving the country , and that their country was becoming an empty land of the elderly – a fact that is obvious to anyone who walks down a Polish street .
Europe might still be home to dynamic young Polish communities , but they are in London , Dublin , Paris , Oslo , and Stockholm – not in Warsaw , Krakow , or Lodz .
And they are certainly not in the poor , rural communities in the east and south of the country , which have been disproportionately emptied by emigration .
Debate about the damage done by emigration has also erupted in countries much more obviously affected by the economic crisis – eurozone countries like Greece , Spain , and Portugal , as well as countries outside the currency union , like Bulgaria and Romania .
And , though the issue raises obvious questions of justice and efficiency – poor countries , having invested large sums in education , now produce graduates who take jobs and pay taxes abroad – Europe has provided little in the way of an effective response .
True , some migrants might eventually return , bringing skills and capital with them .
But , in the meantime , they are leaving behind a population that is older , poorer , and more vulnerable .
European solutions to the problem could involve transfers of funds when local education benefits a continent-wide labor market , or assistance in addressing the problems that affect areas at risk of losing their working-age populations .
The irony is obvious .
European integration has sparked increased mobility – especially in the aftermath of the euro crisis .
But what it has not yet done is generate the institutional framework needed to make mobility acceptable to the EU ’ s residents .
