Europe on Holiday
Currently , the average number of hours worked per person aged 15 to 25 each year in France and Germany is about 50 % lower than in the United States .
Other European countries ( for example , Italy and Spain ) fall somewhere between these poles .
Although some Americans always like to boast about their superior work ethic , this disparity in working hours between the US and Europe has not always existed .
Indeed , until the mid-1970 's , the number of hours worked on either side of the Atlantic was roughly the same .
From the mid-1970 's on , however , Americans continued working more or less the same number of hours , while Western Europeans began working less and less each year .
If Western Europe needs an explanation as to why its rate of economic growth is lagging behind the US , it need look no further .
The average number of working hours per person depends on a variety of factors :
• the level of participation in the labor force ;
• the number of vacation days workers have ;
• the number of hours worked in a " normal " week , i.e. , with no vacation .
Virtually all the difference between the US on one side and France and Germany on the other are due to the first two factors , each with roughly equal weight .
So , lower participation in the labor force explains half of the difference , and longer vacations for those who do work accounts for the other half .
The importance of vacation time should come as no surprise to anyone who has experienced Europe 's deserted cities in August , the three-week vacation " bridges " in April and May in France and Italy , the " rush hours " that take place every Friday at 2 PM in German cities , and crowded ski slopes in February due to winter school vacations .
But knowing " how " Europeans work less is one thing ; knowing " why " Europeans work less than Americans is another .
One view is that Americans are perceived ( and like to see themselves ) as Calvinist workaholics , whereas Europeans like to think that they know how to enjoy life 's pleasures .
As a European working in the US , I admit that I do take many more vacations than my American colleagues .
So there may be something in this " cultural " explanation .
But why did this start around 1973 ?
A second argument attributes the difference to income taxes , which , in fact , have increased significantly in Europe since the 1970 's , while in the US income taxes fell from the early 1980 's onward .
Income taxes certainly must affect willingness to work .
They may not change by much the number of hours worked by the main breadwinner in a family ( typically a man ) , but they do influence the participation of women in the labor force .
After all , why work , when your after-tax salary barely pays for childcare and household help ?
But even this is not a sufficient explanation , because studies of how the supply of labor responds to tax changes suggest that something else must explain the enormous gap between US and Europe , especially France and Germany .
For the age group over 50 , the structure of pension systems is clearly a major factor .
It was and remains much more profitable to retire earlier in Europe than in the US .
Why should a Frenchman or Italian in his early sixties work today , when in the 1990 's he could have retired in his mid-fifties with 80 % or more of his last working-age salary ?
For women , the retirement age in the mid-1990 's was even lower . Public sector employees had even more advantages .
Nor is that all .
In the 1980 's and 1990 's , many European labor unions , in response to rising unemployment , adopted the policy of " work less , work all . "
In other words , they obtained shorter hours ( i.e. , more vacations ) in order to keep employment up .
The problem is that total compensation did not go down in proportion to the shorter hours , thus leading to an increase in pay per hour .
Lower productivity and higher unit labor costs eroded firms ' willingness to hire , leaving Europe with chronically higher unemployment than in the US .
Today 's debates about growth in Europe are full of buzz words like " knowledge-based society , " " technological progress , " and " investment in education . "
Europeans certainly need something to compensate for a short working life with many vacations .
But much of this discussion is merely a form of " political correctness . "
It is more reassuring - and " feels better " - to tell Europeans that growth is sluggish because society is not sufficiently knowledge-based , rather than pointing to the trade-off between vacations and growth .
Europeans tend to prefer vacations over growth .
Personally , I love taking more and more vacations .
But I cannot ( and do not ) then complain if my income does not grow faster and faster .
