Shelter from the Storm in Europe
LAGUNA BEACH – Dark clouds are lowering over Europe ’ s economic future , as three distinct tempests gather : the Greek crisis , Russia ’ s incursion in Ukraine , and the rise of populist political parties .
Though each poses a considerable threat , Europe , aided by the recent cyclical pickup , is in a position to address them individually , without risking more than a temporary set of disruptions .
Should they converge into a kind of “ perfect storm , ” however , a return to sunny days will become extremely difficult to foresee any time soon .
As it stands , the three storms are at different stages of formation .
The Greek crisis , having been building for years , is blowing the hardest .
Beyond the potential for the first eurozone exit , Greece could be at risk of becoming a failed state – an outcome that would pose a multi-dimensional threat to the rest of Europe .
Mitigating the adverse humanitarian consequences ( associated with cross-border migration ) , and geopolitical impact of this storm would be no easy feat .
The second storm , rolling in from the EU ’ s east , is the costly military conflict in Ukraine ’ s Donbas region .
The crisis in eastern Ukraine has been contained only partly by the Minsk II ceasefire agreement , and reflects the deepest rupture in the West ’ s relationship with Russia since the Soviet Union ’ s collapse .
Further Russian interference in Ukraine – directly and / or through separatist proxies in Donbas – would present the West with a stark choice .
It would either have to tighten sanctions on Russia , potentially tipping Western Europe into recession as Russia responds with counter-sanctions , or accommodate the Kremlin ’ s expansionist ambitions and jeopardize other countries with Russian-speaking minorities ( including the EU ’ s Baltic members ) .
The third storm – political tumult brought about by the rise of populist political movements – poses yet another serious threat .
Energized by broad voter dissatisfaction , particularly in struggling economies , these political movements tend to focus on a small handful of issues , opposing , say , immigrants , austerity , or the European Union – essentially whomever they can scapegoat for their countries ’ troubles .
Already , Greek voters handed the far-left anti-austerity Syriza party a sweeping victory in January .
France ’ s far-right National Front is currently second in opinion polls .
The anti-immigration Danish People ’ s Party finished second in the country ’ s just-concluded general election , with 22 % of the vote . And , in Spain , the leftist anti-austerity Podemos commands double-digit support .
These parties ’ extremist tendencies and narrow platforms are limiting governments ’ policy flexibility by driving relatively moderate parties and politicians to adopt more radical positions .
It was concern about the United Kingdom Independence Party ’ s capacity to erode the Conservatives ’ political base that pushed Prime Minister David Cameron to commit to a referendum on the country ’ s continued EU membership .
With three storms looming , Europe ’ s leaders must act fast to ensure that they can dissipate each before it merges with the others , and cope effectively with whatever disruptions they cause .
The good news is that regional crisis-management tools have lately been strengthened considerably , especially since the summer of 2012 , when the euro came very close to collapsing .
Indeed , not only are new institutional circuit breakers , such as the European Financial Stability Facility , in place ; existing bodies have also been made more flexible and thus more effective .
Moreover , the European Central Bank is engaged in a large-scale asset-purchasing initiative that could be easily and rapidly expanded .
And countries like Ireland , Portugal , and Spain have , through hard and painful work , reduced their vulnerability to contagion from nearby crises .
But these buffers would be severely strained if the gathering storms converged into a single devastating gale .
Given the EU ’ s fundamental interconnectedness – in economic , financial , geopolitical , and social terms – the disruptive impact of each shock would amplify the others , overwhelming the region ’ s circuit breakers , leading to recession , reviving financial instability , and creating pockets of social tension .
This would increase already-high unemployment , expose excessive financial risk-taking , embolden Russia , and strengthen populist movements further , thereby impeding comprehensive policy responses .
Fortunately , the possibility of such a perfect storm is more a risk than a baseline at this point .
Nonetheless , given the extent of its destructive potential , it warrants serious attention by policymakers .
Securing Europe ’ s economic future in this context will require , first and foremost , a renewed commitment to regional integration efforts – completing the banking union , advancing fiscal union , and moving forward on political union – that have been crowded out by a never-ending series of meetings and summits on Greece .
Likewise , on the national level , pro-growth economic-reform initiatives – which seem to have lost some urgency in the face of overly complacent and excessively accommodating financial markets – need to be revitalized .
This would ease the policy burden on the ECB , which is currently being forced to pursue multiple ambitious objectives that far exceed its capacity to deliver sustainably good outcomes regarding growth , employment , inflation , and financial stability .
The current focus on the downpour in Greece is understandable .
But policymakers should not be so distracted by it that they fail to prepare for the other two possible storms – and , much more worrisome , the possibility that they merge into a single more devastating one .
Europe ’ s leaders must act now to minimize the risks , lest they find their shelters inadequate to the extreme weather that could lie ahead .
