East Asia \ u0027s Historical Shackles
TOKYO – Diplomatic relationships in East Asia have long been held hostage by history .
But the region ’ s “ history problem ” has been intensifying lately , with growing nationalism among major actors like China , Japan , and South Korea fueling disputes over everything from territory and natural resources to war memorials and textbooks .
Can East Asian countries overcome their legacy of conflict to forge a common future that benefits all ?
Consider the relationship between America ’ s closest East Asian allies , Japan and South Korea .
Though historical disagreements have long hampered bilateral ties , the increasingly nationalistic stance of Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and South Korean President Park Geun-hye has aggravated festering tensions .
If they fail to work together to stem the revival of bitter historical disputes , their relationship will remain frozen , playing into China ’ s hands .
And nobody plays the history card with quite as much relish as China , where President Xi Jinping is also relying on nationalism to legitimize his rule .
Last year , China introduced two new national memorial days to commemorate China ’ s long battle against Japanese aggression in World War II : “ War against Japanese Aggression Victory Day ” on September 3 and “ Nanjing Massacre Day ” on December 13 .
What would happen if countries like Vietnam and India dedicated days to remembering China ’ s aggression toward them since 1949 ?
By reinforcing negative stereotypes of rival countries , such squabbles over history and remembrance sow fragmentation and instability , and have certainly fueled the region ’ s recent territorial disputes .
Indeed , the politicization of history remains the principal obstacle to reconciliation in East Asia .
Repeated attempts to rewrite history – & nbsp ; sometimes literally , through textbook revisions – along nationalist lines make it nearly impossible to establish regional institutions .
This should not be the case .
Japan and South Korea , for example , are vibrant democracies and export-oriented economic powerhouses , with traditionally close cultural ties and many shared values .
In other words , they are ideal candidates for collaboration .
US President Barack Obama recognizes this potential , and has promoted increased strategic cooperation between South Korea and Japan in order to underpin a stronger trilateral security alliance with the US that can balance a rising China .
But Japan and South Korea refuse to let go of history .
To be sure , there is some truth to South Korea ’ s accusation that Japan is denying some of its past behavior .
But it is also true that Park & nbsp ; – who has refused to meet formally with Abe until he addresses lingering issues over Japan ’ s annexation of Korea – & nbsp ; has used history to pander to domestic nationalist sentiment .
Indeed , adopting a hardline stance has enabled her to whitewash some inconvenient family history : Her father , the dictator Park Chung-hee , collaborated with the Japanese military while Korea was under colonial rule .
Abe , too , has stoked tensions , particularly by visiting Tokyo ’ s Yasukuni Shrine – a controversial memorial that honors , among others , Class A war criminals from World War II .
Though Abe visited the shrine only once – in December 2013 – he felt compelled to do so in response to China ’ s unilateral declaration of an air-defense identification zone , covering territories that it claims but does not control .
Of course , the divergences between Japanese and South Korean historical narratives go back further than WWII .
More than a century ago , the Korean activist Ahn Jung-geun assassinated Japan ’ s first prime minister , Hirobumi Ito , at the railway station in the Chinese city of Harbin , cementing Ahn ’ s status as a hero in Korea and a terrorist in Japan .
Ito ’ s image can be seen on Japan ’ s 1,000-yen note ; Ahn has appeared on a 200-won postage stamp in South Korea .
Last year , Park asked Xi to honor Ahn .
Xi seized the opportunity to drive a wedge between America ’ s two main Asian allies , and built a memorial to Ahn .
Japan responded by blasting China for glorifying a terrorist and propagating a “ one-sided ” view of history – a move that , Japan asserted , was “ not conducive to building peace and stability . ”
Such conflicts have a clear catalyst : Asia ’ s rising prosperity .
As their economies have expanded , Asian countries have gained the confidence to construct and exalt a new past , in which they either downplay their own aggressions or highlight their steadfastness in the face of brutal victimization .
All countries ’ legitimizing narratives blend historical fact and myth .
But , in some cases , historical legacies can gain excessive influence , overwhelming leaders ’ capacity to make rational policy choices .
That explains why Park has sought closer ties with China , even though South Korea ’ s natural regional partner is democratic Japan .
One source of hope stems from Abe ’ s landslide victory in the recent snap general election , which gives him the political capital to reach out to Park with a grand bargain : If Japan expresses remorse more clearly for its militaristic past , South Korea will agree to leave historical grievances out of official policy .
Japan and South Korea cannot change the past .
But they can strive to shape a more cooperative future .
As a Russian proverb succinctly puts it , “ Forget the past and lose an eye ; dwell on the past and lose both eyes . ”
