The European Oasis
PARIS – Are non-Europeans much less pessimistic about Europe than Europeans themselves ?
Could distance be a prerequisite for a more balanced view of the continent ’ s predicament ?
In an interview a few months ago , Wang Hongzhang , the chairman of China Construction Bank , indirectly expressed his subdued enthusiasm for Europe .
Quoting the Chinese proverb , “ A starved camel is still bigger than a horse , ” he went on to say that Europe ’ s economies are much stronger than many people believe .
And , without saying so explicitly , he suggested that the time was right to go on a European buying spree at the right price .
Of course , not everyone would share this optimistic vision .
Across the English Channel , British Euroskeptics rejoice that they have kept their distance from a “ sinking ship . ”
But , while The Economist recently described France as being “ in denial , ” the same could be said of the United Kingdom .
True , the French had neither the Olympic Games nor a royal celebration this year ; but , when it comes to the state of their economies , the two countries are largely in the same boat .
If one travels to America or Asia , as I did this autumn , Europe ’ s image becomes selectively brighter : while it continues to be perceived as a positive model , it is no longer considered a global actor .
Seen from the United States , Europe may no longer be a problem , but it is not considered a part of any solution to the world ’ s problems , either – with the possible exception of those that concern Europe directly ( and , even then , doubts linger ) .
Yet , for many international investors , Europe continues to be , or is once again , a risk worth taking , if not – as in the case of Wang – a golden opportunity .
In a time of growing complexity – and thus uncertainty – investors want to hedge their bets .
At least some of the BRICS countries ( Brazil , Russia , India , China , and South Africa ) appear to be running out of steam economically ; and , while new emerging powers , such as Mexico , are tempting , they may prove to be more fragile than they look .
In this context , Europe may be a tired , aging , and depressed continent , but , as its luxury and aeronautics industries attest , it would be premature to bury it .
Relative decline is obvious : Europe accounted for 20 % of the world ’ s population at the beginning of the eighteenth century , but only around 7 % today , while its share is expected to be even lower in 2050 .
But demography is not destiny : a small population has not prevented Singapore from sustaining a hyper-competitive economy .
Europe may not be a source of economic inspiration , but it still makes people dream .
It is perceived as a model of “ civility . ”
Whatever their other disagreements , Chinese and Japanese concur on one point : if Asia today , with its rising nationalist tensions , evokes Europe in the first half of the twentieth century , it is precisely because Asia has not embarked on a reconciliation process such as that which enabled France and Germany to transcend their centuries-old rivalry .
Likewise , Russia ’ s president , Vladimir Putin , may emphasize the specificity of “ Russian civilization ” in a manner evocative of nineteenth-century anti-Western thinkers ; but many in the Russian elite still consider the European Union , despite its many weaknesses , the most civilized model of governance that exists .
When Chinese seek a benchmark model for social protection , they go on study trips to Scandinavia .
But can Europe remain a model if it is no longer a serious geopolitical actor ?
When US officials say to the Europeans , “ We need you , ” what they mean is quite minimal : “ Please do not collapse and bring down the global economy with you . ”
For example , if the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can still be resolved , a solution can come only with strong US involvement .
Barack Obama , who wants to be a transformative president like his role model , Abraham Lincoln , could do worse to deserve the Nobel Peace Prize that he received prematurely than to facilitate a comprehensive Middle East peace settlement .
Few expect such a colossal achievement , of course , but far fewer expect anything remotely similar from Catherine Ashton , the EU ’ s foreign policy czarina , or , for that matter , any European leader .
Europe remains a significant economic and commercial actor – one that can rebound at any time , now that it has at least partly transcended its systemic crisis .
It also remains a model of reconciliation in which people can continue to dream , despite unacceptably high levels of unemployment , particularly among the young .
But Europe is no longer perceived as a global actor – and rightly so .
It is an oasis of peace , if not dynamism .
The question for Europeans today is whether they can – and , more important , should – be content with their status .
