Europe ’ s Last Straw ?
PRINCETON – The European Union is facing a truly terrifying array of crises .
After prolonged euro and sovereign-debt crises polarized and radicalized the continent , creating a deep north-south rift , the arrival of hundreds of thousands of refugees has pitted east ( plus the United Kingdom ) against west .
Add to that numerous other divides and contradictions , and the EU ’ s collapse seems to many more likely than ever .
Consider the wide variations among EU countries ’ energy policies , beginning with incompatible energy-pricing structures that run counter to the idea of a single internal market .
Countries have also adopted incompatible solutions , making it extremely difficult to integrate national energy networks .
For example , whereas France derives the majority of its electricity from nuclear energy , Germany rushed to close all of its nuclear power plants after the 2011 meltdown at Japan ’ s Fukushima plant .
Now Germany , along with Spain , is focusing on renewables like wind and solar – but remains highly dependent on fossil fuels when there is no wind or sun .
Meanwhile , the security challenge posed by Russia has grown steadily since 2008 , and has become especially serious since last year ’ s illegal annexation of Crimea and invasion of parts of eastern Ukraine .
Continued fighting and unresolved territorial claims have injected a new sense of urgency into discussions about Europe ’ s energy policy and , specifically , its dependence on imported energy .
Russia is also involved in another serious challenge to European security and stability : the crisis in Syria that is producing the hundreds of thousands of refugees now flocking to Europe .
The refugee crisis is rooted partly in the failure of European foreign policy to prevent North Africa and the Middle East from descending into chaos .
But Russian attacks on groups fighting Syrian President Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime are exacerbating instability in large swaths of the country , driving even more desperate people to seek shelter in Europe .
As if these challenges were not enough , the EU is plagued by fundamental questions about its democratic legitimacy .
Extremist ideologies are gaining ground , and separatist movements have been reenergized .
During the first half of this year , Greeks seemed to be pitted against Europe .
A similar drama is now playing out in Portugal , where a left-wing coalition includes politicians deeply hostile toward Europe , while the president insists that the old center-right government can win support by emphasizing the country ’ s commitment to Europe .
Spain may soon face a similar dilemma .
Simply put , Europe is overloaded by crises – so overloaded , in fact , that many claim it is too weary to respond effectively to new challenges as they arise .
Years of trauma , according to this view , have sapped the psychic energy its leaders need to design effective solutions , and the political capital needed to win support for these solutions .
That is why the response to the refugee crisis has been so sorely lacking .
But the EU was built on the expectation of crisis .
Jean Monnet , one of the EU ’ s founding fathers , repeatedly returned to the notion that the urgency of emergency would propel integration .
As he put it , “ Europe will be forged in crises , and will be the sum of the solutions adopted for those crises . ”
And yet the problems driving such crises , one could argue , must be small enough to be manageable .
Too large a crisis – or too many crises at once – threatens to overwhelm the EU ’ s capacity to respond , ultimately leading to breakdown .
In Hamlet , Claudius , contemplating Ophelia ’ s deteriorating mental state , observes that , “ When sorrows come , they come not single spies / but in battalions . ” Ultimately , of course , Ophelia goes mad and drowns herself .
But Claudius , a tyrannical murderer , is not exactly a font of political wisdom .
In fact , addressing multiple crises simultaneously can make them all easier to resolve , by increasing the scope for tradeoffs .
In the EU , where competing interests often impede effective responses to crises , this approach could be the key to progress .
Far from imposing on countries ’ sovereignty , the EU would thus become an arena for the negotiation of mutually beneficial compromises .
For example , Germany ’ s reluctance to provide debt relief to southern European countries has helped to prolong their woes ; now , however , it may have sufficient incentive to do more , as it would reap immediate benefits from an EU-wide solution to the refugee crisis .
Similarly , military integration could boost strategic effectiveness and reduce costs , especially for countries with larger defense budgets .
A form of this “ issue-linking ” approach is already used in international trade negotiations .
Though major breakthroughs are difficult to achieve , they result in overall gains for all participants .
Europe needs to recover the mentality of 1989 , when the movement of large numbers of people across borders – initially , the Hungarian-Austrian frontier – prompted reform and openness , rather than a silo mentality .
During that wave of revolutions , protesters seeking freedom thought in terms of Europe and their own countries ’ aspirations simultaneously .
The strengthening of the former was integral to the legitimacy of the latter .
In 2015 , no less than in 1989 , European nation-states need more insurance against external pressures and strategic shocks than the nation-state can provide .
