Europe ’ s Islam Question
OXFORD – The growing Muslim presence in Europe has become a central issue for all European countries , east and west .
The numerous debates that have been breaking out across the continent about “ multiculturalism , ” “ secularity , ” or even “ identity ” are almost always connected to this “ Islamic ” factor .
This link is not necessarily bigoted , because there is a fundamental relationship between “ values ” and “ laws ” on the one hand , and “ culture ” and “ diversity ” on the other .
Indeed , more than a debate over “ Islam ” and the “ Muslims , ” Europe needs a serious dialogue with itself over this relationship , for it is facing a crisis .
The right question to ask is this : can Europe remain consistent with its own values ( democracy , equality , justice , respect , etc . ) and at the same time tolerate and accommodate new citizens from different backgrounds and religions ?
Or , to put it differently , are Europeans intellectually , linguistically , and culturally equipped to face the challenge of marrying equality with an ever more diverse European citizenry ?
The starting point here is actually clear : governments should not confuse socioeconomic problems ( unemployment , violence , marginalization , etc . ) with questions about culture and religion .
In other words , one should not “ culturize , ” “ religionize , ” or “ islamize ” social problems .
The fact that a majority of Europeans who face unemployment or social marginalization are black , Asian , North African , or Muslim does not mean that their religion , ethnicity , or culture explains their situation .
Any kind of cultural , religious , or racial determinism is dangerous : unemployment and marginalization reflect socioeconomic processes , and we need clear social and economic policies to resolve them .
Resorting to vague cultural / religious / racial explanations is a recipe for inaction , if not for misguided action .
Cultural , racial , and religious dimensions may , of course , be subordinate factors that need to be considered , but they are not the main causes of unemployment and marginalization .
European governments , instead of following the suggestions of far-right rhetoric , should reconcile themselves to pursuing strong and creative policies to address the underlying problems of education ( segregated or second-class schools , curricula , etc . ) , unequal employment opportunities , and urban decay .
Indeed , contrary to what has become conventional wisdom ( sadly , normalizing what far-right parties have been saying ) , young European Muslims do not have a problem with religious or cultural “ integration . ”
Instead , they are frustrated by the absence ( or the failure ) of social policies to address their needs .
This failure does not mean that a new kind of racism – “ Islamophobia ” – is on the march .
But no one can deny that some individuals do face discrimination because of their “ religion ” ( according to a recent Pew survey , 45 % of Europeans have a negative image of Islam ) .
The key sign that discrimination has been injected into the current discourse is the obsession with the idea of “ integration , ” despite the fact that the vast majority of European Muslims abide by the law , know the language of the country in which they reside , and are loyal to their country ( though sometimes critical , like their fellow citizens ) .
Ceaseless reference to citizens “ with an immigrant background , ” or to the “ host society , ” only serves to nurture the idea that Muslims are not “ truly ” Europeans or “ at home . ”
Such talk implies that European Muslims must constantly prove their loyalty .
This perception of “ Muslims ” as being the “ other ” or the “ foreigner ” is the central factor that incites discrimination in the job or housing markets .
Beyond insecurity and fear , it is crucial to rely on facts and figures to show that , both at the local and the national levels , the situation is much better than the passionate and polarized debates fostered in the media and some political circles .
Far from the ongoing controversies , European Muslims are doing very well today , and the future is promising .
If European countries want to remain faithful to their embrace of universal and equal human rights and avoid any temptation or slide towards racism and xenophobia , all Europeans must act .
European Muslims should avoid nurturing a “ victim mentality ” and acknowledge their responsibilities within their respective societies .
European governments and citizens , Muslim and non-Muslim alike , must shun any kind of racism .
Education is central here .
School curricula must become more inclusive ( to build a common history of memories ) and broaden students ’ knowledge of religions and cultures .
In the media , journalists should be trained to spot “ success stories , ” not just problems .
In all cases , rhetoric that draws an implicit link between the words “ illegal , ” “ criminal , ” and “ immigrant ” or “ Muslim ” should be seen as nurturing fear and xenophobic reactions .
Muslims are facing a new racism , and they have to strive for their rights , but they should do so alongside their fellow citizens and in many fields : domestic and foreign politics , education , media , and social activism .
Europeans must stop being complacent in the belief that they are somehow protected from any resurgence of racism or betrayal of fundamental human rights .
And European Muslims must stop acting ( and reacting ) to their problems in isolation .
