End the Silence Over Chechnya
It is extremely difficult for an honest observer to break through the closed doors that separate Chechnya from the rest of the world .
Indeed , no one even knows how many civilian casualties there have been in ten years of war .
According to estimates by non-governmental organizations , the figure is between 100,000 ( that is , one civilian out of ten ) and 300,000 ( one out of four ) .
How many voters participated in the November 2005 elections ?
Between 60 and 80 % , according to Russian authorities ; around 20 % , reckon independent observers .
The blackout imposed on Chechnya prevents any precise assessment of the devastating effects of a ruthless conflict .
But censorship cannot completely hide the horror .
Under the world ’ s very eyes , a capital – Grozny , with 400,000 inhabitants – has been razed for the first time since Hitler ’ s 1944 punishment of Warsaw .
Such inhumanity cannot plausibly be described as “ anti-terrorism , ” as Russian President Vladimir Putin insists .
The Russian military leadership claims to be fighting against a party of 700 to 2,000 combatants .
What would be said if the British government had bombed Belfast , or if the Spanish government bombed Bilbao , on the pretext of quelling the IRA or the ETA ?
And yet the world remains silent in the face of the looting of Grozny and other Chechen towns and villages .
Are Chechen women , children and all Chechen civilians less entitled to respect than the rest of mankind ?
Are they still considered human ?
Nothing can excuse the seeming indifference displayed by our worldwide silence .
In Chechnya , our basic morality is at stake .
Must the world accept the rape of girls who were kidnapped by the occupying forces or their militias ?
Should we tolerate the murder of children and the abduction of boys to be tortured , broken , and sold back to their families , alive or dead ?
What about “ filtration ” camps , or “ human firewood ” ?
What about the villages exterminated to set an example ?
A few NGO ’ s and some brave Russian and Western reporters have witnessed countless crimes .
So we cannot say “ we did not know . ”
Indeed , the fundamental principle of democracies and civilized states is at issue in Chechnya : civilians ’ right to life , including the protection of innocents , widows , and orphans .
International agreements and the United Nations Charter are as binding in Chechnya as anywhere else .
The right of nations to self-determination does not imply the right of rulers to dispose of their people .
The fight against terrorism is also at stake .
Who has not yet realized that the Russian army is actually behaving like a group of pyromaniac firefighters , fanning the fires of terrorism through its behavior ?
After ten years of a large-scale repression , the fire , far from going out , is spreading , crossing borders , setting Northern Caucasus ablaze and making combatants even more fierce .
How much longer can we ignore the fact that , in raising the bogeyman of “ Chechen terrorism , ” the Russian government is suppressing the liberties gained when the Soviet empire collapsed ?
The Chechen war both masks and motivates the reestablishment of centralized power in Russia – bringing the media back under state control , passing laws against NGO ’ s , and reinforcing the “ vertical line of power ” – leaving no institutions and authorities able to challenge or limit the Kremlin .
War , it seems , is hiding a return to autocracy .
Sadly , wars in Chechnya have been going on for 300 years .
They were savage colonial conflicts under the Czar and almost genocidal under Stalin , who deported the whole Chechen population , a third of which perished during their transfer to the Gulag .
Because we reject colonial and exterminating ventures , because we love Russian culture and believe that Russia can bloom in a democratic future , and because we believe that terrorism – whether by stateless groups or state armies ­ – should be condemned , we demand that the world ’ s blackout on the Chechen issue must end .
We must help Russia ’ s authorities escape from the trap they set for themselves and into which they fell , putting not only Chechens and Russians , but the world at risk .
It would be tragic if , during the G8 summit scheduled for St. Petersburg , Russia , in June 2006 , the Chechen issue were pushed to the side .
This dreadful and endless war needs to be discussed openly if it is to end peacefully .
