America ’ s Trouble with China
WASHINGTON , DC – Xi Jinping , China ’ s newly anointed president , made his first visit to the United States in May 1980 .
He was a 27-year-old junior officer accompanying Geng Biao , then a vice premier and China ’ s leading military official .
Geng had been my host the previous January , when I was the first US defense secretary to visit China , acting as an interlocutor for President Jimmy Carter ’ s administration .
Americans had little reason to notice Xi back then , but his superiors clearly saw his potential .
In the ensuing 32 years , Xi ’ s stature rose , along with China ’ s economic and military strength .
His cohort ’ s ascent to the summit of power marks the retirement of the last generation of leaders designated by Deng Xiaoping ( though they retain influence ) .
Despite China ’ s greater weight in world affairs , Xi faces internal strains that make China more fragile than is generally understood .
China ’ s export-led economic model has reached its limits , and the transition to domestic-led growth is intensifying internal frictions .
Managing unrest through repression is more difficult than in the past , as rapid urbanization , economic reform , and social change roils a country of 1.3 billion people .
Ethnic conflicts in outlying regions will also test Xi ’ s political control .
China ’ s foreign policy is another cause for concern – & # 160 ; especially for the US .
History teaches us that rising powers inevitably compete with status quo leading powers , and that this conflict often leads to war .
For now , the large bilateral trade imbalance has exacerbated US-China tensions , and can be safely reduced only by changes in behavior on both sides – or , unsafely , though a dangerous crisis-driven correction .
More immediately , China ’ s territorial claims – particularly in the South China Sea , but also regarding its border with India – and its efforts to expand its influence over neighboring countries will force the US to navigate two overarching risks .
The first is confrontation , which could occur directly or as a result of the US being drawn into conflicts between China and its neighbors .
The other risk is that Japan , South Korea , Vietnam , the Philippines , Thailand , or Myanmar could fall into China ’ s strategic orbit .
Many of these countries will look to the US as a strategic counterweight should China seek to assert local dominance .
But some may conclude that it is safer to steer closer to China than away from it , because their economies depend so strongly on Chinese trade .
As recent events in the East and South China Seas show , China sometimes attempts to strong-arm its neighbors .
The US will need to defend its allies and interests by pushing back , but with actions modulated to limit Chinese concerns .
One way to do this is to understand China ’ s motives .
China ’ s drive for economic and political leadership in East Asia , and its increased military capability there , is inevitable .
But the world can be confident that the US will remain stronger , wealthier , and more influential in global affairs than China even in 2030 .
That argues against American overreaction , which could fuel the kind of self-reinforcing downward spiral in bilateral relations that occurred between Great Britain and Germany prior to the conflagrations of the first half of the twentieth century .
Perhaps the best way to avoid confrontation is to cooperate on shared external threats , most notably nuclear proliferation , global climate change , and Islamic extremism .
But getting to 2030 without a major confrontation will be a major achievement .
While the US is likely to maintain the upper hand in terms of military power for at least another 15-20 years , asymmetric warfare could undercut America ’ s advantage should China engage in cyber-attacks on US electronic and satellite systems , along with attacks on infrastructure .
In response to China ’ s capability to project power many hundreds of miles from its borders , the US ( as I have suggested for the last 25 years ) should develop a long-range bomber capable of penetrating sophisticated defenses and delivering great force .
As US security interests shift to the Pacific , Americans now rely on increasingly vulnerable forward land bases and carrier fleets with tactical aircraft that have a combat radius of 300-500 miles ( 482-805 kilometers ) .
But a long-range bomber would be more cost-effective than standoff bombers with cruise missiles , and , unlike shorter-range tactical bombers , its bases would be invulnerable to attack .
That said , America ’ s most serious challenge right now is to get the US economy and its governance in order .
I believe that it can do that .
But , unless and until it does , thereby giving President Barack Obama a firm basis from which to engage Xi on issues requiring international statesmanship , the prospect of trouble between the US and China will continue to grow .
