Europe ’ s Second Chance in the Balkans
Confronting the disintegration of Yugoslavia in 1991 , former EU Council President Jacques Poos made his famous but now derided statement : “ This is the hour of Europe … not the hour of the Americans . ”
What the EU learned from the subsequent four years of Balkan disasters under its management is now being tested by another major turning point and potential crisis – when and how Kosovo is to become independent .
Once again , Europe ’ s role may well prove decisive .
The decision on Kosovo may not imply the prospect of renewed large-scale conflict , but it does raise serious questions for Europe ’ s relations with Russia and the United States , as well as for stability throughout the Balkans .
While the US has a major stake in the outcome , EU countries obviously have the most significant interests in the region , and perhaps this time they will assume a corresponding leadership role .
For at least the next two months , the United Nations Security Council will debate a blueprint for Kosovo ’ s future , arduously worked out during a year of “ negotiations ” between the governments in Belgrade and Pristina by UN envoy and former Finnish president Martti Ahtisaari .
The bluebrint provides for Kosovo ’ s “ supervised independence , ” maximum protection for Serb and other minorities , and a supervisory role for the EU .
Ahtisaari ’ s proposal is an acknowledgement that no agreement between the parties is possible , and that there is no constructive alternative to Kosovo ’ s independence .
Together with the US , the EU collectively has rallied around the Ahtisaari proposal .
But individually , a number of European countries – Spain , Greece , Italy , Cyprus , Romania , Slovakia , and Austria – are skeptical or negative toward Kosovo independence , which raises profound questions about the EU ’ s resolve .
Meanwhile , Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica is waging a tireless and remarkably effective diplomatic campaign denouncing both Ahtisaari and his proposal .
He has strengthened the position of many in Europe and elsewhere who are skeptical of challenging a country ’ s territorial integrity or who still claim to believe in a negotiated settlement .
More worrisome is the current uncertainty about whether a shaky Europe will stand up to Russia , upon which Serbia depends to maintain sovereignty over Kosovo .
So far , the Kremlin has resolutely stated that it will accept only a settlement agreed to by both parties , in effect endorsing Serbia ’ s position .
While conveying the possibility of a veto , Russia ’ s current strategy is to delay a Security Council vote as long as possible by prompting a new fact-finding mission to Kosovo , which will most likely be followed by renewed insistence on another effort to negotiate a settlement .
Serbia welcomes delay in the hope that this will stimulate violence by frustrated Kosovars , thereby increasing Europe ’ s opposition to independence and bolstering Serbia ’ s dedication to maintaining the status quo , or , as a last resort , to partitioning Kosovo .
Some European countries apparently believe that they can maintain an EU consensus in support of Ahtisaari ’ s plan but allow Russian foot-dragging on the grounds that delay is not unreasonable and something better may turn up with additional negotiations .
But , by adopting such a stance , they thwart their own envoy and may well stimulate the violence they profess to abhor .
History offers little consolation .
The EU ’ s handling of relations with Serbia in the past only encouraged intransigence .
Instead of repeatedly making clear that Kosovo independence is an indispensable requirement for EU membership – so important to Serbia ’ s modernization and Balkan stability – EU leaders like Javier Solana laud Kostunica as a great democratic leader .
They relentlessly but unsuccessfully pressured Montenegro ’ s leaders to remain in a dysfunctional union with Serbia , condoned Kostunica ’ s dubious 2006 referendum on a new constitution enshrining Kosovo as a part of Serbia , and weakened demands for Serbia ’ s cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal in The Hague .
Realizing Ahtisaari ’ s proposal will depend on EU solidarity and persistence , coupled with strong American support , to manage the vicissitudes of UN debate , lobby skeptical non-permanent Security Council members , such as Indonesia and South Africa , and persuade Russia to abstain rather than exercise its veto .
Many believe that Russia will not risk its relations with Europe and the US , ultimately abstaining if Western countries hold firm .
But Russia appears to be in a Gaullist mood , and has other outstanding issues causing friction with the US and Europe .
Putin ’ s Russia is not Yeltsin ’ s Russia , when the West could simply shunt aside Russian concerns .
Europe is vulnerable on many fronts , particularly in view of its dependence on Russian energy , while America ’ s weakened presidency has diminished US influence in Russia .
If Russia does veto the Ahtisaari plan , the EU ’ s united facade will likely fracture , with many European countries refusing either to join the US in recognizing an independent Kosovo without the UN ’ s blessing or to send a supervisory mission there .
That would open a new and tumultuous era in the Balkans , with more than Kosovo at stake .
Indeed , with the UN and the Western alliance in disarray , the region could fall victim to further Russian policy mischief .
