Emma Bonino and The War For Europe \ u0027s Future
CAMBRIDGE : Everybody agrees : Europe needs a revolution of its economic structure .
But how to achieve this is another matter altogether .
Advocates of the status quo note that there is no crisis , so why rush ?
They place their faith in a gradual restructuring and , above all , in the myriad high-tech companies now being started by the young .
Somehow , they reckon , the information revolution will arrive in a European way .
From here it is but a short step to proclaiming that the American model cannot work in Europe because it is socially reprehensible and , in any case , poised to crash any day now .
On the other side of the debate , Europe 's desperate reformers see no way to trim , roll back or blow up the Continent 's obsessive bureaucracies and consensual politicians .
In today 's Europe they see only hints of a possibility – a glass far less than half full – for reform and restructuring , and are impatient at Europe 's slow progress .
True , Europe is moving at a painfully slow pace , but the attack on the State and its allies in an ossified supply side and the dinosaurs of industrial stake holders , is widening .
New fronts in this war are opening every day .
But this is not an issue of sweeping moves that will change the world from one day to the next .
The devil is in the details , and that is where the attack must focus .
A wonderful example is the referendum promoted by Emma Bonino , Italy 's star political renegade .
Among many issues , the referendum she put forward proposes three measures : end automatic tax withholding ; end judicial power to reinstate dismissed workers ; end automatic withholding of union dues from pay checks .
Three cheers for Emma Bonino ; never mind if she fails .
Rome was not built in a day and it will take many such assaults to reform it !
At first sight it seems unreasonable , indeed irresponsible , to undermine the all-too difficult task of collecting taxes by taking away the device of automatic withholding .
It is hard enough to collect taxes , so how can societies possibly go back to a world where the tax office has to run after the taxpayer ?
True , withholding makes tax collection easier and that is the point .
The referendum 's advocates believe that making it much harder for the state to tax will force governments to retrench on the currently untouchable spending front .
This is an old idea from the California tax revolt of twenty-five years ago that was an important part of America 's supply side revolution .
Milton Friedman always said : take away the government 's tax revenues and that way , and only that way , can you get spending cuts .
There is no better way to undermine taxation then to make government work hard to get its money .
So , let people get their paychecks and then force the government to come and take the money from them .
Only when the difference between gross and after-tax income becomes painfully obvious will tax payers revolt against the taxes they bear .
Only when they figure out very concretely that half of the days they work are for the government will they really start agitating about big government .
Here , indeed , is a wonderful plot to force the State to retrench , but Italians shouldn 't get their hopes up too early , for Italy 's supreme court ruled that taxation is not for the people to decide .
The proposal about union dues works just the same way .
At present dues are automatically withheld and hence workers have basically no clue as to how much they pay for their union .
But if it becomes a matter of individual worker choice – do I send a check or do I keep the money ? – union revenues and membership and power will shrink very rapidly .
If one believes that less overweening unions and a smaller state are the first steps toward a better supply side in Europe , this referendum item deserves praise .
The third issue highlighted by Ms. Bonino is the quaint Italian labor law that allows a dismissed worker to go to court and seek reinstatement .
It is obvious that this measure creates havoc in business and leads to deeply unproductive outcomes .
There is no issue here of weakening workers ' rights but rather one of redressing a now grotesquely even playing field .
The proposed alternative of separation payments but no recourse to the courts is the right economic answer , or at least it goes in the right direction .
It will be interesting to watch status-quo Italian politicians face up to these issues .
There are no supply-siders in Italy except the referendum-rebels ; in Italy everybody near government is playing the end game of accepting the existing system and getting the maximum out of it .
The central bank stands in the way of cross border financial mergers ; union bosses stand in the way of free choice for workers ; business leaders have too much to gain from the State to see their interest in rocking the boat .
Yet , over the next few years Italy ultimately cannot avoid the road laid out by the referendum .
Economic performance has been horrible for two decades ; the system is grinding to a halt .
The stock market , rightly looking ahead , already sees prospects for change .
Italy 's politicians and administrators , as always and as elsewhere in Europe , are missing the message .
In the meantime , even if the referendum is held and eventually lost under the combined onslaught of bureaucrats , politicians and union bosses , the modernization revolution is alive .
