Europe ’ s Anti-Europeans
PARIS – In 2005 , two founding members of the European Union , France and the Netherlands , rejected by popular referendum the EU ’ s proposed constitutional treaty .
Two far-right parties from these countries , the French National Front and the Dutch Freedom Party , have now formed an alliance ahead of the European Parliament elections in May 2014 .
They hope to attract likeminded parties in other EU countries and form a parliamentary bloc powerful enough to slay “ the monster of Europe , ” as Geert Wilders , the Freedom Party ’ s leader , calls the EU .
It is no accident that France and the Netherlands have taken the lead in this sordid venture .
Both countries are in the midst of a deep identity crisis that is mutating into disdain for Europe , foreigners , migrants , and all who represent the “ other . ”
And both countries are experiencing an increase in popular suspicion toward traditional political elites .
In this environment , the upcoming European Parliament elections seem tailor-made for extremist parties , with recent public-opinion polls suggesting that the National Front will come out on top in France .
European elections leave most citizens indifferent , which translates into low voter turnout – except among those who , defined by what they oppose , wish to express their anger and frustration with the status quo .
Marine Le Pen , the National Front ’ s leader , is shrewd and efficient , running on a straightforward message : “ Europe is against the people , so the people must mobilize against Europe . ”
Her strategy is to enter the mainstream of French politics by shedding all traces of past anti-Semitism , thereby turning the National Front into a seemingly legitimate alternative to a decadent traditional right , which has suffered a prolonged bout of infighting since Nicolas Sarkozy ’ s defeat in the 2012 presidential election .
In the Netherlands , Wilders – more a one-man show than the leader of a real party – has already been in government , thereby providing a veneer of legitimacy to Le Pen simply by forming an alliance with her .
Interestingly , the main Danish and British anti-European parties have refused to follow suit , refusing to enter into a pact with a party that was and probably remains anti-Semitic at its core .
And yet what ultimately unites Europe ’ s far-right parties is similar to what underlies the Tea Party ’ s rise within America ’ s Republican Party : covert racism and xenophobia .
Though the Tea Party ’ s followers – a group that one early opinion poll identified as 89 % white and just 1 % black – claim to oppose government spending above all else , they accept government help for themselves .
What they cannot accept is a black president and government spending on “ others . ”
Likewise , though Europe ’ s populists use their opposition to “ Brussels ” as a rallying flag , their ideology retains the atavism that motivated their forebears .
Today ’ s far-right forces may be more anti-Muslim than anti-Semitic – Wilders may even be sincerely pro-Israel – but they maintain the anti-humanist , cynical , and racist worldview of their predecessors in the 1930 ’ s .
Of course , a country like France is not returning to the politics of the 1930 ’ s , if only because the memories of the country ’ s military and moral collapse in 1940 have not faded .
But the vicious racist attacks on the justice minister , Christiane Taubira , who is black , would have been unthinkable in past decades .
And , throughout Europe , the loss of taboos and the belief that anything can be said – and anyone insulted – has led to an increase in racist incidents that are only superficially isolated .
Europe is not about to turn fascist ; yet it would be dangerous to ignore that it is going astray , or to attribute recent developments solely to economic hard times and high unemployment .
More fundamental causes , political as well as ethical , are at work .
For example , Germany fares better than other European countries in its resistance to populism , not only because its economy is strong and its history constitutes a form of vaccination .
Germans can also thank the mettle and competence of their political leaders , including Chancellor Angela Merkel and her predecessor , Gerhard Schröder .
The best response to today ’ s unholy alliance of populist / racist parties is courage , determination , and clarity of position .
Any alliance by mainstream conservative parties with far-right forces will turn out to be a guarantee of defeat – moral as well as political .
That was true in Europe ’ s past , just as it is true for America ’ s Republicans today .
