Down with Debt Weight
LONDON – Nearly four years after the start of the global financial crisis , many are wondering why economic recovery is taking so long .
Indeed , its sluggishness has confounded even the experts .
According to the International Monetary Fund , the world economy should have grown by 4.4 % in 2011 , and should grow by 4.5 % in 2012 .
In fact , the latest figures from the World Bank indicate that growth reached just 2.7 % in 2011 , and will slow this year to 2.5 % – a figure that may well need to be revised downwards .
There are two possible reasons for the discrepancy between forecast and outcome .
Either the damage caused by the financial crisis was more serious than people realized , or the economic medicine prescribed was less efficacious than policymakers believed .
In fact , the gravity of the banking crisis was quickly grasped .
Huge stimulus packages were implemented in 2008-9 , led by the United States and China , coordinated by Britain , and with the reluctant support of Germany .
Interest rates were slashed , insolvent banks were bailed out , the printing presses were turned on , taxes were cut , and public spending was boosted .
Some countries devalued their currencies .
As a result , the slide was halted , and the rebound was faster than forecasters expected .
But the stimulus measures transformed a banking crisis into a fiscal and sovereign-debt crisis .
From 2010 onwards , governments started to raise taxes and cut spending in response to growing fears of sovereign default .
At that point , the recovery went into reverse .
As Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff tell it in their masterly book This Time is Different , there is no secure way of short-circuiting a deep banking crisis .
The crisis originates with “ excessive debt accumulation , ” which makes economies “ vulnerable to crises of confidence . ”
Commercial banks have to be bailed out by governments ; then governments have to be bailed out by commercial banks .
In the end , both have to be bailed out by central banks .
All of this , according to Reinhart and Rogoff , involves a “ protracted and pronounced contraction in economic activity . ”
They reckon that the average length of post-war crises has been 4.4 years – the time it takes for the necessary “ de-leveraging ” to occur – after which the crisis of confidence is over and economic growth revives .
However , there is something missing in the story .
Recovery from the Great Depression took about 10 years , more than twice the post-war average .
Reinhart and Rogoff offer a couple of reasons for the difference in recovery rates : the slow policy response to the Great Depression and the gold standard , which meant that individual countries could not export their way out of depression .
In other words , fiscal policy and the monetary-policy regime have a decisive influence both on the depth of the collapse and how long before the economy recovers .
It is also significant that big financial collapses occurred again in the 1970 ’ s , after being virtually absent in the 1950 ’ s and 1960 ’ s , when the Keynesian system of managed economies and the Bretton Woods system of managed exchange rates was in place .
The major post-war crises that Reinhart and Rogoff consider run from 1977 to 2001 .
They occurred because regulation of banks and controls on capital movements were lifted ; they were shorter than in the 1930 ’ s because the policy responses were not idiotic .
Indonesian president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono emphasized that point earlier this month , boasting to British Prime Minister David Cameron that Indonesia ’ s successful recovery plan after the 1998 collapse was inspired by John Maynard Keynes . “ We must ensure that the people can buy ; we must ensure that industries can produce … ”
Today , many governments , especially in the eurozone , seem to have run out of policy options .
With fiscal austerity all the rage , they have given up ensuring that “ people can buy ” and “ industries can produce . ”
Central banks have been handed the job of keeping economies afloat , but most of the money that they print remains stuck in the banking system , unable to arrest stagnating consumption and falling investment .
Moreover , the eurozone itself is a mini-gold standard , with heavily indebted members unable to devalue their currencies , because they have no currencies to devalue .
So , given that Chinese growth , too , is slowing , the world economy seems destined to crawl along the bottom for some time yet , with unemployment rising in some countries to 20 % or more .
With fiscal , monetary , and exchange-rate policies blocked , is there a way out of prolonged recession ?
John Geanakoplos of Yale University has been arguing for big debt write-offs .
Rather than waiting to get rid of debt through bankruptcies , governments should “ mandate debt forgiveness . ”
They could buy bad loans from lenders and forgive part of the principal payable by borrowers , simultaneously reducing lenders ’ collateral requirements and borrowers ’ debt overhang .
In the US , the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility ( TALF ) program and the Public-Private Investment Program ( PPIP ) were in effect debt-forgiveness schemes aimed at sub-prime mortgage holders , but on too small a scale .
But the principle of debt forgiveness clearly has applications for public debt as well , especially in the eurozone .
Those who fear excessive public debt are the banks that hold it .
Junk public bonds are no safer for them than junk private bonds .
Both lenders and borrowers would be better off from a comprehensive debt cancelation .
So would citizens whose livelihoods are being destroyed by governments ’ desperate attempts to de-leverage .
Philosophically , the debt-forgiveness approach rests on the belief that creditors share culpability for defaults with debtors , since they made the bad loans in the first place .
As long as the borrower has not misled the lender at the time of taking the loan , the lender bears at least some responsibility for the transaction .
In 1918 , Keynes urged the cancelation of inter-Allied debts arising from World War I. “ We shall never be able to move again , unless we can free our limbs from these paper shackles , ” he wrote .
