Global Solutions for Globalization ’ s Problems
OXFORD – The last few decades of globalization and innovation have resulted in the most rapid progress that the world has ever known .
Poverty has been reduced .
Life expectancy has increased .
Wealth has been created at a scale that our ancestors could not have imagined .
But the news is not all good .
In fact , the achievements brought about by globalization are now under threat .
The world has simultaneously benefited from globalization and failed to manage the inherent complications resulting from the increased integration of our societies , our economies , and the infrastructure of modern life .
As a result , we have become dangerously exposed to systemic risks that transcend borders .
These threats spill across national boundaries and cross the traditional divides between industries and organizations .
An integrated financial system propagates economic crises .
International air travel spreads pandemics .
Interconnected computers provide rich hunting grounds for cybercriminals .
Middle Eastern jihadis use the Internet to recruit young Europeans .
Living standards rise – and greenhouse-gas emissions follow , accelerating climate change .
As a byproduct of globalization , crises that once burned locally and then quickly flamed out now risk sparking international conflagrations .
A pandemic , flood , or cyber attack in the City of London or Wall Street could send the entire world into a financial tailspin .
If the progress that globalization has delivered is to be sustained , countries must accept shared responsibility for managing the risks that it has engendered .
National governments – whether powerful , like the United States and China , or weak , like Iraq and Liberia – are unable to address these cascading and complex challenges on their own .
Only a small fraction of the risks arising from globalization require a truly global response .
But , by definition , these risks transcend the nation-state ; thus , coordinated action is required to address them effectively .
The nature of the response needs to be tailored to the threat .
In the case of pandemics , the key is to support countries where outbreaks occur and help those most at risk of infection .
Widespread dangers , such as climate change or a new financial crisis , can require the cooperation of dozens of countries and a broad range of institutions .
In nearly every case , an international effort is needed .
An important characteristic of the risks of a globalized world is that they often become more serious over time .
As a result , the speed at which they are identified , along with the effectiveness of the response , can determine whether an isolated event becomes a global threat .
One need only look at the rise of the Islamic State , the outbreak of Ebola , the fight against climate change , or the financial contagion of 2008 to see what happens when a danger remains unidentified for too long or a coordinated response is missing or mismanaged .
And yet , just as the need for robust regional and international institutions is at its greatest , support for them is waning .
A growing number of citizens in Europe , North America , and the Middle East blame globalization for unemployment , rising inequality , pandemics , and terrorism .
Because of these risks , they regard increased integration , openness , and innovation as more of a threat than an opportunity .
This creates a vicious circle .
The concerns of the electorate are reflected in rapidly growing support for political parties that advocate increased protectionism , reductions in immigration , and greater national control over the marketplace .
As a result , governments across Europe , North America , Asia , and Oceania are becoming more parochial in their concerns , starving international agencies and regional organizations of the funding , credibility , and leadership capabilities needed to mount a proper response to the challenges of globalization .
In the short term , countries may be able to duck their global responsibilities , but the threat posed by events beyond their borders cannot be kept at bay forever .
Unaddressed , the endemic dangers of a globalized world will continue to grow .
In confronting dangers such as the Islamic State , Ebola , financial crisis , climate change , or rising inequality , short-term political expediency must be overcome – or the entire world will come to regret it .
