Could the IMF Have Prevented This Crisis ?
WASHINGTON D.C. & # 45 ; & # 45 ; Until recently , the International Monetary Fund ’ s main job was lending to countries with balance-of-payment problems .
Today , however , emerging countries increasingly prefer to “ self-insure ” by accumulating reserves ( and sharing them through regional pooling arrangements ) .
As a result , the Fund must change , reinforcing its supervisory role and its capacity to oversee members ’ compliance with their obligation to contribute to financial stability .
So its failure to press the United States to redress the mortgage-market vulnerabilities that precipitated the current financial crisis indicates that much remains to be done .
Indeed , in its 2006 annual review of the US economy , the IMF was extraordinarily benign in its assessment of the risks posed by the relaxation of lending standards in the US mortgage market .
It noted that “ borrowers at risk of significant mortgage payment increases remained a small minority , concentrated mostly among higher-income households that were aware of the attendant risks , ” and concluded that “ indications are that credit and risk allocation mechanisms in the U.S. housing market have remained relatively efficient . ” This , it added , “ should provide comfort . ”
Likewise , the problem was not mentioned in one of the IMF ’ s flagship publications , the Global Financial Stability Report ( GFSR ) , in September 2006 , just ten months before the sub-prime mortgage crisis became apparent to all .
In the IMF ’ s view , “ [ m ] ajor financial institutions in mature ... markets [ were ] ... healthy , having remained profitable and well capitalized , ” and “ the financial sectors in many countries are in a strong position to cope with any cyclical challenges and further market corrections to come . ”
The IMF began to take notice only in April 2007 , when the problem was already erupting , but there was still no sense of urgency .
On the contrary , according to the IMF , “ weakness has been contained to certain portions of the sub-prime market ( and , to a lesser extent , the Alt-A market ) , and is not likely to pose a serious systemic threat . ”
Moreover , “ the US housing market appears to be stabilizing .... Overall , the US mortgage market has remained resilient , although the sub-prime segment has deteriorated a bit more rapidly than had been expected . ”
The GFSR confidently noted that “ stress tests conducted by investment banks show that , even under scenarios of nationwide house price declines that are historically unprecedented , most investors with exposure to subprime mortgages through securitized structures will not face losses . ”
Why has the Fund ’ s surveillance of the US economy been so ineffective ?
Suppose that the vulnerabilities piling up in the US mortgage market – right under the IMF ’ s Washington-headquartered nose – had taken place in a developing country .
It is , frankly , inconceivable that the Fund would have failed so miserably in detecting them .
The IMF has been criticized for burdening borrowers with unnecessary and sometimes perverse lending conditions , but its highly qualified staff has not been shy in blowing the whistle when it perceived domestic vulnerabilities in other countries .
So why didn ’ t they scrutinize the US economy with equal zeal ?
The answer may be found in the IMF ’ s governance structure .
Currently , the distribution of power within the IMF follows the logic of its lending role .
The more money a country puts in , the more influence it has .
This may be prompting the Fund to turn a blind eye to the economic vulnerabilities of its most influential members – precisely those whose domestic policies have large , systemic implications .
This “ money-for-influence ” model of governance indirectly impairs the IMF ’ s capacity to criticize the economies of its most important members ( let alone police compliance with their obligations ) .
In any event , if its staff ’ s criticism ever becomes too candid , these countries can always use their leverage to water down the public communiqués issued by the IMF ’ s board .
The Fund can help to prevent future crisis of this kind , but only if it first prevents undue influence on its capacity to scrutinize , and if necessary criticize , influential countries ’ policies and regulations .
This requires a different governance structure in which power is more evenly distributed , so that the IMF can effectively exercise surveillance where it should , not just where it can .
