Europe ’ s Economic War of Attrition
NEWPORT BEACH – I was nine years old when Egypt entered what became known as its “ war of attrition ” with Israel .
During this period of “ no war and no peace , ” underlying tensions festered , and a fragile tranquility was periodically interrupted by armed skirmishes .
The war of attrition followed the June 1967 war , in which Egypt – to the immense surprise of most of its citizens and the outside world – was soundly defeated .
Its air force was crippled and its army was virtually overrun , with Israel capturing the entire Sinai Peninsula .
Positioned on the eastern bank of the Suez Canal , Israel ’ s army was just over 100 kilometers from Cairo .
And , with Israeli jet fighters still controlling the airspace , Egypt ’ s capital and its major population centers were greatly exposed .
The official narrative reflected little of this .
Whether on state television or in government-controlled newspapers – at the time , there was no free press , Internet , or cable news – citizens were reassured that Egypt had regained control of its destiny .
But they knew better .
To this day , I remember vividly the sense of general anxiety that prevailed among citizens , accentuated by deep concern about what the future might hold .
People were afraid to invest , and many wondered whether they should emigrate in search of a better future .
With the underlying issues left unaddressed , the war of attrition was followed by another full-scale war in 1973 – one that again surprised most people inside and outside Egypt .
This time , the Egyptian armed forces won a number of early battles and secured a cease-fire that regained part of the Sinai , setting the stage for the 1979 peace agreement with Israel .
I recount this history not to draw a parallel with today ’ s Israeli-Palestinian conflict , which , just a couple of weeks ago , resulted in many civilian deaths , overwhelmingly in Gaza .
Rather , it is because I see too many & # 160 ; parallels with what is happening in the European debt crisis .
European citizens – particularly in peripheral economies such as Greece , Portugal , and Spain – are anxious .
Unemployment is unacceptably high , and is still rising .
Their economies continue to implode , leading to cumulative contractions that are setting tragic new records .
Poverty is on the rise .
Not surprisingly , increased emigration to the stronger eurozone countries ( such as Germany ) has been accompanied by higher outflows of financial capital .
Admittedly , and fortunately , the parallels are far from perfect .
Europe does not have armed conflicts .
Feelings of intense insecurity are not related to bombs and sirens .
The threat is economic rather than military .
Yet there is a real sense of “ no peace and no war . ”
Europe ’ s economic peace remains elusive for a simple reason : governments have still not found a way to generate the trifecta of growth , employment , and financial stability .
The longer this prevails , the more oxygen is sucked out of sectors that remain relatively healthy – and for three distinct reasons .
First , the eurozone economy is extremely interconnected .
As such , it is only a matter of time until weakness in one part migrates to other parts .
Witness what is happening in Germany , a well-managed country once thought itself immune from the troubles around it .
After a period of record low unemployment , economic growth has slowed markedly , reaching just 0.2 % in quarterly terms in July-September .
On current trends , the fourth quarter ’ s growth rate will turn negative .
Second , the eurozone ’ s bailout bill continues to rise .
Cyprus is expected to join the other three “ program countries ” ( Greece , Ireland , and Portugal ) in requiring considerable official financing ; and , of the other three , only Ireland is getting close to regaining normal access to capital markets .
With Spain also requiring billions more to recapitalize its banks , the contingent claims on taxpayers in the core countries continue to mount .
Indeed , this is one of the factors that contributed to Moody ’ s decision – following Standard & amp ;
Poor ’ s – to strip France of its AAA credit rating .
Finally , adverse contagion is extending beyond the 17 countries in the eurozone .
The region ’ s debt crisis is undermining cooperation within the larger 27-member European Union , resulting in the spectacular failure of the recent summit on the EU budget .
It has also contributed to the economic slowdown in China , raising concerns ( which I believe are exaggerated ) that the country ’ s new leadership may have problems engineering a soft landing for an economy accustomed to double-digit ( or high single-digit ) growth .
This lack of peace would have resulted in outright economic and financial war if not for the critical – and growing – role played by the European Central Bank .
Under the bold leadership of Mario Draghi , the ECB has committed to provide as much time as possible for most governments to get their acts together .
And it has done so by relying on innovative measures that substitute its elastic balance sheet for those of over-extended governments , gun-shy private investors , and fleeing bank depositors .
Yet it would be a grave mistake to assume that the ECB can deliver lasting economic peace .
It cannot .
If governments continue to dither and bicker , the most that it can do is delay the war for a while .
Like Egypt ’ s war of attrition , the eurozone ’ s underlying economic , financial , and social ferment continues .
If governments continue to stumble from one patchwork remedy to another – a probability that remains uncomfortably high – the delay in implementing a comprehensive solution will eventually overwhelm the defenses that the ECB has so courageously put in place .
Some say that , just as Egypt ’ s war of attrition eventually gave way to a full-scale war and then a peace treaty , Europe needs a major crisis to move forward .
But this is a dangerous notion , one that entails not just massive risks , but also unacceptably high interim human costs .
European governments are well advised to use the financial cease-fire that the ECB is willing to buy for them .
Allowing it to expire without progress toward permanent stability would expose Europe to disruptions that would diminish significantly its prospects for long-term economic stability , growth and job creation .
