Regulate the Carry Trade
PRINCETON – During the early years of the global financial crisis , exchange rates were the least interesting part of the macroeconomic debate .
A French proposal in 2011 for a sweeping reform of the international monetary regime went nowhere .
Today , the subject has become the focus of intense anxiety – and with good reason .
Currency wars are a reminder of the fragility of the process of globalization .
As one part of that process begins to appear unacceptably painful , demand for political intervention rises , and the entire system risks beginning to unravel .
The expectation that interest rates in the United States will rise is driving up the value of the dollar , even as monetary easing in Japan and Europe is pushing down the yen and the euro .
Over the last year , the euro has lost more than a fifth of its value relative to the dollar , and there is no sign that the trend will reverse anytime soon .
The euro ’ s depreciation has been greeted with delight by Europe ’ s business leaders .
But in the US , where the dollar ’ s gains are threatening to choke off economic recovery , officials at the Federal Reserve are expressing signs of concern .
The swing in exchange rates could have an impact that extends far beyond the short-term rebalancing of the global marketplace .
US President Barack Obama is negotiating with Asian countries over the Trans-Pacific Partnership and with Europe over the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership .
The dollar ’ s rapid rise will play into the hands of his protectionist critics in a hostile and increasingly obstructionist Congress .
Indeed , surges in the dollar ’ s value have long coincided with increased political pressure for trade protectionism .
After all , the most obvious way to compensate for the apparent overvaluation of a country ’ s currency is by imposing import restrictions .
In the mid-1980s , the dollar ’ s appreciating exchange rate undermined US competitiveness , inaugurating a period of rapid and painful deindustrialization .
At that time , the major competitive threat was from Japan , and American politicians faced intense pressure to respond .
In 1985 , the US Senate unanimously approved a resolution condemning Japan ’ s unfair trade practices and called on President Ronald Reagan to act to curb imports .
This was followed by a bill proposing a special levy on countries running large bilateral trade surpluses with the US .
If anything , today ’ s exchange-rate swings are likely to be more extreme , and to last longer , than the surge in the dollar ’ s value in the 1980s or the volatility of the 1930s , when , in the aftermath of the financial crash that triggered the Great Depression , countries competed to devalue their currencies .
The problem is what is known as the carry trade , a common financial strategy in which an investor borrows money in a currency subject to a low interest rate in order to buy assets in a currency subject to a higher rate .
The interest-rate differential , often combined with high amounts of leverage , provides a profit when the loans are paid off .
When exchange rates are stable and predictable , the carry trade is relatively safe .
But this is rarely the case .
For starters , the practice has the tendency to push exchange rates further apart , as investors sell the currency in which they borrowed to make their purchases .
This creates an incentive to take on more debt , because the real value of the loan is likely to be lower when the time comes to repay it .
The large corporate borrowers engaged in the carry trade consider themselves sophisticated investors , capable of predicting when exchange rates are about to reverse .
Unfortunately , this only increases the risk , boosting the possibility of a sudden reversal as money pours back into the borrowed currency in an attempt to repay loans before the exchange rate soars to loss-generating levels .
And hedging against such a reversal merely builds up risk elsewhere in the international financial system .
The dangers are very real .
In the 1980s , governments responded to large exchange-rate swings through active intervention , intentionally driving the dollar ’ s value down in 1985 , only to try to stabilize it 18 months later .
These initiatives served a political purpose – holding off the protectionists .
But they also caused serious financial instability , contributing to a major stock-market crash in October 1987 .
There is one historical precedent that could serve as a model , should we be able to muster the political will to consider it .
In the 1930s , John Maynard Keynes championed limits on the movement of capital in order to blunt the more damaging consequences of globalization .
The equivalent today would be to introduce regulations on the carry trade .
