Migration and Memory in Europe
ROME – Stories of migrant-laden ships sinking in the Mediterranean while trying to reach the shores of Europe , and of refugees dying at Calais while trying to enter Britain through the Eurotunnel , have lately become ubiquitous in Europe .
This ongoing crisis should remind us of a painful , and shameful , episode of recent history : the rejection faced by European Jews seeking refuge from the anti-Semitic fury that raged across Europe in the 1930s .
Today ’ s refugees should remind us , too , of those Jews who , having survived the Holocaust , sailed across the Mediterranean toward Palestine in 1946-1947 only to be imprisoned by the British in Cyprus or elsewhere .
The fact is that in the 1930s , as Jews faced growing persecution in Germany and anti-Semitic laws proliferated in Central and Eastern Europe , the outside world was mostly indifferent to the victims ’ fate .
That indifference was no doubt shaped by the deeply ingrained prejudices of the time , as well as by widespread suspicion of all strangers . “ The boat is full ” was a refrain that resonated with governments and public opinion alike .
Indeed , in 1935 , the United States admitted only about 6,000 Jewish émigrés from Europe ;
Argentina let in 3,000 ; and 2,000 legally entered Brazil .
Western Europe was more generous : France took in 35,000 , while Belgium and the Netherlands admitted about 20,000 each .
In 1938 , under pressure from US President Franklin D. Roosevelt , a conference was held in Évian , France , to discuss the status of Jewish refugees .
Although more than 30 countries took part , they accepted only a minuscule number of Jewish refugees .
Citing unemployment , socioeconomic difficulties , and problems of public order , the participants concluded that nothing could be done for Europe ’ s Jews .
For their part , the British refused even to discuss the issue of Jewish emigration to Palestine .
Despite the surge in anti-Jewish violence in Europe , the number of Jews admitted by Britain into Palestine had first fallen and then stagnated : 60,000 in 1935 , 30,000 in 1936 , 10,000 in 1937 , 13,000 in 1938 , and just a few more in 1939 .
Yielding to Arab opposition and afraid of strengthening the Zionist movement , the United Kingdom limited Jewish immigration to Palestine to 10,000 per year for five years ( with a potential supplementary quota of 25,000 ) .
In April 1939 , the colonial secretary , Malcolm MacDonald , responding to a question in the House of Commons , said that Britain had prevented “ 1,220 illegal immigrants from landing in Palestine . ”
Passengers were ordered to be returned to their ports of embarkation .
“ You mean the concentration camps ? ” the MP then asked . MacDonald ’ s retort echoes through today ’ s crisis in the Mediterranean : The responsibility , he said , fell on those who had organized the illegal immigration .
Even after the outbreak of war in Europe that September , only 20,000 Jews found asylum in the US .
( They owed their salvation mainly to resolute action in occupied France by the Emergency Rescue Committee , whose valiant volunteers included Varian Fry and Hannah Arendt ) .
Many factors account for America ’ s reticence : anti-Semitism ; anti-immigration ideology ; silence by Christian churches ; and US Jewish organizations ’ reluctance to press the Roosevelt administration , lest they increase anti-Jewish sentiment .
Moreover , for Zionists , the need to create a Jewish state took precedence over Jewish migration to America .
In the chronicles of those horrible years , two ships take starring , albeit ill-fated , roles : the Struma and the St. Louis .
The Struma left Romania ’ s Black Sea port of Constanța in December 1941 , carrying 800 Jews fleeing the slaughter organized by the Romanian state and fascist militias .
Upon reaching Istanbul , the British refused to grant its passengers entry visas to Palestine .
After 70 days in harbor , the Struma was forced to return to the Black Sea – where it was sunk by a torpedo whose origin remains a mystery .
Only one passenger survived .
The St. Louis , with 900 German Jews on board , left Germany in May 1939 on course for Cuba .
Upon reaching Havana , after long negotiations between the Cuban government and the American Joint Distribution Committee , the ship was obliged to return to Europe .
Some of the refugees were given safe haven by the Netherlands , Belgium , France , and Great Britain .
Others , however , were forced to return to Hitler ’ s Germany , where they were soon to perish .
Europe ’ s response to today ’ s destitute migrants , many of them seeking asylum from countries that have been torn apart by extremism and civil war , shows that it can happen again .
European leaders , fearful of a popular backlash , are once again devising novel ways to reject , rather than help , some of the most vulnerable people on the planet .
Migration is a complex issue , and there are no simple solutions between the extremes of utopian goodwill and heinous xenophobia .
But recalling the plight of Europe ’ s Jews in the 1930s should compel us to reject indifference to the fate of those with nowhere else to turn .
