Turkey ’ s Lost Illusions
PARIS – “ Day by day , Europe is moving further away from Turkey , ” Egemen Bağış , Turkey ’ s Minister for European Union Affairs , declared last week .
But the reverse is equally true : With a mixture of disillusion and defiance , Turkey has been distancing itself from Europe in recent years .
In reality , nearly three years after the beginning of the “ Arab Spring , ” Turkey is more in search of itself than it is of Europe , even if it needs Europe more than Turks are willing to admit .
What is Turkey today , what are its values , and what is its destiny in a highly fluid regional environment ?
The Arab Spring was initially seen as a great opportunity for Turkey , an ideal setting in which to highlight the country ’ s economic success , democratic political model , and indispensable strategic role in the region .
The inheritors of one of the world ’ s great empires were proving to the world that Islam and modernity were perfectly compatible – an inspiring example for Arab countries like Egypt .
Instead , Turkey ’ s role inspired reservations among Egyptians ; after all , the Ottoman Empire had ruled over Egypt .
And , on the Turkish side , there was a sense of superiority vis-à-vis the Arab world .
The collapse of the Soviet Union awakened “ neo-Ottoman ” Turkish ambitions in the Caucasus and Central Asia , and revolution in the Middle East seemed to offer the heirs ( if not orphans ) of a long-dead empire an opportunity to avenge its loss .
If a lazy and fearful Europe did not want Turkey , so much the worse for Europe ; history was offering more glorious alternatives to the Turks .
Whereas Turkey could appear too Oriental and too religious in Brussels or Paris , when viewed from Cairo or Tunis , it looked like an ideal Muslim bridge to the democratic West and economically dynamic Asia .
Moreover , Turkey could play some powerful cards , owing to its “ good neighbor ” policy with two partners and rivals , Iran and Syria , as well as its support for the short-lived presidency of Mohamed Morsi in Egypt .
Unfortunately , Turkish elites ’ hopes ( if not expectations ) were not realized .
The Arab revolutions ended up exposing Turkey ’ s own weaknesses and contradictions , further aggravated by Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan ’ s repressive policies and overweening political style .
This became clear in the demonstrations that spread this spring from Istanbul ’ s Taksim Square to much of the rest of the country ( though the protests had more in common with Brazil ’ s recent unrest or the revolt in Paris in 1968 than with the popular movements in Egypt or Tunisia ) .
What characterizes Turks today is not so much pride and hope in their country ’ s expanding influence as fear of its disintegration .
The Kurdish problem preoccupies Turks , as does their growing sense that they are losing control of two essential issues – the Syrian and Iranian crises .
In recent months , Turkey ’ s government has adopted an increasingly tougher stance toward Syrian President Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime , convinced that it can only fall .
The agreement recently reached by the United States and Russia is , from this standpoint , frustrating news : For the price of destroying its chemical arsenal , the regime may have saved itself .
So Turkey must wonder what purpose is to be served by courting the West .
Why resume , under US pressure , a nearly normal dialogue with Israel if the outcome is to be abandoned , if not betrayed , by American policy ?
Similarly , Iranian President Hassan Rouhani ’ s moderate rhetoric , together with possible progress on Iran ’ s dispute with the West over its nuclear program , has left Turkey with a sense of uselessness , if not isolation .
How can a country perceive itself , and be perceived by others , as a key regional actor if it finds itself marginalized at the critical moment ?
History is moving in the Middle East , but not in the direction that Turkey would prefer .
And , with their country ’ s economic growth faltering , its government hardening , and its diplomatic performance a source of growing disappointment , many Turks now openly wonder what happened .
But , far from engaging in an open and positive self-examination , they are too often retreating into a strident nationalism that is all the more defensive to the extent that it reflects a growing lack of self-confidence .
Turkey ’ s current challenge is to overcome lost illusions .
And that means that Turks may need Europe more than they are willing to admit , even to themselves .
But is Europe today any more ready and willing than it was yesterday to engage in serious talks with Turkey ?
