Egypt ’ s Dead Men Walking
CAIRO – Mass death sentences are usually associated with regimes like those of Adolf Hitler ’ s Nazis or Pol Pot ’ s Khmer Rouge .
But Egypt ’ s military rulers have now joined the ranks of such regimes , staging circus-like trials in which the outcome is foreordained .
One such trial , in March 2014 , produced 529 death sentences ; another , in April , yielded 683 death sentences .
And the trend shows no signs of slowing .
Last month , 107 people – including Mohamed Morsi , Egypt ’ s first freely elected president – were handed death sentences for their alleged role in a mass “ prison break ” during the January 2011 uprising against former President Hosni Mubarak .
Morsi was also accused of “ colluding with foreign militants ” – that is , Hezbollah and Hamas – in order to free political prisoners in Egypt .
Soon after , the six defendants in the so-called “ Arab Sharkas ” case – who were handed death sentences in October 2014 for allegedly attacking security posts – were executed , despite a local and international outcry against the flawed trial .
According to Ahmed Helmi , a lawyer for four of the six men , the government wanted to “ send a message following Morsi ’ s verdict ” that it would carry out such sentences .
His clients and the others , he concluded , were just “ scapegoats . ”
Overall , civilian courts have handed down more than 1,000 death sentences since Egypt ’ s military overthrew Morsi in July 2013 .
The profiles of the “ convicts ” raise eyebrows : Emad Shahin , for example , is a world-renowned academic who has taught at Harvard and the American University in Cairo ;
Sondos Asem is a promising young scholar and political activist .
Making matters worse , extra-judicial killings by the security services and elements in the military are rampant .
The most dramatic of these episodes accompanied the coup in July 2013 , when Egyptian police and army opened fire on crowds protesting Morsi ’ s ouster in Cairo ’ s Rab ’ a Square , killing more than 1,000 protesters in less than ten hours .
More recently , Islam Atito , an engineering student at Cairo ’ s Ain Shams University who supported the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood , was found dead in the desert on the outskirts of Cairo .
Egypt ’ s interior ministry claimed that Atito had been involved in the “ assassination ” of a police officer and was killed in a firefight with security forces during a raid on his “ hideout . ”
But according to the student union of the university ’ s engineering faculty – whose members collectively resigned in protest against the killing – Atito was arrested during a final exam on the university campus .
The government , it is claimed , had Atito abducted and murdered in response to his activism .
As a human-rights lawyer monitoring the case notes , this is just one of several such cases – none of which is being seriously investigated .
These judicial and extra-judicial killings reflect the depth of Egypt ’ s current crisis .
The “ hawks ” who control the security and military establishments seem intent on restoring a Mubarak-style regime , but with one key difference : they believe that Mubarak did too little to repress the opposition .
For Egypt ’ s current leadership , the brutal tactics employed by the likes of Libya ’ s Muammar el-Qaddafi and Syria ’ s Bashar al-Assad are more likely to work in the Egyptian context than in those countries .
After all , the probability of international intervention ( as in Libya ) is nil , and the likelihood of a full-fledged armed revolution ( as in Syria ) is extremely limited .
But relying on force to subdue dissent in a country where 70 % of the population is under the age of 30 will be a major challenge , if not resulting in a bloodbath .
The brutal policies of Egypt ’ s hawks have also transformed the opposition .
At a 2013 sit-in protesting Morsi ’ s ouster , the Muslim Brotherhood ’ s Supreme Guide , Mohamed Badie , declared , in what became a rallying cry for the movement , “ Our peacefulness is stronger than their bullets . ”
But , with Badie having since been sentenced to death in multiple cases ( including one related to attacks on police stations in the southern province of Minya ) , the phrase has become the subject of bitter mockery among young political activists , including Brotherhood members .
Rassd , a Brotherhood-affiliated news website , recently published a letter ( link in Arabic ) by the group ’ s former secretary-general , Mahmoud Ghozlan , asserting that the “ revolution ” will continue to be non-violent .
But it also published harsh criticism of Ghozlan ’ s position by young Brotherhood activists – a notable development for an organization in which dissent is rarely publicized .
In fact , anger among younger members has become so acute that the Brotherhood has allegedly changed some 65 % of its leadership , according to Ahmed Abdel-Rahman , the head of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood Administrative Office Abroad ( a new body that organizes the thousands of Brotherhood members now in exile ) .
The organization has also adopted a harsher line , having publicly stated that the “ reformist ” approach that its government took after winning parliamentary and presidential elections in 2011 and 2012 was “ wrong ” , and that excluding non-Islamist revolutionary youth groups was a “ major mistake . ”
Given Egypt ’ s mass death sentences , extrajudicial violence , and the dominance of hawks in the security and the military establishments , together with the rhetorical , behavioral , and organizational changes within the Muslim Brotherhood , the chances of reconciliation are fading by the day .
In an environment in which “ compromise ” is regarded as a dirty word , Egypt ’ s future appears to be far from bright .
