All in the Family
MUNICH – Big economic crises often cause iconic companies to falter .
Rupert Murdoch ’ s media empire is a model of the modern global enterprise .
A particularly dynamic and innovative business model came from outside and took over central aspects of British and then American public life .
That model is now threatened by the fallout from the scandal that started with phone hacking in Murdoch ’ s British press operations .
The Murdoch experience is a microcosm of how modern globalization works .
Murdoch always looked like a foreign intrusion into British life .
It was not just that he was Australian ; he also brought new ideas .
In particular , the application of digital technology , introduced after a ferocious struggle with the powerful print unions , brought substantial cost savings and allowed a new era of journalism .
Even more importantly , Murdoch represented a concept of family business that is common in many parts of the world , but relatively rare in Britain and the United States .
Family capitalism in the continental European model uses relatively little capital to achieve maximum control .
It frequently depends on very complex corporate structures , with multiple layers of holding companies , as well as privileged shares that can guarantee the continuation of control .
This sort of firm is also very common in the most dynamic emerging-market economies in Asia and Latin America .
The Murdoch family holds only 12 % of the shares of News Corporation , the top-level holding company , but it wields about two-fifths of the voting rights ; other votes are held by a loyal Saudi prince .
For decades , academic analysts have been fighting over whether such large-scale family businesses should be considered beneficial .
Their defenders point out that such companies often have a much longer-term vision than is true of managerial capitalism , which enables them to establish strong and enduring relationships with their customers and suppliers .
At least in the case of the Murdoch empire , it now appears that they pursue long and binding relationships with politicians and the police as well .
Indeed , political entanglements are one of two sources of weakness in European-style family capitalism , as owners seek political advantages and preferred access as much as they strive for technical innovation .
Murdoch ’ s empire depended on its closeness to politicians .
In retrospect , three successive British prime ministers – Tony Blair , Gordon Brown , and David Cameron – were on overly familiar terms with a manipulative business leader .
Cameron now talks about the need for “ a healthier relationship between politicians and media owners . ”
And Murdoch apparently is now saying that he wishes that all these prime ministers would “ leave me alone . ”
The second notorious weakness of family businesses is the problem of succession .
When he appeared before the British parliament in July , Rupert Murdoch looked like an old man , remote and out of control .
In old-style family firms , there is a clear rule of succession that the oldest son takes over .
But that rule is rightly recognized as being potentially dysfunctional .
There is obviously no guarantee that the oldest son is the best businessman , and the result could be bitter and ferocious sibling rivalry .
Such succession disputes become even more acute when there are multiple marriages and multiple sets of competing children .
Until the eruption of the current scandal , the youngest of Murdoch ’ s three children from his second marriage , James , was generally believed to stand the greatest chance of succeeding his father .
The complexities of modern marriage patterns make family life much more fraught , especially when phenomenal power and huge sums of money are involved .
All three of Murdoch ’ s marriages have produced children , though those from his current relationship are too young to be considered potential corporate successors .
In addition , succession planning can become complicated by the emergence of “ substitute children ” from the company ’ s management .
Rebekah Brooks , the editor of The News of the World at the beginning of the phone-hacking scandal , and subsequently the chief executive of News International , Murdoch ’ s British subsidiary , played precisely such a role .
The disintegration of the business empire is then accompanied and amplified by bitter disputes between the children and the substitute children .
Indeed , the crisis of the Murdoch family ’ s business empire is neither unique nor unprecedented .
In the first half of the 1990 ’ s , many observers of the alleged Asian economic miracle emphasized trust and families ’ capacity to cooperate with political authorities in order to realize long-term growth plans .
After the 1997-1998 Asia crisis , and as authoritarian regimes in South Korea and Indonesia disintegrated , these relationships were suddenly interpreted as corrupt , and the counter-view – that “ crony capitalism ” had become entrenched in these countries – soon prevailed .
The Arab Spring has been in large part a movement against corrupt family capitalism , embodied not only in ruling families like the Ben Alis , the Mubaraks , and the Assads , but also in the large family business empires that depended on and supported them .
As a result of globalization , large family firms could increase their size and their geographic range .
But globalization also increases the chances of backlashes that focus on the vulnerabilities , weaknesses , and mistakes of big family firms .
They are vulnerable to an Arab Spring ( and a British summer ) – and maybe to a US autumn that will focus not just on the Murdochs ’ business , but also on its interplay with politics .
