Debt and America ’ s Decline
MILAN – Italians and other Europeans have serious problems addressing their own national debts , public and private , so it may seem immodest for a European to discuss America ’ s growing and grave debt problem .
But the fiscal realities on both sides of the Atlantic nowadays are very similar , and only lingering trust in the promise of America keeps alive the expectation among some Europeans that some grand American coup de théâtrewill resolve the country ’ s dire debt situation .
Of course , many Americans recognize the scale of the country ’ s debt burden .
Admiral Mike Mullen , Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and thus America ’ s highest ranking military officer , recently said , “ The greatest danger to American security comes from the national debt . ” Four Americans out of ten agree with him , whereas less than three in ten deem terrorism or Iran more dangerous .
America ’ s Great Power status has always been tied to its level of debt .
Indeed , it was the absence of debt that marked the United States ’ emergence as a world power between 1914 and 1917 .
The US went from owing $ 3 billion ( mostly to Great Britain ) to being a net creditor for about the same amount , thanks to $ 6 billion in war credits given to the Western Allies .
A further $ 3 billion in credits for European post-war reconstruction cemented America ’ s status as the world ’ s premier creditor nation , with its surplus equal to roughly 8 % of GNP at the time .
This shift meant that the US had essentially replaced Britain as the heart of the world ’ s financial and monetary system .
Previously , thanks to the gold standard and Britain ’ s political stability , the City of London had been the world ’ s key source of capital and financial guarantees for more than a century .
The new era began suddenly in January 1915 , when , after a few months of deep uncertainty , gold started to be shipped to New York in increasing quantities .
A few months earlier , the veteran Boston financier Henry Lee Higginson had sketched in a letter to President Woodrow Wilson what America ’ s new strategy should be . “ This is our chance to take first place , ” he wrote .
America ’ s financial house had to be put in order , all debts repaid , and , as London had done for a long time , confidence had to be maintained , which meant guaranteeing the dollar ’ s convertibility into gold .
Alone among the world ’ s great nations , the US did manage to guarantee dollar convertibility throughout the Great War .
With peace , the dollar and Wall Street became the dominant force on the world ’ s financial landscape .
The financial-market rules established after 1933 by President Franklin Roosevelt ’ s New Deal enabled the dollar to replace the British pound at the center of the international system .
America ’ s role as the world ’ s banker went unchallenged for the next 40 years ago , until President Richard Nixon decoupled the dollar from gold .
Yet , even without the gold standard , America ’ s economic might , together with the recycling of petrodollars , kept the dollar on top .
Indeed , the US remained the world ’ s premier creditor nation until 1986-1987 , when it became a debtor nation again .
In the two decades that followed , America ’ s debt usually was around $ 3 trillion , rising or falling with the exchange rate of the dollar .
Starting in 1990 , the US began to import more and more capital , particularly from Asia .
In the 2000 ’ s , China became the prime source of debt financing , and Americans were happy , because it enabled the US Federal Reserve to keep interest rates low .
There were some who foresaw danger .
The Swedish economist Axel Leijonhufvud foresaw asset-price inflation – houses in particular – and a worsening of credit quality .
Financial innovation soon made that prediction come true .
It is enough to remember that in 2008 there were only 12 public companies in the world with AAA credit ratings , but more than 60,000 – mostly American – triple-A structured financial products .
The US , the world ’ s banker , had mutated into the world ’ s hedge fund .
With that change , the banker ’ s traditional imperative to maintain fidelity and trust – to “ keep faith , ” as Higginson put it – was forgotten .
And it is in America ’ s public debt that the debris of its financial system ’ s broken promises are collected , just as Italy ’ s massive public debt reflects its past national prodigality .
The figures for the US are staggering .
Public debt includes not only the federal government ’ s current $ 13.2 trillion , but another $ 3 trillion owed by America ’ s states , counties , and cities .
In addition , there is the $ 3.9 trillion in debt owed by America ’ s government-backed housing-finance agencies ( Fannie Mae , Freddie Mac , and others ) , which currently underwrite more than 90 % of all US mortgages .
As a result , America ’ s public debt has reached roughly 140 % of GDP .
The US Congress is well aware of what these numbers portend , but its members have chosen to avert their eyes .
Indeed , the president is no longer required to provide the usual five-year forecast of the country ’ s fiscal position . A one-year perspective is now deemed sufficient .
So , where does that leave the world economy ?
There is no newly emerging Great Power that can assume responsibility for global finance , as there was in 1914 .
Back then , Wall Street was ready for the job .
Someday , Shanghai and Hong Kong might be ready , but that possibility is of little help now .
