How to Fight Currency Manipulation
WASHINGTON , DC – Is it appropriate to use trade agreements to discourage countries from using large-scale intervention in the foreign-exchange market to hold down their currencies ’ value ?
That is the question of the day in American economic-policy circles .
In recent years , Japan , South Korea , and China have manipulated their currencies to keep them undervalued .
This boosted their exports , limited imports , and led to large current-account surpluses .
But such intervention adversely affects trading partners and is barred under existing international rules .
Unfortunately , those rules have proved completely ineffective .
Now a new opportunity to address the issue has emerged : The Trans-Pacific Partnership – the mega-regional free-trade agreement involving the United States , Japan , and ten other countries in Latin America and Asia .
With the TPP close to being finalized , South Korea and China are watching intently , and other countries may want to join .
US President Barack Obama correctly argues that this is an occasion to set the rules for trade and investment in the twenty-first century .
Yet the US Treasury Department and the US Trade Representative steadfastly refuse to include any language prohibiting currency manipulation in the TPP , for five main reasons – none of which fits the facts .
The first argument is that the International Monetary Fund can deal with instances of currency manipulation .
The IMF does have up-to-date guidelines that define and seek to prevent currency manipulation .
These were adopted not only with America ’ s assent , but at its insistence , at a time ( the mid-2000s ) when China ’ s renminbi was greatly undervalued , contributing to the loss of millions of US manufacturing jobs .
Unfortunately , the IMF cannot enforce its guidelines , because currency manipulators are able to stall action .
This has been the entrenched and continuing pattern , including when I was the IMF ’ s chief economist ( from early 2007 to August 2008 ) .
The second argument made by the US Treasury and the Trade Representative is that no sufficiently precise currency rules can be negotiated .
But there is nothing wrong with the IMF guidelines – both the 2007 and 2012 versions – negotiated by the Treasury itself .
Recognizing this , Congressman Sander Levin – the senior Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee , which has jurisdiction over international trade – proposes that a TPP currency chapter be based on the IMF guidelines .
These guidelines identify when a country , despite running a large current-account surplus , is pursuing long-term , large-scale purchases of foreign assets , thereby blocking exchange-rate appreciation – exactly the problem we want to prevent .
( I have worked with Levin on some of these issues , but here I am speaking only for myself . )
The third argument against putting anti-manipulation provisions in the TPP is that they would imperil America ’ s ability to implement monetary stimulus .
But this reflects a thorough misunderstanding of the issue .
A well-designed currency chapter in the TPP would not impede US monetary independence .
Conventional monetary policy operates by altering short-term interest rates , which includes the central bank buying and selling short-term government debt .
No intervention in the foreign-exchange market – buying and selling foreign currency – is involved .
Similarly , the quantitative easing ( QE ) that has defined many major central banks ’ monetary policy in recent years does not involve buying or selling foreign assets .
Under QE , the Federal Reserve buys – and announces that it will buy – assets ; the only difference is that these assets are longer-maturity US government debt instruments and mortgage-backed securities of various kinds , all denominated in US dollars .
The fourth argument is that no major country is currently manipulating its exchange rate ( the renminbi has appreciated since the mid-2000s ) , so there is nothing to worry about .
But there is also nothing to stop China or any other country from resuming large-scale currency-market intervention if and when it chooses .
And the lack of diplomatic tension around exchange rates today makes this a good moment to raise the topic .
The final reason cited in support of excluding a currency chapter from the TPP is that the countries negotiating the deal would never agree .
But this argument does not hold up when the participating countries are examined one by one .
Canada , Australia , and New Zealand , developed economies with floating exchange rates , do not want to encourage currency manipulation .
Chile , a middle-income country that has long had sound and responsible macroeconomic policies , does not favor currency manipulation .
Mexico and Peru have much to fear from other countries becoming currency manipulators again .
Likewise , Japan , now running its own version of QE , worries about potential currency manipulation by other countries , such as South Korea and China .
Malaysia and Singapore , having built up a substantial stock of foreign-exchange reserves , should also now be more concerned about currency manipulation by their trading partners .
Vietnam has much more serious TPP issues to resolve , particularly concerning labor rights .
And Brunei Darussalam , with a population of less than 500,000 , is unlikely to object .
Currency manipulation is a real problem that causes significant damage .
The TPP deal – if it establishes a dispute-resolution mechanism that can quickly dismiss frivolous claims and home in on genuine cases – may offer the best chance to fix it .
