Europe \ u0027s Culture of Euthanasia
Modern technology has created the possibility of dramatically extending human life , but also a host of new practical and moral problems in the process .
Extending life is costly both because the technology itself can be expensive , but also because it often is extremely labor intensive in countries where labor is not cheap .
In capitalist societies , the high price tag associated with these new ways to extend life means that the poor and even the middle class can be excluded from important new benefits .
Humanitarian and moral concerns demand that this problem be addressed adequately .
Free market critics , sensitive to the problem of excluding people from living a longer life simply because of their income , look to the welfare states of Northern Europe for guidance , because they do not use the price system to allocate healthcare .
But the welfare states ' experience with extending life creates its own ethical problems that may be even more serious than those in more market-oriented societies .
Faced with bloated fiscal deficits , today 's newly cost-conscious welfare states are economizing in the use of expensive life-extending technologies .
Moreover , as a result of policies allowing medically-assisted termination of human life , a “ culture of euthanasia ” has been gaining ground in some Northern European countries .
Life-extending technologies are increasingly out of fashion , and terminating ill old people 's lives is often extolled as caring , even “ humanitarian . ”
The confluence of economic considerations and the culture of euthanasia is nowhere as visible as in Holland .
People may differ about the ethics of euthanasia itself . But a negative by-product of a policy which allows doctors to practice euthanasia is that the taboo against terminating human life diminishes .
As a result , there is less resistance to ending patients ' lives “ for their own good , ” with only the family 's consent substituting for that of the patient , or even without the family 's consent , and the practice gradually becomes socially acceptable .
According to the respected Dutch newspaper NRC Handelsblad , “ humanitarian ” terminations by doctors occur at the rate of 10,000 per year in Holland , though how many “ terminations ” are done without patient or family consent is unclear .
Apparently , Dutch doctors are letting their patients die the old-fashioned way , rather than use the expensive new techniques to prolong their lives .
Reinforcing this “ culture of euthanasia ” are economic considerations .
By foregoing prices in allocating healthcare , the Dutch have taken the economic incentives for extending life away from the country 's physicians .
Unlike doctors in a profit-driven healthcare system , Dutch doctors cannot “ make money ” extending life ; nor can they “ make money ” from informing the patient and his or her family of the various life-saving options made possible by advances in medical science .
Indeed , because extending the lives of ill old people can be very costly , the economic incentives run in the opposite direction in the welfare state .
In these budget balancing times , doctors at public nursing homes and hospitals are under severe pressures to keep costs down .
Economic considerations thus cannot help but play an important role in life or death medical decisions , though welfare state doctors are loathe to admit it .
Where welfare state medicine differs most from that in more market-oriented countries is that patients and their families often have little or no say in critical medical decisions that can profoundly affect their lives .
In Holland , patients are virtually helpless against the new “ culture of euthanasia . ” “ Free ” healthcare effectively disempowers them .
Doctors are not gods , but they increasingly play god by refusing to use life-extending techniques for patients and families who want them and are even willing to pay for them .
In Holland , there is no private medicine . The only recourse for dissatisfied patients is to leave the country or go to the courts .
Europe 's welfare states thus face a serious dilemma .
There is no doubt that Holland spends a substantial amount of money on caring for old people .
If it were to exploit more fully the existing life-extending technologies for its people , it would put substantial additional pressure on the healthcare budget , perhaps to the point of causing a deficit crisis .
On the other hand , underutilization of life-extending techniques creates a moral crisis because ill patients are being prematurely terminated by doctors who have too much power over life and death decisions .
One solution to this dilemma is simple .
The Dutch , as the British have done in recent years , should allow private medicine to co-exist with public medicine .
In a so-called “ mixed system , ” patients would have more – and physicians less – power over life-and-death decisions .
The sick could go “ private ” to secure life-extending treatments that the state is denying them .
This would be a good thing . Introducing private medicine might even take some pressure off public health budgets .
Critics of market-driven health care say that such changes would lead societies back to the bad old days of unequal access to health care of all sorts , not just to these new life extending technologies .
Such critics , however , forget that welfare state health systems practice an insidious form of unequal access , but one shrouded from view .
In the welfare state system , personal connections are just about the only way to get favored treatment .
Insiders get the goods , outsiders get the waiting list .
Given the life-and-death choices involved , the proper choice seems clear .
