Europe ’ s Northern Lights
PARIS – “ The Northern Lights ” was the title of a major painting exhibition in Paris a few years ago , dedicated to Scandinavian masterpieces .
But “ northern lights ” may also correspond to what Europe , if not the entire West , needs nowadays : a political , economic , social , and ethical model .
Indeed , in becoming the first center-right leader in Sweden to win re-election in modern times , Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt not only ended the centre-left ’ s electoral hegemony in his country , but revealed that the modern Scandinavian model of governance is relevant across Europe .
At a time when budget cuts are the order of the day , political power in Scandinavia is modest and generally honest .
Women play a major role in society and politics , and have for a long time .
Scandinavian capitalism has been traditionally more humane , and social injustice , though it exists , is much less destructive than in southern Europe , for example .
Moreover , immigrants are generally treated with a greater sense of respect for their dignity .
To be sure , many other Europeans recognize these “ virtues . ”
But their natural reaction is to say , “ It ’ s not for us . ” In order to practice Scandinavian virtues , many believe , you must come from a cold-weather country with a small , homogeneous population that accepts high taxes without grumbling .
One can behave in such a manner , many Europeans outside of Scandinavia say , only if one has been raised according to the Protestant ethic .
For Greeks , Italians , and many French , evading taxes is a kind of national pastime , which some even perceive as a moral duty .
Politics is a game , and power a drug that allows you to rise above ordinary citizens .
And the temptation to consider oneself the incarnation of the state , rather than its servant , is often irresistible among southern European politicians .
Of course , it is dangerous to idealize the Scandinavian model .
Scandinavian countries have their share of problems , such as Denmark ’ s significant xenophobic extreme right and Norway ’ s occasional bouts of provincial puritanism .
But the difference between these countries and their southern counterparts in terms of economic performance , social climate , and political culture are plainly visible .
The weak and sick men of Europe – from Greece to Spain – are to be found in the south , not the north .
The Asian challenge , particularly from China , should encourage us to reconsider the validity of the “ Scandinavian model . ”
For the Chinese example represents for Europeans a dual opportunity to moralize our capitalism and reinvent our democratic practices .
We cannot continue to preach to others values that we no longer practice with rigor .
To play the moral high ground , we must deserve it .
Moreover , we cannot simply wait for the Chinese “ other ” to collapse under the weight of its own contradictions .
Of course , these contradictions are real , but our main source of strength cannot be their weakness .
The Chinese model – inspired nowadays not by Lenin but by Singapore ’ s decades of disciplined economic success – has called into question the traditional linkage ( made since Adam Smith ) between capitalism and democracy .
In China , capitalism prospers without democracy .
In fact , a contemporary Chinese joke is very indicative of how the country perceives its role in today ’ s world . “ In 1949 , communism saved China ; in 1979 capitalism saved China ; and in 2009 , China saved capitalism . ”
In the aftermath of a major financial and economic crisis – which may yet be far from over – Chinese and Asians in general ask Europeans rather bluntly how we dare try to teach them lessons in financial capitalism .
After all , during the Asian financial crisis in 1998 , “ we ” did not come to their aid ; ten years later , “ they ” saved us .
China today is increasingly becoming for Europe what the United States was yesterday – a mirror reflecting our weaknesses and our strengths .
We are too few to become anything other than a “ niche of excellence ” in the character of our capitalism and our democratic practices , both of which are endangered above all by ourselves .
Nothing incites failure more than success .
Since the end of the Cold War , we Europeans have lost the incentive to demonstrate the superiority of our systems .
We have become complacent and lazy .
In this context , looking north is essential if we want to regain our universal attractiveness and defend our “ democratic ” comparative advantages .
There is more rigor and openness under the Northern Lights , and this is precisely the combination we need , with its mixture of modesty towards others and ambition towards ourselves .
