God Crashes the Tea Party
OXFORD – Where does America put God ?
Historically , there has always been tension between the separation of church and state that the United States has enshrined in its Constitution and regular upsurges of religious faith , even religious extremism , that seek an outlet in the political process – or even seek to dominate it .
Nowhere is this tension more visible today than in the struggle for the political soul of the Tea Party .
For , as the coalition on the religious right that dominated American conservatism since the 1980 ’ s has begun to fall apart , some of the same Christian fundamentalist elements are seeking to absorb – some would say take over – the originally non-sectarian Tea Party .
The Tea Party emerged from a laudably grassroots base : libertarians , fervent Constitutionalists , and ordinary people alarmed at the suppression of liberties , whether by George W. Bush or Barack Obama .
Libertarians , of course , tend to understand church-state separation : if you don ’ t want government intruding in your life , you definitely don ’ t want it telling you how to worship .
This anti-establishmentarian impulse is a time-honored tradition in America , where advocacy of separation of church and state – a radical view in the late eighteenth century – was driven by the experiences of religious minorities such as Quakers , Huguenots , and Puritans , all of whom suffered religious persecution in Britain and France .
Unfortunately , religious bigotry also has a long history in America , and there are powerful factions that cannot accept that God did not intend the US to be a Christian nation .
Ronald Reagan saw the benefit of tapping these constituencies , introducing a faith-first element into what had been a more secularized , “ big tent ” conservatism .
Since the 1980 ’ s , “ culture wars ” ( usually staged ) about homosexuality , abortion , and sex education , or other coded messaging about religious values , have served to mobilize the religious right .
Bush ’ s early avowal of his conversion experience was given in language poll-tested for acceptance by fundamentalist Christians .
But , in the face of a severe recession and endless real wars , hot-button “ culture war ” issues don ’ t have the mobilizing power that they once did .
Moreover , the Christian conservative movement has become rudderless and fragmented , with many of its leaders dead , compromised by sex scandals , or increasingly perceived as plain batty .
This is why the architects of the religious right – many of them professional political consultants with no organic ties to movement – see the Tea Party as the great prize to subvert and then dominate .
You can see these fingerprints everywhere .
At early Tea Party events , secular issues dominated : the Federal Reserve , monetary policy , taxation , the size of the government , and , above all , the Constitution .
Today , the think tanks and pressure groups of the organized right are pumping money into Tea Party “ branded ” sites and events – and altering the message with an increasingly “ culture war ” slant .
At Townhall.com and LibertyCentral.org , for example , explanations of the Constitution sit uneasily next to articles urging citizens to take action against the construction of a mosque at the Twin Towers site in New York .
Elsewhere , a seemingly commendable grassroots petition movement to re-establish Constitutional values at the state level turns out to be – if you read the fine print – a drive to enshrine Christian values in state law .
Likewise , the Tea Party , which showed no interest in racist language or iconography at its outset , increasingly injects such demagoguery into its messages .
The movement ’ s libertarian message is now regularly subverted by anti-Muslim paranoia and contradicted by activism supporting such initiatives as the mass round-up , without due process , of undocumented immigrants in Arizona .
The political consultants behind this shift know that chauvinist appeals work in America – especially in times of economic stress and political turmoil .
But perhaps enough Americans will keep their eyes open this time and learn from history .
Over a century ago , a nation that originated modern democracy was gripped by a political fever that led ordinary people to choose sides based on racist demagoguery .
Cynical political tacticians manipulated popular opinion – through propaganda , through what posed as a free press , and through targeted political hate speech – to unite in carrying out a massive miscarriage of justice , demonizing a religious minority for political gain .
Not insignificantly , this hysteria was whipped up in the name of fighting “ treason ” and bolstering “ national security . ”
Also tellingly , the accused member of the hated religious minority was jailed for life and condemned to a method of punishment – solitary confinement on an island 3,000 miles away – that was invented just for him after his conviction .
The nation that had defined itself by its belief in freedom and reason for over a hundred years found itself seduced by the most barbaric of faith-based bigotry .
Even civilized , educated people signed on to it .
It was not the US that was gripped by this wave of racist paranoia , but France , the cradle of “ liberté , egalité et fraternité . ”
And the hated , “ treasonous ” religious minority was not Muslim , but Jewish .
Indeed , the most important book that a student of America can read right now to understand today ’ s malignant political climate is Ruth Harris ’ admirable new look at the Dreyfus affair , The Man on Devil ’ s Island .
Harris re-reads the famous trial to show how even the greatest of democracies can falter when good people abandon their principles , and when fear-mongering propaganda drives leaders to erode democratic checks and balances in the name of “ national security . ”
American Jews , in particular , need reminding that when one religious minority is targeted , all religious minorities are at risk .
France eventually regained its soul – but long after a dark eclipse of its most cherished democratic values .
Americans – and the Tea Party – should look at France a century ago , when religious bigotry hijacked constitutionalism , and then take a good hard look at themselves .
