Democracy in Tea Party America
BERKELEY – When the French politician and moral philosopher Alexis de Tocqueville published the first volume of his Democracy in America in 1835 , he did so because he thought that France was in big trouble and could learn much from America .
So one can only wonder what he would have made of the Republican National Convention in Tampa , Florida .
For Tocqueville , the grab for centralized power by the absolutist Bourbon monarchs , followed by the French Revolution and Napoleon ’ s Empire , had destroyed the good with the bad in France ’ s neo-feudal order .
Decades later , the new order was still in flux .
In Tocqueville ’ s imagination , at least , the old order ’ s subjects had been eager to protect their particular liberties and jealous of their spheres of independence .
They understood that they were embedded in a web of obligations , powers , responsibilities , and privileges that was as large as France itself .
Among the French of 1835 , however , “ the doctrine of self-interest ” had produced “ egotism … no less blind . ”
Having “ destroyed an aristocracy , ” the French were “ inclined to survey its ruins with complacency . ”
To the “ sick ” France of 1835 , Tocqueville counterposed healthy America , where attachment to the idea that people should pursue their self-interest was no less strong , but was different .
The difference , he thought , was that Americans understood that they could not flourish unless their neighbors prospered as well .
Thus , Americans pursued their self-interest , but in a way that was “ rightly understood . ”
Tocqueville noted that “ Americans are fond of explaining … [ how ] regard for themselves constantly prompts them to assist each other , and inclines them willingly to sacrifice a portion of their time and property to the general welfare . ”
The French , by contrast , faced a future in which “ it is difficult to foresee to what pitch of stupid excesses their egotism may lead them , ” and “ into what disgrace and wretchedness they would plunge themselves , lest they should have to sacrifice something of their own well-being to the prosperity of their fellow-creatures . ”
For Tocqueville , France ’ s sickness in 1835 stemmed from its Bourbon patrimony of a top-down , command-and-control government , whereas America ’ s health consisted in its bottom-up , grassroots-democratic government .
Give the local community enough control over its own affairs , Tocqueville argued , and one “ will see at a glance … the close tie which unites private to general interest . ” It was “ local freedom which leads a great number of citizens to value the affection of their neighbors and of their kindred , perpetually brings men together , and forces them to help one another , in spite of the propensities which sever them . ”
Nearly two centuries have passed since Tocqueville wrote his masterpiece .
The connection between the general interest and the private interest of individual Americans has , if anything , become much stronger , even if their private interest is tied to a post office box in the Cayman Islands .
Indeed , no private-equity fortunes were made over the past generation without investing in or trading with the prosperous North Atlantic industrial core of the world economy .
But the mechanisms that individuals can use to join with their immediate neighbors in political action that makes a difference in their lives have become much weaker .
If , say , 25 % of the 1,000 households in the 30-block Brookside “ fiberhood ” in Kansas City , Missouri , pre-subscribe , Google will provide all 1,000 with the opportunity to get very cheap , very fast Internet service very soon .
But that is the proverbial exception that proves the rule .
And the Republicans gathered in Tampa to celebrate the rule – to say that the America that Tocqueville saw no longer exists : Americans no longer believe that the wealth of the rich rests on the prosperity of the rest .
Rather , the rich owe their wealth solely to their own luck and effort .
The rich – and only the rich – “ built ” what they have .
The willingness to sacrifice some part of their private interest to support the public interest damages the souls and portfolios of the 1 % .
Perhaps the moral and intellectual tide will be reversed , and America will remain exceptional for the reasons that Tocqueville identified two centuries ago .
Otherwise , Tocqueville would surely say of Americans today what he said of the French then .
The main difference is that it has become all too easy “ to foresee to what pitch of stupid excesses their egotism may lead them ” and “ into what disgrace and wretchedness they would plunge themselves . ”
