For Whom Syria Tolls
PARIS – With every passing week , the Syrian conflict increasingly resembles the Spanish Civil War .
The images of warplanes bombing civilians and destroying cities have turned Aleppo into a latter-day version of Guernica , immortalized in Picasso ’ s masterpiece .
But the real similarities between the two conflicts are to be found in the behavior of the international community ’ s main actors , which have again taken opposite sides .
On one side stand Russia and Iran , cynically determined to buttress President Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime .
On the other side stand the established democracies , hesitant and ambivalent in their support of the rebels .
In 1930 ’ s Spain , of course , Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy fully supported General Francisco Franco ’ s rebellion , while the democracies reluctantly offered scant help to the Spanish Republic .
There are even deeper similarities .
Many argued at the time that support for republican Spain meant helping the far more dangerous anarchists and Communists at a time when the Soviet threat in Europe was growing .
In that sense , yesterday ’ s Reds have become today ’ s “ fundamentalist Muslims . ”
Indeed , for many nowadays , helping the Syrian rebels is too risky , and might even jeopardize the Middle East ’ s Christian minorities .
While the Syrian regime is odious , they argue , the choice is between a hypothetical hope of democracy in the Muslim world and the real risk of endangering Christians ’ lives .
Unfortunately , therefore , one must choose the status quo .
Of course , Western vacillation reflects deeper strategic and diplomatic factors as well .
Indeed , by shooting down a Turkish warplane that wandered into Syrian airspace , Assad ’ s regime intended to deliver a clear message to the international community : “ Stay out of Syria ’ s domestic affairs . ”
Syria is not Libya , and the political context has changed significantly , with America ’ s presidential election approaching and a deepening economic crisis in Europe .
Rightly or wrongly , Russia and China believe that the time has come to take their revenge over an arrogant West that deceived them about the true purpose of “ humanitarian intervention ” in Libya .
This time , they hold the better cards .
At a time when US President Barack Obama is basing his campaign partly on his withdrawal of American troops from Iraq and his plan to do the same in Afghanistan , he cannot take the risk of intervening in Syria .
Meanwhile , the European Union is fighting for its survival , and cannot devote its energies to an uncertain battle .
For the West , the timing of the Syrian rebels ’ uprising could not have been worse .
But , despite deep divisions among the rebels , the cost of Western indifference is probably higher than the risk of intervention .
The international community can no longer hide behind the pretense of ignorance .
It lost its innocence decades ago .
When faced with the slaughter of civilians , it can no longer pretend that it does not know .
But , beyond ethics , there are geopolitical considerations .
With the Arab world in the midst of upheaval , what message does the West want to send ?
And , with global power in flux , what message is the West sending to the authoritarian regimes that are backing Assad ?
These regimes can only read the West ’ s dithering as a green light for their cynical agendas .
This is particularly problematic in the case of Iran .
The less determination the West demonstrates in Syria , the more the Iranians become convinced that they can play with the international community ’ s nerves and patience indefinitely .
As Russia and Iran continue to send money and weapons , if not military advisers , to Syria , it is impossible to persist with hypocritical language that can be interpreted only as a formula for inaction .
Threatening the Syrian regime with “ terrible consequences ” if it were to use chemical weapons means only one thing : “ Bomb your civilians at will , but use only conventional munitions . ”
The time has come to supply the rebels with what they desperately need : anti-tank and surface-to-air missiles .
Of course , such a choice carries risks .
Do we know the people we would be helping ?
After all , such weapons could be turned against the West one day , as they have been in Afghanistan .
And , by involving ourselves militarily in the conflict , even if only by supplying the rebels , we might give a propaganda boost to terrorist groups that are already willing to strike in the West .
Nevertheless , the risks of passivity , indecision , and incoherence are even greater .
The more the West waits , the more radicalized the rebels will become , weakening the standing and influence of moderate forces .
The logic of intervention goes through cycles .
In the aftermath of the Rwandan genocide and the subsequent refugee crisis and war in the Great Lakes region of Central Africa in the 1990 ’ s , a combination of guilt , economic prosperity , and America ’ s unique international status led to interventions in Kosovo , Afghanistan , and , unfortunately , Iraq .
Today , we are in a completely different cycle , dominated by the ghosts of Iraq , the global economic crisis , and the ( relative ) decline of the West .
When it comes to intervention nowadays , respect for legality has overcome the concern for legitimacy that prevailed a decade ago .
We have gone from one extreme to the other , whereas a middle road would be wiser .
But , above all , let us not forget the lessons of the Spanish Civil War .
It is always dangerous to give the impression of being the first to blink when facing authoritarian regimes .
