Debt and Democracy
PRINCETON – The European Union ’ s sovereign-debt crisis constitutes a fundamental threat not only to the euro , but also to democracy and public accountability .
At the moment , Europe ’ s woes and dilemmas are confined to relatively small countries like Greece , Ireland , and Hungary .
But all of them look as if their governments have cheated on fundamental articles of the democratic contract .
The rotating presidency of the EU is about to shed a spotlight on one of these countries .
Hungary ’ s turn at the EU helm comes at a time of fierce debate over Prime Minister Victor Orbán ’ s alteration of constitutional law and suppression of press freedom , as well as a new round of worries about the country ’ s financial sustainability .
Hungary has many reasons to be sensitive to the issue of the political consequences of debt .
After all , Hungary still holds the world record for hyperinflation , with the currency debased by 1027 in the 1940 ’ s , paving the way for the imposition of Communist dictatorship .
The EU ’ s debt arithmetic is uncertain and precarious .
Fiscal consolidation in the Mediterranean countries might just do the trick , and allow – at great cost – a return to normal financing arrangements .
But if market nervousness persists and interest rates remain high relative to rates for secure German debt , the debt burden will rapidly become unsustainable .
So it might be a good idea for the EU to prepare a mechanism that spells out how debt can be trimmed .
Many economists have argued this case on the basis of arithmetic calculation .
But the European Central Bank , notably by ECB board member Lorenzo Bini Smaghi , has elegantly spelled out the case against debt reduction – a case that is politically significant and deeply moral .
Indeed , the principle of not reneging on public debt is deeply intertwined with the development of legal security , representative government , and modern democracy .
In the wake of the Glorious Revolution of 1688 , when Britain revolted against the spendthrift Stuart dynasty , the British government adopted a new approach to debt .
Voting on budgets in Parliament – a representative institution – ensured that the people as a whole were liable for the obligations incurred by their government .
A constitutional approach limited the scope for wasteful spending on luxurious court life ( and on military adventure ) , which had been the hallmark of early modern autocratic monarchy .
The lesson of 1688 was reinforced by the next European revolutionary wave .
In the aftermath of the French Revolution and Napoleon , France was heavily in debt , and the revolutionary regimes had discredited themselves through paper-currency ( assignat ) inflation .
After the Congress of Vienna returned King Louis XVIII to the French throne , his advisers debated whether or not to recognize the debt incurred by Napoleon .
The decision not to default contributed to the legal security needed for the French economy to catch up with Britain ’ s industrial revolution .
The experience of wartime inflations and de facto defaults in the twentieth century made the theme of responsible finance a crucial part of a new European consensus .
A foundation of the European integration process was recognition of the importance of a stable currency to political legitimacy .
Indeed , the EU ’ s critical French-German axis was held together by the conviction that political order in a democracy depended on the security of debt .
In Germany , the expropriation of two generations of middle-class bond holders was seen as the outcome of the Kaiser ’ s war , and then of Hitler ’ s war – in other words , a result of democratic failure .
After inflation and unstable government , Charles de Gaulle rebuilt the French political system , but also the idea of the French nation , by championing currency stability .
He explicitly went back to the legacy of Napoleon , and argued that France could be stable only with a strong currency .
The financial revolution that swept the world over the last two decades seemed to sever the link between representative government and public finance .
Derivatives and other complex financial instruments seemed to offer a way to circumvent citizens ’ responsibility for expenditure to which they had consented .
In other words , modern government finance had come to resemble sub-prime mortgages , which created the illusion of universal home ownership ; rules and limits no longer applied .
Countries could practice generosity on the never never .
The apparently hard rules of the EU ’ s Maastricht Treaty and its Growth and Stability Pact , which impose a 3 % -of-GDP ceiling on fiscal deficits and 60 % on government debt , encouraged ingenious accounting to shift expenditure for purely cosmetic purposes .
The financial revolution went in parallel with the effective disenfranchisement of Europeans .
For the past 20 years , it looked as if power was being shifted to a technocratic elite .
Behind-the-scenes accounting tricks were accompanied by behind-the-scenes political tricks .
Citizens , unsurprisingly , complained about the declining legitimacy of EU institutions .
Similarly , in guaranteeing the debt of Irish banks in September 2008 , the Irish government did something that no responsible government should have contemplated .
It took responsibility for obligations that amounted to a multiple of Ireland ’ s national income , driving up government debt to more than 1,300 % of GDP .
Prime Minister Brian Cowen , who still defends this action , is likely to be massively punished in the next elections .
But Cowen ’ s actions were symptomatic of a broader failure : the fundamental link between the liability of citizens and taxpayers and the responsibilities of government had been broken .
The idea of shifting some part of EU members ’ existing government debt to a European bond may be technically appealing , but it will work only if there is a return to the British principles of 1688 ( or the principles of the American Revolution ) .
Taxpayers across the EU must have the sense that they control what they owe – and that they will not be held responsible for the mistakes and frauds of the unholy alliance between irresponsible finance and irresponsible government .
