Dry China
ANSHUN , GUIZHOU PROVINCE , CHINA -- The Huangguoshu Waterfall in China ’ s southwestern Guizhou Province is a magnificent sight , when there is water .
The largest waterfall in Asia , it plunges over a sheer cliff more than 200 feet high in a thundering display of foam , mist , and rainbows .
Unfortunately , this wonder of nature has recently suffered an indignity .
Each evening , it gets turned off as if it were a garden fountain .
This part of China ’ s southwest , known for its abundant rainfall , mountains , underground rivers and caves , and tropical flora , has recently been gripped by a drought that many say is the worst since the Ming Dynasty .
So , after all the tourists that irrigate this poor region with precious income leave the viewing platforms below the falls , authorities close the sluice gates that dam the White Water River on the dangerously low upstream reservoir , and the falls cease .
Then , each morning , before the tourists reappear , they unceremoniously open the gates again , so that the eerily silent falls suddenly revive in a simulacrum of normalcy .
The disturbance to so elemental a part of this region ’ s natural architecture is a measure of only one of the many kinds of severe weather aberrations – from floods and droughts to unseasonal blizzards and massive dust storms – that have been unsettling China of late .
No one can say with any certainty what the causes are .
To try to compensate for these perturbed weather patterns , Chinese officialdom has launched an unprecedented array of costly projects .
These include the titanic $ 55 billion South-North Water Transfer Project , a massive engineering effort to construct three canals to bring water from China ’ s normally wet south to its arid north ; a widespread campaign to dig ever-deeper wells ; a nationwide tree-planting campaign ; and even an extensive effort at “ weather modification . ”
According to Zheng Guoguang , the Director of the China Meteorological Administration , “ Science and technology will answer the prayers of those living through the harshest drought in decades . ”
He says that two-thirds of China ’ s almost 3,000 counties have tried artificial methods to induce more rainfall , sometimes resulting in lawsuits over rights to mine passing clouds for water .
Such efforts , Zheng reports , have involved some 6,533 cannons , 5,939 rocket launchers , and numerous aircraft in an attempt to seed clouds across one-third of China ’ s landmass with dry ice , ammonia , and silver iodide .
But can science and technology really solve problems that are not caused by China alone ?
More and more scientists are beginning to suspect that global warming has caused the radically changed patterns of precipitation now seen across China .
If true , China will never resolve droughts such as the current one in Guizhou by itself , regardless of how many large-scale engineering projects the government undertakes , or how well organized remedial efforts are .
After all , global problems demand global solutions .
When Chairman Mao still reigned supreme , one of his most vaunted principles was zili gengsheng , or “ self-reliance . ”
Since China had been bullied , invaded , semi-colonized , and even occupied during most of his formative years , he was deeply suspicious that any foreign country – even a “ fraternal ” Communist ally – could ever be relied upon to leave China alone , much less actually help it .
As a result , the Party leadership became steeped in suspicion and distrust toward the outside world , especially toward the so-called “ great powers . ”
Even today , with Mao ’ s revolution long gone and globalization having knit a new fabric of inter-dependence around China , there remains , particularly among older leaders , a residual wariness about relying on collaboration with outsiders , especially when it comes to “ core interests . ”
But it is not just world markets that have enmeshed China in a new commons .
Issues such as nuclear proliferation and the global environment – and especially climate change – have also snuck up on China ’ s leaders ( and everyone else ) .
Like it or not , leaders everywhere are now enfolded in an inescapable web .
So , despite China ’ s predilection for aloofness , cooperation is not merely an option , but a necessity .
And that means that China also must reconsider its rigid notion of sovereignty .
This is a difficult adjustment for any country to make , especially one like China , which has a history of imagining itself as being at the center of the world while also remaining an inviolable entity that can close its doors whenever it chooses to do so .
That time is past .
China ’ s leaders have been committed to a process of “ opening ” for more than a generation .
But they remain neuralgic about any hint of outside interference , including even the suggestion that their nation ’ s business might also be the business of other peoples , and vice versa .
The drought in Guizhou , whatever its cause , is a reminder that the fate of China ’ s people has become inextricably linked to what happens elsewhere , and that no country can opt out or find unilateral solutions separate from the global commonweal any longer .
