Evolutionary Theory ’ s Welcome Crisis
EXETER – Those who believe that a supernatural being created the universe have never posed an intellectual challenge to evolutionary theory .
But creationists , whether biblical fundamentalists or believers in “ intelligent design , ” do pose a threat to scientific thinking .
Indeed , creationism ’ s insidious genius lies in its ability to reinvent evolution in its own image as a dogmatic belief system – and thus the antithesis of science .
The creationists are right about one thing : contrary to the impression given by much popular writing on the subject , the theory of evolution is in crisis .
But this is a positive development , because it reflects the non-linear progress of scientific knowledge , characterized by what Thomas Kuhn described in his influential book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions as “ paradigm shifts . ”
For the last 70 years , the dominant paradigm in evolutionary science has been the so-called “ new synthesis . ”
Widely publicized in recent years by Oxford evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins , the new synthesis unites Darwin ’ s theory of natural selection with Mendelian genetics , which explains heredity .
The current crisis in evolutionary science does not imply complete rejection of this paradigm .
Rather , it entails a major , progressive reorganization of existing knowledge , without undermining the fundamental tenets of evolutionary theory : organisms alive today developed from significantly different organisms in the distant past ; dissimilar organisms may share common ancestors ; and natural selection has played a crucial role in this process .
Other assumptions , however , are under threat .
For example , in the traditional “ tree of life ” representation of evolution , the branches always move apart , never merging , implying that species ’ ancestry follows a linear path , and that all evolutionary changes along this path occur within the lineage being traced .
But examination of genomes – particularly microbes – has shown that genes moving between distantly related organisms are an important catalyst of evolutionary change .
Moreover , the new synthesis assumes that the main drivers of evolution are small mutations generated by chance within a species .
But recent evidence suggests that large changes , caused by the absorption of a chunk of alien genetic material , may be just as significant .
Indeed , the absorption of entire organisms – such as the two bacteria that formed the first eukaryotic cell ( the more complex cell type found in multicellular animals ) – can generate large and crucial evolutionary change .
Further destabilizing evolutionary theory is the growing realization that many factors , not just the genome , determine an individual organism ’ s development .
Ironically , as the discovery of DNA ’ s structure – initially lauded as the final act in the triumph of the new synthesis – led to a better understanding of genomes ’ functioning , it ended up weakening belief in their unique role in directing biological development .
Those who long deplored the omission of development from evolutionary models – a decades-old critique made under the scientific banner of evolutionary developmental biology ( “ evo-devo ” ) – together with the insistence that organisms ’ development draws on a wide variety of resources , have been vindicated .
Recent developments in molecular biology have put the final nail in the coffin of traditional genetic determinism .
For example , epigenetics – the study of heritable modifications of the genome that do not involve alterations to the genetic code – is on the rise .
And the many kinds of small RNA molecules are increasingly recognized as forming a regulatory layer above the genome .
Beyond undermining the gene-centered theories of evolution that have dominated public consciousness for several decades , these developments call for new philosophical frameworks .
Traditional reductionist views of science , with their focus on “ bottom-up ” mechanisms , do not suffice in the quest to understand top-down and circular causality and a world of nested processes .
This brings us back to where we started .
Radically rethinking evolutionary theory invariably attracts the attention of creationists , who gleefully announce that if professional advocates of Darwinism cannot agree , the concept must be in retreat .
And , evolutionists , confronted with this response , tend to circle the wagons and insist that everyone is in agreement .
But nothing more clearly demonstrates that science and creationism are polar opposites than the latter ’ s assumption that disagreement signals failure .
In fact , disagreement – and the deeper insights that result from it – enables new approaches to scientific understanding .
For science , unlike for dogmatic belief systems , disagreement is to be encouraged .
Evolutionary theory ’ s current contretemps – and our inability to predict where the field will be in 50 years – are a cause for celebration .
We should leave the creationists to their hollow convictions and happily embrace the uncertainties inherent in a truly empirical approach to understanding the world .
