The Education Antidote to Radicalization
DUBAI – No visitor to the Middle East can avoid noticing the yawning gap between the educational , entrepreneurial , and occupational aspirations of the region ’ s young people and the harsh reality that deprives so many of them of a positive future .
Indeed , in the Middle East , half of those aged 18-25 are either unemployed or underemployed .
Aggravating this situation is the global refugee crisis , which has displaced some 30 million children , six million from Syria alone , very few of whom are likely to return home during their school-age years .
It should come as no surprise that the group known in the region as Daesh ( the Islamic State ) believes that it can find fertile ground for recruitment in this vast population of dispossessed and disaffected young people .
Daesh propagandists are misusing social media in the way that their extremist predecessors and contemporaries have sometimes misused mosques – as a forum for radicalization .
The group consistently posts content that challenges the possibility of coexistence between Islam and the West and calls young people to jihad .
The grotesquely violent videos that Daesh produces have shock appeal .
But what really attracts disaffected young people is the invitation to be part of something that seems larger than themselves and the societies in which they live .
Shiraz Maher of the International Center for the Study of Radicalization ( ICSR ) at King ’ s College London identifies a common thread of sentiment among recruits : “ righteous indignation , defiance , a sense of persecution , and a refusal to conform . ”
As a recent Quilliam Foundation report concludes , Daesh plays on the youthful desire to be part of something worthwhile ; it is the organization ’ s utopian appeal that is most alluring to new recruits .
Given this , few would disagree that we find ourselves in a generational battle for hearts and minds that cannot be won by military means alone .
Hard power can eliminate Daesh ’ s hardcore leaders . But we will need more than that to convince nearly 200 million young Muslims that extremism is , quite literally , a dead end .
There are many examples of under-the-radar operations working to counter extremism across the Indian subcontinent and the Middle East : children ’ s magazines in Pakistan , videos aimed at teenagers in North Africa , radio stations in the Middle East , and books and publications opposing Al Qaeda .
They can help to expose the truth about life in Daesh – that it is brutal , corrupt , and prone to internal purges – in several ways , including by drawing attention to defections .
As a 2014 report states , “ [ the very existence of defectors ] shatters the image of unity and determination that [ the group ] seeks to convey . ”
But we must be more ambitious if we are to win the war of ideas , sustaining the cultural space that Daesh calls the “ the grey zone , ” which it longs to destroy . It is a space in which Muslims and non-Muslims can coexist , discover their shared values , and cooperate .
Peter Neumann , the director of the ICSR , has proposed a YouTube contest for videos that explain the failings of Daesh .
“ You would receive 5,000 videos in no time , ” he says . “ Four thousand are junk , but 1,000 of them are effective – 1,000 videos against [ Daesh ] propaganda . ”
The best long-term tool for countering extremism , however , is education .
In Jaffa , Israel , a school run by the Church of Scotland teaches the virtues of tolerance to Muslim , Jewish , and Christian children .
Throughout Lebanon , a common school curriculum championing religious diversity – including the “ refusal of any radicalism and religious or sectarian seclusion ” – is being taught to Sunni , Shia , and Christian children starting at the age of nine .
The country has also introduced double shifts in its school system to accommodate some 200,000 Syrian refugee children .
If troubled Lebanon , wracked by sectarian violence and religious divides , can champion coexistence and provide Syrian refugees with a chance to study , there is no reason other countries in the region should not follow its example .
The choice could not be clearer .
We can stand by and watch a new generation of web-savvy Muslim youth be deluged with false claims that Islam cannot coexist with Western values .
Or we can recognize that the young people of the Middle East and the rest of the Muslim world share the aspirations of young people in every other part of the world .
All the evidence indicates that the region ’ s young people want education , employment , and the chance to make the most of their talents .
