Europe ’ s Bad Example
LONDON – The death toll resulting from Europe ’ s paralysis in responding to the influx of refugees from the Middle East and Africa continues to rise .
Hundreds of thousands of others have suffered unnecessarily .
The European Union ’ s reputation has been battered , despite bold leadership from Germany , Sweden , and the European Commission .
Bitter divisions among member states have jeopardized the Schengen Area of borderless travel within the EU .
Populists are having a field day .
But the EU ’ s failure to devise a cohesive response has had another dire , if less commented-upon , consequence : As Europe ’ s leaders stumble from one inconclusive summit to another , they have handed the rest of the world an excuse for similar inaction .
If the EU cannot get its act together to confront a crisis directly affecting its member countries , why should others leap into action ?
Let there be no misunderstanding : Europe alone is not responsible for the wellbeing of all the people fleeing persecution in Afghanistan , Eritrea , Syria , and elsewhere .
These desperate souls are the collective responsibility of the entire world community , as the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees makes abundantly clear .
But the immoral and xenophobic posturing of a handful of EU states has allowed other countries to be bystanders , in turn damaging the global refugee system – of which Europeans have been the main beneficiaries over the past 64 years .
So , regardless of what European leaders decide at their latest summit , it is past time for the international community to act in support of the world ’ s refugees and others who have been forcibly displaced .
A few countries already have stepped up .
Brazil has issued thousands of humanitarian visas to Syrians .
Venezuela has offered to take in 20,000 .
But most have been noticeably silent .
Today , just 100,000 out of 20 million refugees benefit each year from the UN refugee agency ’ s resettlement program , which provides permanent new homes in stable countries ( a mere 26 participate ) .
Most of the rest languish in conditions that offer generally dismal prospects .
Expanding resettlement capacity , therefore , should be one goal of global action .
The potential is enormous .
In Iceland , 11,000 families have offered to host refugees , as have many thousands of others throughout Europe .
Resettlement via “ private sponsorship ” – whereby individuals , communities , and NGOs take responsibility for families – is stymied only by governments ’ failure to set up systems to vet and match refugees with sponsors .
Equally important , adequate support must finally be given to frontline states , like Jordan , Lebanon , and Turkey .
This is the best way to stem refugees ’ dangerous efforts to cross the Mediterranean .
Incomprehensibly , the world has failed to provide funds for even basic needs like food and housing , let alone for the schools , health care , and training that would persuade refugees to stay closer to home .
The UN refugee agency ’ s funding for Syria , which supports humanitarian agencies and development aid for neighboring countries , has received about one-third of the $ 4.5 billion needed this year .
The World Food Program , a backbone of the refugee system , has met only two-thirds of its 2015 funding needs , compelling it to slash support to hundreds of thousands of Syrians .
But global action must go well beyond offers of temporary or permanent refuge for the displaced , or funding for frontline countries .
Countries could contribute in many other ways as well .
Perhaps the single most effective contribution would be to establish less cumbersome means for asylum-seekers to reach safety .
Providing humanitarian visas – which can be issued with minimal delay – constitutes one clear commitment countries could make immediately .
Over time , countries could also establish procedures enabling asylum-seekers to apply more easily for labor , student , or family reunification visas .
Meanwhile , special economic zones could be established in frontline countries to attract investment and create jobs for refugees , with the G-20 offering preferential trade status .
Tax breaks and other support could be given to companies offering opportunities to refugees .
A global response also must harness the extraordinary potential of civil society and the private sector .
Indeed , the real leadership in this crisis has come from millions of European citizens , whose everyday acts of compassion have put their craven leaders to shame .
Then there are the bold actions of moral entrepreneurs like Chris and Regina Catrambone , who created the Migrant Offshore Aid Station to rescue people at sea ; the founders of Refugees Welcome , the Airbnb-type platform to match asylum seekers with families willing to host them ; and Refugee Air , a pioneering Swedish effort to enable qualified asylum-seekers to fly to Europe .
These and similar civil-society initiatives need to be supported , coordinated , and amplified .
The potential on the corporate side is immense as well .
Google is matching public contributions to a variety of organizations responding to the crisis .
The Ikea Foundation is a major partner of the UN refugee agency in providing shelter to refugees .
And Turkish-American Hamdi Ulukaya , founder of Chobani yogurt , has pledged $ 700 million to support refugees .
There is no reason that thousands of companies cannot make similar commitments .
The Syrian exodus is the largest refugee crisis for a generation , and the EU should be doing much more than it is .
But not all solutions will come from Europe – and there is no legal or moral reason why they should .
