Getting to “ Yes ” on Missile Defense
WASHINGTON , DC – The recent visit by Dmitry Rogozin , Special Envoy of the Russian President for Missile-Defense Cooperation with NATO , to the US State Department highlights one of the many obstacles to Russian-US cooperation on ballistic missile defense ( BMD ) .
Russia ’ s foreign and defense ministries have both asserted primacy in the BMD dialogue with the US , but with competing perspectives and priorities .
Russia ’ s diplomats have generally , but not always , adopted a harder line , while Rogozin has been pushing his own BMD agenda .
Another complexity is uncertainty over who will rule Russia .
Given the differing views of President Dmitri Medvedev and former President and current Prime Minister Vladimir Putin – the main candidates in next year ’ s presidential election – many Russian bureaucrats prefer to avoid offering bold initiatives regarding BMD or other strategic arms-control issues until they know who the next president will be .
Medvedev seems less fearful of NATO than his semi-paranoid predecessor , but Putin has in the past shown surprising flexibility on some strategic issues .
The joint missile-threat assessments that the Russian government recently concluded with NATO and the US revealed much overlap among the participating technical experts , but some fundamental differences between the policy strategists .
For example , while Western representatives generally view Iran as an emerging threat , many Russians still insist that the Iranian regime remains a proliferation challenge that can be managed through non-BMD means such as diplomacy and limited international sanctions .
More generally , for reasons of pride and history , many Russians refuse to believe that US policymakers have become more concerned about Iran ’ s minimal strategic potential than they are about Russia ’ s robust nuclear forces .
They therefore presume that , despite American professions to the contrary , the US seeks BMD capabilities that can negate Russia ’ s strategic deterrent under the guise of protecting America and its allies from Iran .
In bilateral negations with Moscow , US officials have been offering four concrete BMD collaboration projects :
· Bi-national and multi-national jointly manned centers where Russian personnel can see the non-threatening nature of US and NATO missile-defense activities ;
· Joint Russian-US expert studies regarding how BMD might affect Russia ’ s nuclear deterrent and what steps can be taken to minimize any problems ;
· Expanded NATO-Russian theater-level BMD exercises that build on earlier collaboration – disrupted by Russia ’ s August 2008 war with Georgia – and that rehearse how deployed NATO and Russian forces can jointly defend against missile threats ; and
· An underlying legal framework to support these and other cooperative projects .
Russian officials have expressed some interest in these projects ( some of which were originally proposed by the Kremlin ) , but they have insisted on first achieving consensus with the US on underlying strategic principles .
Above all , they want the US to sign a legally binding agreement affirming that US BMD will never threaten Russia ’ s strategic deterrent .
American officials stress that they will not try to negate Russia ’ s strategic deterrent – an impossible effort , given the size and sophistication of Russian ’ s offensive nuclear forces .
But the Obama administration cannot sign an agreement stating that it will deliberately constrain America ’ s ability to protect itself and its allies from foreign missile attacks .
Beyond these specific BMD discussions , US arms-control efforts with Russia currently focus on strategic stability talks and other dialogues designed to establish a favorable conceptual foundation for the next round of formal arms-control negotiations .
These negotiations might address many of the issues set aside in the rush to conclude the New START Treaty .
Besides missile defense , topics could include non-strategic ( tactical ) nuclear weapons ; reserve nuclear warheads that have been removed from operational arsenals , but have yet to be destroyed ; and the placement of conventional munitions on strategic delivery vehicles , such as long-range ballistic missiles , that are normally used to carry nuclear warheads .
These discussions are occurring on a bilateral basis , between Russia and the US , and multilaterally , within the context of the so-called P-5 talks , which involve all five permanent United Nations Security Council members – the only countries that the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty legally permits to retain nuclear weapons pending universal disarmament .
Recent US-Russian dialogues have addressed ways to move from a world characterized by mutually assured destruction to one based on mutually assured stability .
These efforts have encountered difficulties .
Only a small group of Russian specialists , primarily nongovernmental experts , embrace and employ US strategic concepts .
Many Russians still employ negative and outdated Cold War constructs when discussing Russia-US nuclear relations .
Despite these problems , some of Russia ’ s BMD-related concerns can be addressed through mutually agreed transparency and confidence-building initiatives .
Although constraining future US BMD programs with legally binding agreements is politically untenable , US officials could inform their Russian counterparts of their long-range BMD plans without much difficulty .
The US Defense Department regularly includes such data in its budget and planning documents .
Support also exists for jointly manned centers , Russian expert visits to NATO BMD facilities , and exchange of early-warning information from Russian and NATO radars regarding potential missile launches .
One hopeful sign is that Russian officials have recently acknowledged the impracticality of the sectoral BMD plan that Medvedev proposed at last November ’ s NATO-Russian Council summit .
The idea was that Russia would protect NATO from attacking missiles traveling over its territory , with the expectation that the alliance would then forego developing defenses capable of engaging missiles over Russia .
NATO officials persuasively argued that their collective-defense commitment could not be delegated to a non-NATO member .
A more practical problem is that Russia lacks the capability to destroy space-traveling ballistic missiles .
Russian officials need to retreat from their politically impossible demand for legally binding limitations on US BMD .
They should instead consider cooperating on concrete BMD projects .
Better still , they should redirect their cooperative efforts to easier but important issues , such as securing stability in Afghanistan after NATO ’ s military withdrawal .
In that case , productive collaboration on other issues might become easier .
