Can Palestine Win the Peace ?
RAMALLAH – The rollout of the war-ending ceasefire agreement between Israel and Palestine last month was impressive .
With almost perfect synchronization , Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas announced the end of the war on Gaza in a televised broadcast from his Ramallah headquarters , while Hamas leaders called on Palestinians in Gaza to take to the streets to celebrate their supposed victory .
Of course , with more than 2,200 Palestinians – mostly civilians – killed , over 10,000 injured , and thousands of homes , schools , mosques , and other structures destroyed , the war ’ s outcome can hardly be called a victory .
Nonetheless , this is the first time that Palestinians have been able to create something close to mutual deterrence with the Israelis .
Strengthening Palestine ’ s position further is the United Nations General Assembly ’ s recognition of Palestine as a non-member observer state , which Palestinian diplomats can use to exert political pressure on Israel to take their national aspirations seriously .
Palestine ’ s membership in UN agencies , & nbsp ; not to mention the possibility of joining & nbsp ; the International Criminal Court , & nbsp ; has also boosted its leaders ’ bargaining power .
All of these levers – not to mention the tremendous sympathy and support Palestinians have received from international observers – will be essential to ensure that the high price Palestinians paid during the 51-day war was not in vain . But the levers will be useless if the leaders of Hamas and Fatah , the two dominant Palestinian factions , fail to maintain a united front .
The effectiveness of such a cooperative approach was apparent in the Egypt-sponsored indirect talks with Israel .
The unified Palestinian delegation was convenient for Egypt and Israel , both of which consider Hamas a terrorist organization , and for Palestine , because it helped to bring an end to the violence .
And it was a political boon for Abbas , who was able to field a delegation headed by one of his confidants , Azzam al-Ahmad , and thus claim the right to announce the ceasefire .
Having withstood the test of war , the Palestinian unity government that was created less than two months before the conflict began will now become the main vehicle for Gaza ’ s reconstruction . But Prime Minister Rami Hamdallah will face considerable challenges – beginning with Gaza , where his executive authority is severely limited .
More broadly , the unity government ’ s success depends on the ability of the Fatah-led Palestinian government and Hamas – and , to whatever extent possible , Islamic Jihad – to cement their cooperation by agreeing on a path toward liberation and freedom . A clear , realistic strategy will be integral to Palestine ’ s efforts to win support from regional and international actors eager to end the decades-old conflict with Israel .
This will , of course , require compromises from all sides .
Hamas must reconsider its refusal to recognize Israel .
For its part , the Palestinian leadership must pursue active resistance alongside negotiations with Israel , while defending more vigorously Palestinians ’ right of return , which it has often ignored in an effort to appease the Israelis .
But establishing a unified strategy is only the first step .
Ordinary Palestinians , who will undoubtedly have to make sacrifices , must be brought on board – especially given the heavy price they incurred during the recent conflict , in which they had no say .
With broad public support , Palestine ’ s unity government will be able to rally the international community behind its fair and reasonable demands for a truly independent state , free of sieges , separation barriers , and foreign settlements – demands that fall squarely within the realm of basic human rights .
Just as the international community isolated South Africa until it abandoned apartheid , it can put pressure on Israel through boycotts , divestment , and sanctions , while calling upon Israel ’ s allies to stop providing aid and arms .
If Palestine ’ s leaders truly want to end the cycle of violence in Gaza , they must begin by resolving their own internal disagreements and present themselves as a cohesive , reliable , and committed negotiating party .
They must band together behind the simple but powerful goal expressed by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to the General Assembly in New York : “ We will build again , but this must be the last time to rebuild . ”
For Palestine ’ s unity government , the time to begin the rebuilding process is now .
If Fatah and Hamas are willing to do what it takes to achieve peace , this may well be their best chance .
