Europe ’ s Vindictive Privatization Plan for Greece
ATHENS – On July 12 , the summit of eurozone leaders dictated its terms of surrender to Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras , who , terrified by the alternatives , accepted all of them .
One of those terms concerned the disposition of Greece ’ s remaining public assets .
Eurozone leaders demanded that Greek public assets be transferred to a Treuhand-like fund – a fire-sale vehicle similar to the one used after the fall of the Berlin Wall to privatize quickly , at great financial loss , and with devastating effects on employment all of the vanishing East German state ’ s public property .
This Greek Treuhand would be based in – wait for it – Luxembourg , and would be run by an outfit overseen by Germany ’ s finance minister , Wolfgang Schäuble , the author of the scheme .
It would complete the fire sales within three years .
But , whereas the work of the original Treuhand was accompanied by massive West German investment in infrastructure and large-scale social transfers to the East German population , the people of Greece would receive no corresponding benefit of any sort .
Euclid Tsakalotos , who succeeded me as Greece ’ s finance minister two weeks ago , did his best to ameliorate the worst aspects of the Greek Treuhand plan .
He managed to have the fund domiciled in Athens , and he extracted from Greece ’ s creditors ( the so-called troika of the European Commission , the European Central Bank , and the International Monetary Fund ) the important concession that the sales could extend to 30 years , rather than a mere three .
This was crucial , for it will permit the Greek state to hold undervalued assets until their price recovers from the current recession-induced lows .
Alas , the Greek Treuhand remains an abomination , and it should be a stigma on Europe ’ s conscience .
Worse , it is a wasted opportunity .
The plan is politically toxic , because the fund , though domiciled in Greece , will effectively be managed by the troika .
It is also financially noxious , because the proceeds will go toward servicing what even the IMF now admits is an unpayable debt .
And it fails economically , because it wastes a wonderful opportunity to create homegrown investments to help counter the recessionary impact of the punitive fiscal consolidation that is also part of the July 12 summit ’ s “ terms . ”
It did not have to be this way .
On June 19 , I communicated to the German government and to the troika an alternative proposal , as part of a document entitled “ Ending the Greek Crisis ” :
“ The Greek government proposes to bundle public assets ( excluding those pertinent to the country ’ s security , public amenities , and cultural heritage ) into a central holding company to be separated from the government administration and to be managed as a private entity , under the aegis of the Greek Parliament , with the goal of maximizing the value of its underlying assets and creating a homegrown investment stream .
The Greek state will be the sole shareholder , but will not guarantee its liabilities or debt . ”
The holding company would play an active role readying the assets for sale .
It would “ issue a fully collateralized bond on the international capital markets ” to raise € 30-40 billion ( $ 32-43 billion ) , which , “ taking into account the present value of assets , ” would “ be invested in modernizing and restructuring the assets under its management . ”
The plan envisaged an investment program of 3-4 years , resulting in “ additional spending of 5 % of GDP per annum , ” with current macroeconomic conditions implying “ a positive growth multiplier above 1.5 , ” which “ should boost nominal GDP growth to a level above 5 % for several years . ”
This , in turn , would induce “ proportional increases in tax revenues , ” thereby “ contributing to fiscal sustainability , while enabling the Greek government to exercise spending discipline without further shrinking the social economy . ”
In this scenario , the primary surplus ( which excludes interest payments ) would “ achieve ‘ escape velocity ’ magnitudes in absolute as well as percentage terms over time . ”
As a result , the holding company would “ be granted a banking license ” within a year or two , “ thus turning itself into a full-fledged Development Bank capable of crowding in private investment to Greece and of entering into collaborative projects with the European Investment Bank . ”
The Development Bank that we proposed would “ allow the government to choose which assets are to be privatized and which not , while guaranteeing a greater impact on debt reduction from the selected privatizations . ”
After all , “ asset values should increase by more than the actual amount spent on modernization and restructuring , aided by a program of public-private partnerships whose value is boosted according to the probability of future privatization . ”
Our proposal was greeted with deafening silence .
More precisely , the Eurogroup of eurozone finance ministers and the troika continued to leak to the global media that the Greek authorities had no credible , innovative proposals on offer – their standard refrain .
A few days later , once the powers-that-be realized that the Greek government was about to capitulate fully to the troika ’ s demands , they saw fit to impose upon Greece their demeaning , unimaginative , and pernicious Treuhand model .
At a turning point in European history , our innovative alternative was thrown into the dustbin .
