Don ’ t Forget Wim Duisenberg ’ s Legacy
The most surprising and controversial thing about last December ’ s rate hike by the European Central Bank was that , after two and a half years of keeping interest rates at exceptionally low levels , the bank ventured an increase of only 25 basis points with no promise of more to come .
Political pressure on Europe ’ s central bank may be the reason for that timid move .
Jean-Claude Trichet , the current ECB president , may be in the same job but not the same environment as his predecessor Wim Duisenberg , who famously remarked , “ I hear the politicians , but I don ’ t listen . ”
Political pressure on the ECB today is much greater than in Duisenberg ’ s time .
The political environment is much more hostile .
Some of this pressure may be seeping through and affecting ECB policy decisions .
This is an extremely negative development ­ – and one of the central bank ’ s biggest challenges for 2006 .
Not only will politicians ’ influence be towards monetary excess , which of course is a serious enough matter for a bank whose primary mandate is price stability , but also the excess will constitute a serious barrier to structural reform , which is essential for European prosperity in a competitive global economy .
Increasingly , Europe ’ s politicians regard excess liquidity and economic reform as substitutes for one another .
The more the bank gives on liquidity , the less the politicians will do on reform .
Duisenberg recognized this linkage and held firm .
The ECB ’ s paltry rate hike in December , together with the supine promise of no plans for further monetary tightening , demonstrates that Trichet is no Duisenberg .
Europe ’ s finance ministers have played a clever game with the ECB .
Even though they were already resigned to a 25-basis-point rate increase , the politicians made a big show of being opposed to it , aiming to prevent what they really feared and what was certainly more warranted : a 50-basis-point hike and a warning of more on the way .
Their strategy worked .
Luxembourg ’ s finance minister , Jean-Claude Juncker , diplomatically declared after the December meeting that , “ The result could have been worse . ”
Indeed , even the markets were fooled , giving the ECB a good grade for its unremarkable rate hike .
Inflationary expectations , as measured by the rates on certain market instruments , actually fell after the hike , indicating increased confidence that the ECB will keep a lid on price pressures .
Although the meager rate hike was presented as a consensus of the ECB ’ s Governing Council , it soon became apparent that the decision had been controversial .
Some Council members , unhappy with Trichet ’ s dovish stance at the December press conference , made their displeasure known via the press soon after .
In an interview with Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung , for example , Bundesbank president Axel Weber made it clear that future rate hikes were very much on the table .
Others spoke out as well , and the futures markets quickly predicted another 25-basis-point rate hike in March .
The consensus alleged at the December press conference simply did not exist .
With political pressures encroaching on the bank ’ s policy decisions and a faux consensus , it is not surprising that there is now nostalgia in Frankfurt for earlier times and for Wim Duisenberg , even among his former critics .
Duisenberg ’ s great skills – under-appreciated by the press and public alike – were genuine consensus-building in a potentially divisive body and , in Trichet ’ s own words , “ an exceptional ability to keep his nerve in some highly demanding and extremely hostile environments . ”
In particular , the stubborn Dutchman understood the extreme danger if Europe ’ s top monetary authority became too cozy with Europe ’ s politicians , especially at a time when many EU finance ministers view economic reform and excess liquidity as being essentially the same thing .
Wim Duisenberg died last year , but his values , philosophy , and wisdom must not be allowed to die with him .
The New Year provides a perfect opportunity for Jean-Claude Trichet to resolve that , despite the more trying circumstances in which he must operate , his own policies and procedures will more faithfully reflect Duisenberg and his legacy .
Europe deserves no less .
