Europe ’ s Paradoxical Parliament
What do members of the European Parliament ( MEPs ) actually do ?
Most of the 375 million or so people eligible to vote in the European elections on June 4-7 probably have only a hazy idea , or none at all , which explains why voter turnout throughout the European Union is likely to be disastrously low .
Thirty years ago , when the first elections to the parliament were held , almost two-thirds of the electorate voted , but over the years , participation has dropped steadily .
This year it may be 30 % .
Europe ’ s politicians are by and large proud of the EU and the way it has both grown and deepened .
But it is also the EU ’ s growing complexity that is at the root of voters ’ waning enthusiasm , so their indifference is a matter for serious concern .
The European elections are themselves curious and unsatisfactory ; there are no obvious EU-wide issues that people can vote for or against , and , with the average MEP ’ s constituency numbering well over half a million people , the vote is not a test of personal popularity , either .
In most parts of Europe , the elections will be an opportunity for protest votes on national issues .
Paradoxically , though , great deal hangs on the elections ’ outcome .
The number of seats won by the socialists and centre-right parties is likely to influence the make-up of the next European Commission – and thus the EU ’ s political agenda until 2014 .
But you wouldn ’ t know this from the low level of media interest .
Most journalists , like national electorates , have little understanding of the significant shift in Europe ’ s political decision-making over the last 20 years .
They hang on to the outdated notion that their national parliaments make all key decisions , when in reality some four-fifths of the policies that determine Europe ’ s future are taken in Brussels and then rubber-stamped by national parliamentarians .
A glance at any EU member state ’ s parliamentary calendar shows that lawmaking there is largely confined to domestic issues . The specialist MEPs , on the other hand , use their expertise and their steadily increasing powers to exert a good deal of influence on EU legislation .
But this does not mean that the European Parliament is a “ real ” parliament .
It can ’ t raise taxes , declare war , or sack a government ( even though in theory it can dismiss all the members of the European Commission en masse , the so-called “ nuclear option ” that is unlikely ever to be used ) .
More to the point , perhaps , the European Parliament doesn ’ t really work on the same basis of left-right politics as national parliaments do ; it deals in practicalities more than ideologies .
For all that , the European Parliament ’ s importance goes far beyond its members ’ technical expertise on complex issues , or its usefulness as a democratic fig leaf for an EU decision-making process that is dominated by inter-governmental horse-trading .
The parliament has been able to claw greater power for itself because it is the only mechanism Europe has for questioning and challenging EU policy proposals , and ironing out the sometimes clumsy and high-handed diktats of Brussels ’ officialdom .
Unfortunately , however , the European Parliament is fairly inept at selling itself to public opinion .
A recent Gallup poll showed that 36 % of people questioned in all 27 EU countries no longer trust the parliament , with the only consolation being that even more , 37 % , now mistrust the European Commission .
Of those who said they wouldn ’ t be voting in this year ’ s European elections , 64 % cited “ lack of information ” as the reason , with 62 % complaining that their vote “ wouldn ’ t change anything . ”
This feeling of ignorance coupled with powerlessness is not entirely the European Parliament ’ s fault .
The combination of high politics and grinding technical detail makes EU policymaking a much less interesting spectacle than national politics , and of course there ’ s the added problem that so many of the players are unknown foreigners .
But , even when the parliament does make an effort to connect with voters , the ponderous bureaucratic culture of its permanent officials tends to spoil things .
Last year , the parliament launched a lamentably amateurish Web-TV broadcasting service whose large budget was spent not on good programming but on doing everything in all the EU ’ s official languages .
So what is to be done ?
Many of the 736 EU parliamentarians are unsung heroes who risk being seen more and more as a problem rather than a solution to the EU ’ s ills .
Rather than tinkering , perhaps the EU should boldly create an American-style bicameral system by turning the parliament into a House of Representatives and electing a Senate to replace the Council of Ministers , with two senators per member state .
But that is probably far too revolutionary for an EU that took 50 years to fashion today ’ s unsatisfactorily hybrid decision-making structures .
