Free Trade with a Human Face
MEXICO CITY – Although many Americans believe immigration is a domestic issue that should be excluded from talks with other governments , this is not a view held by other nations – or by the United States .
Indeed , the US negotiated its first immigration deal in 1907 , maintained for more than two decades a controversial treaty with Mexico covering immigration , and has kept up immigration talks and deals even with Fidel Castro since the early 1960 ’ s .
For many Latin American nations , not just Mexico , immigration is the single most important issue in their relations with the US . The Caribbean islands all have a similarly high proportion of their citizens residing in the US and depend as much as Mexico on remittances .
The same is true for much of Central America . And no part of South America is exempt from this pattern .
So almost all of Latin America is deeply affected by the current immigration climate in the US , and would benefit greatly from the type of comprehensive immigration reform that both John McCain and Barack Obama have supported .
The Bush administration ’ s regrettable decision to build fences along the US-Mexico border , raid workplaces and housing sites , detain and deport foreigners without papers , is viewed in Latin America as being hypocritical and offensive .
The issue is all the more painful and disappointing since most Latin American foreign ministries know full well that these attitudes are pure politics , nothing more .
Everyone knows what viable immigration reform in the US will entail : tightening security at the border , but also including gates in the walls currently being built ; legalizing , with expeditious and sensible fines and conditions , the 15 million or so foreigners present in the US illegally ; and establishing a migrant or temporary worker program that allows a sufficient number of foreigners to satisfy the growing needs of the US economy , with paths both to regular visits home and to US permanent residence .
A second component is political will and timing .
Bush had it right at the beginning : his willingness to negotiate an immigration agreement with Mexico at the start of his term was probably the only way to get it done .
Moving quickly is probably the only way the next president can succeed on this front as well .
If immigration is to become a less heated issue , the US must address the needs of Latin America ’ s economies .
Here , one of the key challenges facing the next US administration lies in the existing and pending free-trade agreements between the US and Latin America .
If John McCain is elected , tinkering with or overhauling NAFTA , CAFTA , and free-trade deals with Chile and Peru , as Barack Obama has proposed , will be unlikely . But , given the likelihood that Democrats will retain their majorities in the US Congress , even McCain would need to modify the agreement with Colombia in order to get it passed .
The pressure to include similar provisions in the other deals would then grow .
If recession drags on and Americans continue to blame trade agreements – erroneously – for growing unemployment , falling wages , and yawning inequality , opposition to these deals will grow .
Instead of waiting for the pressure to mount , the next president would do well to preempt it with an ambitious agenda on free-trade reform that would benefit everyone .
In this respect , the US could learn from the European Union .
American trade agreements have been faulted for limiting themselves to trade .
The response has always been : the US is not Europe , nor is it in the business of nation-building or reconstruction .
But this is exactly what it did , successfully , with the post-1945 Marshall Plan and , unsuccessfully , with Iraq and Afghanistan today .
First , clear and explicit human rights and democracy clauses should be included , along the lines of similar clauses in the Mexican and Chilean Economic Association treaties with the EU .
Second , more specific provisions on labor , the environment , gender equality , and indigenous rights are needed , as well as anti-trust , regulatory , and judicial reform provisions , for reasons both of principle and political expediency .
Although there have been enormous improvements in most of these areas , there remains a huge agenda , particularly with regard to breaking up or regulating monopolies – public , private , commercial , trade union-based – that plague nearly every country in the region .
These revised agreements should include bold , enlightened provisions for infrastructure and “ social-cohesion ” funds , since these can make the difference between muddling through and true success .
Free-trade advocates should not view Obama ’ s demand that these deals be revisited as a mistake , but rather as an opportunity to improve and deepen them ;
McCain ’ s supporters should not see the incorporation of all of the aforementioned inclusions as “ European nonsense , ” but rather as a way to narrow the gap between the agreements ’ promise and their actual results .
Improving Mexican and Central American infrastructure , education , and rule of law , or improving Colombian and Peruvian drug-enforcement efforts and respect for labor laws and human rights , are all in America ’ s interest , and-free trade agreements can help rather than harm such efforts .
If the US and Latin America can face up to the challenges of trade and immigration together , the next US president may leave a weightier mark on the hemispheric relationship than any American leader in three generations .
