American Power after Bin Laden
OXFORD – When one state is preponderant in power resources , observers often refer to the situation as hegemonic .
Today , many pundits argue that other countries ’ rising power and the loss of American influence in a revolutionary Middle East point to the decline of “ American hegemony . ”
But the term is confusing .
For one thing , possession of power resources does not always imply that one can get the outcomes one prefers .
Even the recent death of Osama bin Laden at the hands of United States special forces does not indicate anything about American power one way or the other .
To see why , consider the situation after World War II .
The US accounted for more than one-third of global product and had an overwhelming preponderance in nuclear weapons .
Many considered it a global hegemon .
Nonetheless , the US was unable to prevent the “ loss ” of China , “ roll back ” communism in Eastern Europe , prevent stalemate in the Korean War , defeat Vietnam ’ s National Liberation Front , or dislodge the Castro regime in Cuba .
Even in the era of alleged American hegemony , studies show that only one-fifth of America ’ s efforts to compel change in other countries through military threats were successful , while economic sanctions worked in only half of all cases .
Yet many believe that America ’ s current preponderance in power resources is hegemonic , and that it will decline , like that of Britain before it .
Some Americans react emotionally to that prospect , though it would be ahistorical to believe that the US will have a preponderant share of power resources forever .
But the term “ decline ” conflates two different dimensions of power : absolute decline , in the sense of decay or loss of ability to use one ’ s resources effectively , and relative decline , in which the other states ’ power resources become greater or are used more effectively .
For example , in the seventeenth century , the Netherlands flourished domestically but declined in relative power as other states grew in strength .
Conversely , the Western Roman Empire did not succumb to another state , but instead to internal decay and swarms of barbarians .
Rome was an agrarian society with low economic productivity and a high level of internecine strife .
While the US has problems , it hardly fits the description of absolute decline in ancient Rome , and the analogy to British decline , however popular , is similarly misleading .
Britain had an empire on which the sun never set , ruled more than a quarter of humankind , and enjoyed naval supremacy .
But there are major differences in the relative power resources of imperial Britain and contemporary America .
By World War I , Britain ranked only fourth among the great powers in terms of military personnel , fourth in GDP , and third in military spending .
The costs of defense averaged 2.5-3.4 % of GDP , and the empire was ruled in large part with local troops .
In 1914 , Britain ’ s net export of capital gave it an important financial kitty to draw upon ( though some historians consider that it would have been better to have invested the money in domestic industry ) .
Of the 8.6 million British forces in WWI , nearly one-third were provided by the overseas empire .
With the rise of nationalism , however , it became increasingly difficult for London to declare war on behalf of the empire , the defense of which became a heavier burden .
By contrast , America has had a continental-scale economy immune from nationalist disintegration since 1865 .
For all the loose talk of American empire , the US is less tethered and has more degrees of freedom than Britain ever had .
Indeed , America ’ s geopolitical position differs profoundly from that of imperial Britain : while Britain faced rising neighbors in Germany and Russia , America benefits from two oceans and weaker neighbors .
Despite these differences , Americans are prone to cycles of belief in decline .
The Founding Fathers worried about comparisons to the decline of the Roman republic .
Moreover , cultural pessimism is very American , extending back to the country ’ s Puritan roots .
As Charles Dickens observed a century and a half ago , “ if its individual citizens , to a man , are to be believed , [ America ] always is depressed , and always is stagnated , and always is in an alarming crisis , and never was otherwise . ”
More recently , polls showed widespread belief in decline after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik in 1957 , then again during the Nixon-era economic shocks in the 1970 ’ s , and after Ronald Reagan ’ s budget deficits in the 1980 ’ s .
At the end of that decade , American ’ s believed the country was in decline ; yet , within a decade , they believed that the US was the sole superpower .
Now many have gone back to believing in decline .
Cycles of declinism tell us more about American psychology than about underlying shifts in power resources .
Some observers , such as the Harvard historian Niall Ferguson , believe that “ debating the stages of decline may be a waste of time – it is a precipitous and unexpected fall that should most concern policy makers and citizens . ”
Ferguson believes that a doubling of public debt in the coming decade cannot erode US strength on its own , but that it could weaken a long-assumed faith in America ’ s ability to weather any crisis .
Ferguson is correct that the US will have to come to terms with its budget deficit to maintain international confidence , but , as I show in my book The Future of Power , doing so is within the range of possible outcomes .
America enjoyed a budget surplus only a decade ago , before George W. Bush ’ s tax cuts , two wars , and recession created fiscal instability .
The US economy is still ranked near the top in competitiveness by the World Economic Forum , and the political system , in its own messy way , has slowly begun to wrestle with the necessary changes .
Some believe a political compromise between Republicans and Democrats can be reached before the 2012 election ; others suggest an agreement is more likely after the election .
Either way , fuzzy statements about hegemonic decline would again prove misleading .
