Democracy in Inaction at the World Bank
James Wolfensohn , the president of the World Bank , has announced his intention to leave , and the search is on for a new head of the world ’ s most important multilateral organization promoting development .
The choice is especially important now , when poverty in the Third World is finally being recognized as our greatest problem and challenge .
The World Bank ’ s designation as a “ bank ” understates its importance and its multifaceted roles .
It does lend money to countries to undertake a variety of projects , and to help them through crises ( such as the $ 10 billion it provided to Korea in 1997-1998 ) .
It has been , and is , playing a vital role in post-conflict reconstruction around the world .
But the Bank also provides grants and low-interest loans to the poorest countries , particularly for education and health , and advises these countries on development strategies .
It has often joined with the IMF in strong-arming countries into accepting this “ advice ” : unless they do , they will not only be cut off by the IMF and the World Bank , but also by other donors , and capital markets will be discouraged from providing funds .
Sometimes – its critics will say often – the advice provided by the IMF and World Bank is misguided .
This was certainly true in the 1980 ’ s and early 1990 ’ s , when right-wing ideology dominated , producing a one-size-fits-all prescription entailing privatization , liberalization , and macroeconomic stability ( meaning price stability ) , with little attention to employment , equity , or the environment .
The term “ bank ” is a misnomer in a second sense : while the World Bank refers to its members as “ shareholders , ” it is hardly a private bank .
On the contrary , the World Bank is a global public institution .
But , while the G-7 countries , which dominate voting at the Bank , all declare their commitment to democracy and good governance – and espouse promoting them as one of their central objectives – there is a yawning gap between what they preach and what they practice .
Indeed , the entire process of choosing these international institutions ’ leaders is a historical anachronism that undermines their effectiveness and makes a mockery of the G-7 countries ’ commitment to democracy .
This process , established at the outset 60 years ago , is framed by an agreement that an American would lead the World Bank and a European would lead the IMF .
The American president would choose the Bank ’ s head , and Europe would collectively decide on the IMF leader , with the understanding that the other side would exercise its veto only if a candidate were totally unacceptable .
Within the United States , all major presidential appointments must be ratified by the Senate ; even if rejections are rare , the vetting process is important , for the president knows that he can go only so far .
But the presidency of the World Bank is a rare presidential plum – an appointment that is not subject even to Congressional hearings .
How can advice on democratic reforms be taken seriously when the multilateral institutions that offer it do not subscribe to the same standards of openness , transparency , and participation that they advocate ?
Why should the search for Wolfensohn ’ s successor be limited to an American ( and especially an American loyal to a particular political party ) ?
Why is the search process going on behind closed doors ?
Shouldn ’ t these international public institutions be looking for the best-qualified person , regardless of race , religion , gender , or nationality ?
The two names that have been floated so far ­ – presumably leaked as trial balloons – are particularly disturbing .
To put it bluntly , given the World Bank ’ s importance , consideration of either putative US candidate , Assistant Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz or former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carleton Fiorina , have been highly controversial around the world .
Even if convention allows the American president to appoint the World Bank ’ s head , the organization ’ s success depends on the confidence of others .
Neither Wolfowitz nor Fiorina have any training or experience in economic development or financial markets .
Of course , some past appointees turned out to be far better than anticipated ; they rose to the occasion , despite qualifications that , in any open and objective selection process , would never even have left them on the short list .
They proved that there is always a chance of outperforming .
But this does not outweigh the risk of underperforming , which is why the best policy is to look for the best candidate .
There are some absolutely first-rate individuals who could step into the job , people who have shown their command of economic development , their intellect and personal integrity , and their political and managerial skills .
Such potential candidates include former Mexican president Ernesto Zedillo , a Yale Ph.D. who now teaches there and has been strongly supported in an editorial in the Financial Times ;
Arminio Fraga , a Princeton Ph.D. and former head of Brazil ’ s central bank ; and Kemal Dervis , a former World Bank vice-president who has taught at Princeton and successfully managed one of Turkey ’ s crises as finance minister .
Why should the world settle for anything less than candidates of this caliber ?
It is time that the G-7 countries back up their democratic rhetoric with action .
Many stood up to the US as it pushed for the war in Iraq .
They were right to be skeptical about US claims of an imminent danger from weapons of mass destruction .
What is at stake here is no less important : the lives and well being of billions in the Third World depend on a global war on poverty .
Choosing the right general in that war will not assure victory , but choosing the wrong one surely enhances the chances of failure .
