Terrorists and the Refugee Battleground
BUDAPEST – Europe and the United States should open their doors to Syrian and Iraqi refugees .
They are the victims of the Islamic State and Syrian President Bashar al-Assad ’ s brutal regime .
Terrorism has destroyed their homelands .
Not only is offering them refuge the right thing to do ; it is also good for our security .
The Islamic State ’ s attacks in Paris in November were designed to produce fear by bringing the group ’ s crimes against humanity into the heart of Europe ; and politicians , by equating refugees with terrorists , are pandering to it .
Razor-wire fences and political barriers are being erected in the path of asylum-seekers .
In the battle for hearts and minds , branding refugees as security threats – as politicians on both sides of the Atlantic are doing – only fuels intolerance and gives terrorists a potent recruitment tool to convince young Muslims that the West has no place for them .
This is a battle of values that we should be winning .
Modern Europe was built on the ashes of World War II and the Holocaust .
Europe ’ s values – and those of its principal postwar sponsor , the US – are tolerance , diversity , and human rights .
Europe has vast experience with refugees .
Millions of Europeans fled from violence and persecution during and after World War II .
In the 1990s , a genocidal conflict in the Balkans forced hundreds of thousands of the region ’ s residents to seek refuge in countries to the north .
The massive exodus from the Middle East as hundreds of thousands flee war and terror is just the latest chapter in Europe ’ s long history as a destination for refugees .
Meanwhile , for more than a century , the US , in the words of the poet Emma Lazarus , has provided refuge to “ huddled masses yearning to breathe free . ”
Security concerns have been addressed as each new wave has arrived .
More than a million Vietnamese were resettled in the US during and after the Vietnam War , and nearly 400,000 refugees from Muslim-majority countries have been accepted by the US since the September 11 , 2001 , attacks .
It is this proud history that European and American politicians are ignoring .
Hungary and other Central European countries have sealed their borders , and right-wing political parties across Europe have stoked anti-Muslim mania .
In the US , Republican politicians – congressmen , governors and presidential candidates – are trying to derail the resettlement of a miniscule number of Syrian refugees ( just 10,000 ) in the US .
In short , Western anti-refugee politics are playing directly into the hands of the Islamic State ’ s propagandists .
Western leaders cannot simply wish the refugee crisis away by turning their backs on those fleeing terror .
Asylum-seekers will continue to pour into Europe in large numbers , with the United Nations Refugee Agency predicting a 44 % increase next year .
Global management is urgently needed to prevent a humanitarian catastrophe .
The European Union and the US must develop a coordinated strategy to address the crisis .
First , the international humanitarian relief effort must be scaled up sharply .
The UN agencies charged with providing basic necessities to refugees are grossly underfunded and unable to meet more than 40 % of the demand .
Huge refugee camps in Turkey , Jordan , and Lebanon lack sufficient food , water , sanitation , medical care , and education .
It is , in part , these desperate conditions that are pushing refugees to Europe and beyond .
Second , the US should lead an international effort to coordinate the resettlement of qualified , security-screened Syrian and Iraqi refugees .
German Chancellor Angela Merkel has taken a courageous stance by receiving more than 700,000 asylum-seekers this year – 70 times the number the US has proposed accepting .
Prodded by Merkel , the EU has developed a quota system for apportioning refugees .
The US should help shoulder the burden by accepting 100,000 refugees next year and using its influence to persuade other countries to join an international resettlement initiative .
Finally , the US and Europe should step up diplomatic efforts to achieve a ceasefire and negotiated end to the war in Syria .
This will involve working with Russia and Iran on the divisive question of who will govern Syria when the war is over , as well as broadening the international coalition to defeat the Islamic State .
Terrorists like those who attacked Paris want to destroy our values because they know these are our most effective weapons against them .
That is why the US and Europe should open their doors to the victims of terror in the Middle East .
