Democratic Inequality
CHICAGO – Why did the household savings rate in the United States plummet before the Great Recession ?
Two of my colleagues at the University of Chicago , Marianne Bertrand and Adair Morse , offer an intriguing answer : growing income inequality .
Bertrand and Morse find that in the years before the crisis , in areas ( usually states ) where consumption was high among households in the top fifth of the income distribution , household consumption was high at lower income levels as well .
After ruling out a number of possible explanations , they concluded that poorer households imitated the consumption patterns of richer households in their area .
Consistent with the idea that households at lower income levels were “ keeping up with the Vanderbilts , ” the non-rich ( but not the really poor ) living near high-spending wealthy consumers tended to spend much more on items that richer households usually consumed , such as jewelry , beauty and fitness , and domestic services .
Indeed , many borrowed to finance their spending , with the result that the proportion of poorer households in financial distress or filing for bankruptcy was significantly higher in areas where the rich earned ( and spent ) more .
Were it not for such imitative consumption , non-rich households would have saved , on average , more than $ 800 annually in recent years .
This is one of the first detailed studies of the adverse effects of income inequality that I have seen .
It goes beyond the headline-grabbing “ 1 % ” debate to show that even the everyday inequality that most Americans face – between the incomes of , say , typical readers of this commentary and the rest – has deep pernicious effects .
Equally interesting is the link that the study finds between income inequality and pre-crisis economic policy .
Republican Congressmen from districts with higher levels of income inequality were more likely to vote for legislation to expand housing credit to the poor in the years before the crisis ( almost all Democrats voted for such legislation , making it hard to distinguish their motives ) .
And the effect of spending by the rich on non-rich households ’ spending was higher in areas where house prices could move more , suggesting that housing credit and the ability to borrow against rising home equity may have supported over-consumption by the non-rich .
I was most fascinated , though , by the difference in legislators ’ response to inequality now and in the past .
In a study of the congressional vote on the McFadden Act of 1927 , which sought to boost competition in lending , Rodney Ramcharan of the US Federal Reserve and I found that legislators from districts with a highly unequal distribution of land holdings – farming was the primary source of income in many districts then – tended to vote against the act .
More inequality led legislators , at least in that case , to prefer less competition and less expansion in lending .
And we found that counties with less bank competition experienced a milder farmland boom , and therefore a smaller bust in the years before the Great Depression .
The obvious lesson to be drawn from these episodes is the importance of unintended consequences .
In the early twentieth century , a congressional district ’ s rich landowners were likely to own the local banks as well , or to be related to , or friends with , bank owners .
They benefited from limiting competition and controlling access to finance .
Representatives voted on behalf of their districts ’ powerful interests .
They preferred less competition in credit markets not out of concern for the unwitting farmers , but in order to defend powerful lenders ’ profits .
It worked , but an unintended collateral effect was to protect these districts from getting carried away by the financial frenzy .
Why did twenty-first-century legislators behave differently ?
The cynical , and increasingly popular , view is that they were again voting their pocketbooks – all financial legislation in the run-up to the 2008 crisis was supposedly driven by the financial sector ’ s appetite for more customers to devour with teaser loans and dubious mortgages .
But , if voting was influenced by the financial sector , the supposed party of the plutocrats , the Republicans , should have voted in unison for the bill .
Instead , they split on the basis of whose non-rich constituents were more desirous of obtaining finance .
Twenty-first-century legislators seemed to be more democratic , responding to their voters ’ possibly misguided wishes , rather than primarily to powerful financial interests .
Indeed , once the unintended consequences of their actions – more financial duress for the non-rich after the crisis – became clear , Bertrand and Morse show that the legislators in unequal districts moved against the financial sector to protect their constituents , voting to set limits on interest rates charged by “ payday ” lenders ( who lend to over-indebted lower-income borrowers at very high interest rates ) .
Of course , such legislation will have unanticipated consequences , which future studies will unearth , but the intent behind it cannot be doubted .
We should not come away from these episodes thinking that expanding access to finance is bad .
In general , expanding access is beneficial ( just not before a crisis ! ) , but finance is a powerful tool that has to be used sensibly .
Access is good ; excess is bad .
But there is a more important point : while there are many gaps between the intent and consequences of legislation , legislators do seem ultimately to care more about their less-moneyed constituents than they did in the past .
Democracy is stronger .
In these cynical times , that is encouraging .
