The Debtor Prisoner ’ s Dilemma
PRINCETON – Any economic slowdown increases debt burdens , whether for households or for states .
Today , both are looking for ways to reduce the weight of debt – and some would prefer to escape it .
Deeply frustrated and angry people – especially in southern Europe – frequently hold up Argentina ’ s defiance of the international community in 2001 as a model .
Argentina then used a mixture of coercion and negotiation to get out from under the mountain of debt that it incurred in the 1990 ’ s , effectively expropriating foreign creditors , who were viewed as dangerous and malign .
In the 1990 ’ s , Argentina tied its hands with a dollar-pegged currency in order to enhance its credibility as a borrower .
The strategy worked too well : the large credit inflows that it attracted triggered an inflationary boom that reduced the country ’ s competitiveness .
By 2001 , a combination of devaluation ( exit from the currency straitjacket ) and partial default was inevitable .
Default was followed by nominally voluntary restructurings in which creditors were invited to take some losses .
Up to now , the Argentine model has seemed successful , yielding substantial economic growth for the country since 2001 .
That is what has made the model so appealing to debt-burdened southern Europeans .
But a recent New York court ruling against Argentina in a case brought by a holdout hedge-fund creditor has dramatically raised the stakes of sovereign default and bankruptcy .
When holdouts are rewarded by court decisions , and the rights of recalcitrant creditors are recognized in other jurisdictions , efforts at “ voluntary ” restructuring become unsustainable .
More and more parties will resist writing down some debt in favor of trying to seize whatever assets they can .
For Argentina , the writing is now on the wall .
One of the creditors favored in the New York case , Elliott Capital , had already successfully requested the seizure in Ghana of the Argentine Navy ’ s three-mast sailing ship ARA Libertad .
If the fallout of the New York decision is an extensive Argentine default on other obligations , foreign trade will become practically impossible , many goods will become scarce , and domestic inflation will increase further .
In short , the Argentine model of debt reduction in the 2000 ’ s has collapsed as completely as its borrowing model in the 1990 ’ s did .
Two fundamental facts have created an apparently insoluble dilemma for the global economy , and have turned countries like Argentina and Greece into victims of an impossible logic .
First , debt continually grows ; second , there is no really satisfactory way of getting rid of it .
The financial sector ’ s explosive growth over the past two decades has fueled the accumulation of exceptionally large volumes of debt .
In the absence of some positive shock – such as an acceleration of GDP growth – servicing that debt becomes impossible for at least some borrowers .
Real debt defaults are historically rare .
For both borrowers and creditors , the risks and costs are enormous .
The borrower is cut off from international markets , and essential imports can no longer be purchased , while large-scale defaults threaten to plunge creditors into insolvency .
The consequence is a complicated game – currently exemplified by the saga of Greek voluntary restructuring – in which both sides stare into the abyss and then turn away from the out-and-out conflict that would send them plummeting into it .
Latin America experienced this dilemma in the 1980 ’ s , when its debt arithmetic had become unsustainable .
At the outset of that crisis , major US financial institutions ’ capital exposure to Latin America was near 200 % , making candid recognition of debt unsustainability the surest route to wiping out the global financial system .
Most of the big Latin American debtors took extraordinary pains to avoid an explicit default .
The only sustained exception was Peru , which defaulted in 1985 and became an international pariah .
Of the largest borrowers , only Brazil , in 1987 , formally defaulted – and only briefly .
As President José Sarney , backing down , admitted , “ The fact is that we cannot destroy the international system .
We can scratch it , but it can destroy us . ”
Instead , banks in the 1980 ’ s offered new money in an attempt to extricate themselves from the crisis .
Managing modern debt crises always involves the extraordinary logic of throwing good money after bad in the hope of masking the underlying unsustainability .
The same logic has been applied in the euro crisis , with official money taking the place of private-sector exposure .
The emergence of inextinguishable debt replicates other troubling aspects of contemporary life .
Governments , businesses , and individuals all face the build-up of other sorts of liabilities in the form of accumulations of information that cannot be deleted .
E-mail , Facebook , and Twitter accounts all produce a permanent record that perpetually accompanies users , even when their circumstances change .
The legacy of the past continually resurfaces to constrain action in the present .
Just as countries might want to wipe out their debt and start anew , individuals might like to erase their electronic past in a dramatic act of liberation .
But that would destroy the useful together with the embarrassing or irrelevant .
If a clean start is impossible , the best that can be done is to try to bury the old information with such an inflationary flood of new data that it simply dwindles into insignificance .
The analogue in the world of debt negotiation is that a new start that allows borrowing to begin all over again is also impossible .
A cleanup is impossible .
That leaves only one solution : pile on new claims to such an extent that old debts appear paltry .
Those who cannot forget the past are condemned to inflate it .
