Geithner ’ s Gamble
" LOS ANGELES – In a recent interview , United States Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner laid out his view of the nature of world economic growth and the role of the US financial sector .
It is a deeply disturbing vision , one that amounts to a huge , uninformed gamble with the future of the American economy – and that suggests that Geithner remains the senior public official worldwide who is most in thrall to the self-serving ideology of big banks .
Geithner argues that the world will now experience a major “ financial deepening , ” owing to growing demand in emerging markets for financial products and services .
He is thinking , of course , of “ middle-income ” countries like India , China , and Brazil .
And he is right to emphasize that all have made terrific progress and now offer great opportunities for the rising middle class , which wants to accumulate savings , borrow more easily ( for productive investment , home purchases , education , etc ) , and , more generally , smooth out consumption .
But then Geithner takes a leap .
He wants US banks to take the lead in these countries ’ financial development .
His words are worth quoting at length :
“ I don ’ t have any enthusiasm for … trying to shrink the relative importance of the financial system in our economy as a test of reform , because we have to think about the fact that we operate in the broader world … It ’ s the same thing for Microsoft or anything else .
We want US firms to benefit from that … Now , financial firms are different because of the risk , but you can contain that through regulation . ”
There are three serious problems with this view .
First , Geithner ignores everything that we know about the pattern of financial development around the world .
It is very rare for financial systems to develop without major crises .
In fact , experience in recent decades confirms what should have been obvious from previous centuries : as countries grow and accumulate savings , they become increasingly prone to financial collapse .
Given Geithner ’ s extensive international crisis-fighting experience at the US Treasury , the International Monetary Fund , and the New York Federal Reserve , his current naiveté on this point is simply stunning .
Second , Geithner assumes that risks at the largest US firms can be contained through regulation , when all our knowledge points directly to the contrary .
Even the strongest supporters of the Dodd-Frank reform legislation emphasize that it only went part way towards reducing the incentives for major financial institutions to take big risks .
Looking at the combined effect of the new law , plus the weak additional capital requirements agreed under Basel III and the hands-off approach already signaled by the Financial Stability Oversight Council ( which Mr. Geithner chairs ) , it is hard to believe that anything has really improved .
In fact , given that our largest banks are now undoubtedly too big to fail , they have even more incentive to increase their debt levels relative to their equity .
Higher leverage increases their payoffs when times are good – as executives and traders are paid based on their “ return on equity . ”
And when times are bad , for example in a crisis episode , losses are transferred to creditors .
If those creditor losses are large and spread so as to undermine the broader financial system , pressure for a government bailout will mount .
Bankers get the upside and taxpayers ( and people laid off as credit is disrupted ) get the downside .
The US financial sector went mad for high-risk loans to emerging markets during 1970s – arguing that this was the new frontier .
This loan portfolio blew up in the debt crisis of 1982 .
A version of same thoughtless cross-border lending is again underway , extolled by leading financial sector executives ( e.g. , Jamie Dimon from JP Morgan Chase ) – who have apparently persuaded Mr. Geithner to tag along intellectually .
And third , Geithner completely overlooks what has brought significant parts of Europe to its economic knees .
He should spend more time with the authorities in Iceland or Ireland or Switzerland , countries where “ financial globalization ” allowed banks to become big relative to the economy .
In Iceland , the three largest banks built global balance sheets that were between 11 and 13 times the size of the economy .
And then they collapsed .
In Ireland , the three largest banks went crazy for commercial real estate – financed by large-scale borrowing from other eurozone countries ( including Germany ) .
The politicians looked the other way – or were paid off , some claim – while these banks built balance sheets valued at two times Irish GDP .
And then they collapsed , causing enormous damage to the government ’ s own solvency .
In Switzerland , the two largest banks ( UBS and Credit Suisse ) had a combined balance sheet in fall 2008 of around 8 times Swiss GDP – mostly based on their global activities .
Mortgage traders in London – not many of whom were Swiss – took on enormous risks that almost brought down UBS .
The Swiss government could afford the bailout , just .
And now the Swiss National Bank is moving in the exact opposite direction to Geithner – they are pushing these big banks to become smaller and to finance more of their activities with equity , rather than debt .
Geithner is a very smart and experienced public servant .
His views concerning the future of finance will help shape what happens .
And that is why we are headed for trouble .
