The Moral Economy of Debt
LONDON – Every economic collapse brings a demand for debt forgiveness .
The incomes needed to repay loans have evaporated , and assets posted as collateral have lost value .
Creditors demand their pound of flesh ; debtors clamor for relief .
Consider Strike Debt , an offshoot of the Occupy movement , which calls itself “ a nationwide movement of debt resisters fighting for economic justice and democratic freedom . ”
Its Web site argues that “ [ w ] ith stagnant wages , systemic unemployment , and public service cuts ” people are being forced into debt in order to obtain the most basic necessities of life , leading them to “ surrender [ their ] futures to the banks . ”
One of Strike Debt ’ s initiatives , “ Rolling Jubilee , ” crowd-sources funds to buy up and extinguish debt , a process that it calls “ collective refusal . ”
The group ’ s progress has been impressive , raising more than $ 700,000 so far and extinguishing debt worth almost $ 18.6 million .
It is the existence of a secondary debt market that enables Rolling Jubilee to buy debt so cheaply .
Financial institutions that have come to doubt their borrowers ’ ability to repay sell the debt to third parties at knock-down prices , often for as little as five cents on the dollar .
Buyers then attempt to profit by recouping some or all of the debt from the borrowers .
The US student-loan provider Sallie Mae admitted that it sells repackaged debt for as little as 15 cents on the dollar .
To draw attention to the often-nefarious practices of debt collectors , Rolling Jubilee recently canceled student debt for 2,761 students of Everest College , a for-profit school whose parent company , Corinthian Colleges , is being sued by the US government for predatory lending .
Everest College ’ s loan portfolio was valued at almost $ 3.9 million .
Rolling Jubilee bought it for $ 106,709.48 , or about three cents on the dollar .
But that is a drop in the ocean .
In the US alone , students owe more than $ 1 trillion , or around 6 % of GDP .
And the student population is just one of many social groups that lives on debt .
Indeed , throughout the world , the economic downturn of 2008-2009 increased the burden of private and public debt alike – to the point that the public-private distinction became blurred .
In a recent speech in Chicago , Irish President Michael D. Higgins explained how private debt became sovereign debt : “ As a consequence of the need to borrow so as to finance current expenditure and , above all , as a result of the blanket guarantee extended to the main Irish banks ’ assets and liabilities , Ireland ’ s general government debt increased from 25 % of GDP in 2007 to 124 % in 2013 . ”
The Irish government ’ s aim , of course , was to save the banking system .
But the unintended consequence of the bailout was to shatter confidence in the government ’ s solvency .
In the eurozone , Ireland , Greece , Portugal , and Cyprus all had to restructure their sovereign debt to avoid outright default .
Rising debt / GDP ratios cast a pall over fiscal policy , and became the main justification for austerity policies that prolonged the slump .
None of this is new .
Creditor-debtor conflict has been the stuff of politics since Babylonian times .
Orthodoxy has always upheld the sacred rights of the creditor ; political necessity has frequently demanded relief for the debtor .
Which side wins in any situation depends on the extent of debtor distress and the strength of the opposing creditor-debtor coalitions .
Morality has always been the intellectual coin of these conflicts .
Creditors , asserting their right to be repaid in full , historically have created as many legal and political obstacles to default as possible , insisting on harsh sanctions – garnishment of income , for example , and , at the extreme , imprisonment or even slavery – for borrowers ’ failure to honor their debt obligations .
Governments that incurred debt in costly wars have been expected to set aside annual “ sinking funds ” for repayment .
Morality , however , has not been entirely on the side of the creditor .
In New Testament Greek , debt means “ sin . ”
But , though it might be sinful to go into debt , Matthew 6 : 12 supports absolution : “ forgive us our debts , as we also have forgiven our debtors . ”
The position of debtors was further strengthened by the prohibition of usury – charging unreasonably high interest on money .
Interest-rate caps were abolished in Britain only in 1835 ; the near-zero central-bank rates prevailing since 2009 are a current example of efforts to protect borrowers .
The truth of the matter , as David Graeber points out in his majestic Debt : The First 5,000 Years , is that that the creditor-debtor relationship embodies no iron law of morality ; rather , it is a social relationship that always must be negotiated .
When quantitative precision and an unyielding approach to debt obligations are the rule , conflict and penury soon follow .
In an effort to stem recurrent debt crises , traditional societies embraced the “ Law of Jubilee , ” a ceremonial wiping clean of the slate . “ The Law of Jubilee , ” writes Graeber , “ stipulated that all debts be automatically canceled ‘ in the Sabbath year ’ ( that is , after seven years had passed ) , and that all who languished in bondage owing to such debts would be released . ”
The moral of the tale is not , as Polonius instructed his son Laertes , “ neither a borrower nor a lender be . ”
Without both , humanity might still be living in caves .
Rather , we need to limit the supply of and demand for credit to what the economy is capable of producing .
How to do this and maintain freedom of enterprise is one of the great unsettled questions of political economy .
