Creating the Next Crisis
WASHINGTON , DC -- Informed opinion is sharply divided about how the next 12 months will play out for the global economy .
Those focused on emerging markets are emphasizing accelerating growth , with some forecasts projecting a 5 % increase in world output .
Others , concerned about problems in Europe and the United States , remain more pessimistic , with growth projections closer to 4 % – and some are even inclined to see a possible “ double dip ” recession .
This is an interesting debate , but it misses the bigger picture .
In response to the crisis of 2007-2009 , governments in most industrialized countries put in place some of the most generous bailouts ever seen for large financial institutions .
Of course , it is not politically correct to call them bailouts – the preferred language of policymakers is “ liquidity support ” or “ systemic protection . ”
But it amounts to essentially the same thing : when the chips were down , the most powerful governments in the world ( on paper , at least ) deferred again and again to the needs and wishes of people who had lent money to big banks .
In each instance , the logic was impeccable .
For example , if the US hadn ’ t provided essentially unconditional support to Citigroup in 2008 ( under President George W. Bush ) and again in 2009 ( under President Barack Obama ) , the resulting financial collapse would have deepened the global recession and worsened job losses around the world .
Similarly , if the eurozone had not stepped in – with the help of the International Monetary Fund – to protect Greece and its creditors in recent months , we would have faced further financial distress in Europe and perhaps more broadly .
In effect , there were repeated games of “ chicken ” between governments and major financial institutions in the US and Western Europe . The governments said : “ No more bailouts . ”
The banks said : “ If you don ’ t bail us out , there will most likely be a second Great Depression . ”
Creditors were protected and financial sectors ’ losses were transferred to the domestic government ( as in Ireland ) or to the European Central Bank ( as in Greece ) .
Elsewhere ( the US ) , the losses were covered up with a great deal of regulatory “ forbearance ” ( i.e. , agreeing to look the other way while banks rebuild their capital by trading securities ) .
And it worked – in the sense that we are now experiencing an economic recovery , albeit one with a disappointingly slow employment rebound in the US and some European countries .
So what is the problem with the policies of 2007-2009 , and why can ’ t we just plan on doing something similar in the future if we ever face a crisis of this nature again ?
The problem is incentives – what bailouts imply for attitudes and behavior within the financial sector .
The protection that was extended to banks and other financial institutions since summer 2007 , and more comprehensively since the failure of Lehman Brothers and AIG in September 2008 , sends a simple signal .
If you are “ big ” relative to the system , you are more likely to get generous government support when there is system-wide vulnerability .
How big is “ big enough ” remains an open and interesting question .
Major hedge funds are presumably looking for ways to become bigger and take on “ systemic importance . ”
Ideally – from their point of view – they will bulk up without attracting regulatory scrutiny , i.e. , no ex ante limits on their risk-taking activities will be imposed .
If all goes well , these hedge funds – and of course the banks that are already undoubtedly Too Big to Fail ( TBTF ) – get a great deal of upside .
Of course , if anything goes wrong , everyone who is TBTF – and who has lent to TBTF firms – expects to receive government protection .
This expectation lowers the cost of credit for megabanks today ( relative to their competitors , which are small enough that they are more likely to be allowed to fail ) .
As a result , all financial institutions gain a powerful incentive to bulk up ( and borrow more ) in hope of also becoming bigger and therefore “ safer ” ( from creditors ’ point of view , not from a social perspective . )
Top US policymakers acknowledge that this structure of incentives is a problem – interestingly , many of their European counterparts are not yet willing even to discuss these issues openly .
But the rhetoric from the White House and the Treasury Department is “ we have ended TBTF ” with financial reform legislation currently before Congress and likely to be signed by Obama within a month .
Unfortunately , this is simply not the case .
On the critical dimension of excessive bank size and what it implies for systemic risk , there was a concerted effort by Senators Ted Kaufman and Sherrod Brown to impose a size cap on the largest banks – very much in accordance with the spirit of the original “ Volcker Rule ” proposed in January 2010 by Obama himself .
In an almost unbelievable volte face , for reasons that remain somewhat mysterious , Obama ’ s administration itself shot down this approach . “ If enacted , Brown-Kaufman would have broken up the six biggest banks in America , ” a senior Treasury official said .
“ If we ’ d been for it , it probably would have happened . But we weren ’ t , so it didn ’ t . ”
Whether the world economy grows now at 4 % or 5 % matters , but it does not much affect our medium-term prospects .
The US financial sector received an unconditional bailout – and is not now facing any kind of meaningful re-regulation .
We are setting ourselves up , without question , for another boom based on excessive and reckless risk-taking at the heart of the world ’ s financial system .
This can end only one way : badly .
