From Olympia to Impasse
PARIS – “ Do not mix sports and politics ! ”
That defiant cry from China ’ s rulers to the threat of a boycott of this summer ’ s Beijing Olympic Games does not stand the test of reality .
Sport and politics have always been closely linked .
Obvious examples abound .
The 1936 Berlin Olympics were dominated as much by Nazi propaganda as by the athletic events .
During the Cold War , “ ping pong diplomacy ” helped revive official relations between China and the United States .
In 1990 , Germany fielded a single Olympic team before the country reunified .
To claim that politics and sports can be any more separated in today ’ s media age than they were in the past is especially naïve .
The Olympics were awarded to Beijing for a mixture of economic and political reasons , and China wanted the Games for the same reasons .
The current tension between China and ( mostly ) Western public opinion on the eve of the Beijing Olympics is the result of incompetence , hypocrisy , and legitimate but potentially counterproductive indignation .
China ’ s incompetence in its treatment of the crisis in Tibet should come as no surprise .
The Chinese regime is , quite simply , a victim of its inability to reform itself .
China saw in the Olympics a symbolic opportunity to consolidate and celebrate its new status in the world .
Caught by surprise in Tibet , and by the virulence and popularity of what they described as “ anti-Chinese ” sentiments , China ’ s rulers have resorted to the traditional tools of authoritarian regimes , turning their citizens ’ deep nationalism and sense of humiliation against Western critics .
The Chinese today sound almost as stunned by the supposed mistreatment of the Olympic torch in London , Paris , and San Francisco as Americans were back in 2001 : “ Why do they hate us so much ? ”
Self-isolated from global political realities and incapable of grasping the meaning of “ civil society , ” the Chinese regime encourages its public in expressions of defiance of all who fail to “ respect China , ” which only reinforces negative reactions .
But the West ’ s hypocrisy nearly matches the Chinese regime ’ s incompetence . The moment the international community “ bestowed ” the Olympics on China , the West demonstrated how little consideration it actually gives to human rights and democracy .
The idea that the Chinese regime would quickly reform the country into an open , moderate , and benevolent giant was either a fraud , a gigantic misperception , or wishful thinking .
The dilemma posed by China for democratic regimes is understandable . Caught between their desperate need for finance and markets and their need to respond to their citizens ’ sentiments , they oscillate between condemnation and reassurance of China , struggling to find a coherent path that defends the West ’ s principles without damaging its economic interests .
Now the West believes that it has found a “ third way ” by threatening to boycott the Olympics ’ opening ceremony , but not the Games themselves .
Thus , the Chinese people , the world ’ s athletes , and a planet hungry for “ bread and circuses ” will not be deprived , and China ’ s rulers will not “ get away with murder ” in their contempt for human rights and international public opinion . The problem is that such a choice requires governments ’ absolute determination to stand by their words .
The power of indignation is a necessary component of a transparent and interdependent world that has lost the privilege of ignorance .
But selective responses to the actions of dictatorships can be problematic and counterproductive . China , for both good and bad , is a status-quo power that does not want to rock the boat of the international system – a power largely satisfied with its new status , but one that does not want to see its regime transformed , especially through external pressures .
Let us have no illusions : no “ conditions ” imposed from outside will bring about the “ China we deserve ” in the way , after World War II , we got the “ Germany we deserved ” through a process of integration and reconciliation .
If the Chinese reform their political system and improve their human rights record , it will not be the result of anything we in the West say or do , but because they realize that the absence of the rule of law jeopardizes their long-term ambition to be strong and respected .
