Europe ’ s Moment of Decision
BRUSSELS & # 45 ; & # 45 ; Is amnesia an integral part of politics ?
When it comes to the treaty to reform the Union ’ s institutions , which will be finalized in November , recent events suggest that amnesia does play a central role .
Let ’ s examine the “ illness ” that leads certain EU leaders with questionable scruples to forget even the recent past .
Busy with domestic political affairs , they do not hesitate to use Europe as a scapegoat to avoid breaking bad news to their fellow citizens .
Some display separatist tendencies that worry , and frustrate , their electorates .
No surprise , then , that many EU citizens refuse , or at least hesitate , to embrace the European cause .
This form of political racketeering may win elections , but it sabotages any opportunity to experience , or to perceive , politics as a process that can contribute to global development .
Consider Gordon Brown , Britain ’ s new prime minister , according to whom globalization strips the European project of any meaning , a form of political autism that in fact will prevent the EU from adapting to change and from being able to find solutions to globalization ’ s challenges .
Fortunately , openly anti-European political programs are not the norm , at least not yet .
In fact , if , on the eve of the 2009 European Parliament elections , the new Reform Treaty enters into force , each member country will be forced to clarify and justify its position .
The Treaty will be essential not only to the proper functioning of Europe ’ s institutions , but also to their further “ deepening ” – something that many call for without necessarily really wanting to achieve .
Thanks to “ reinforced cooperation , ” recalcitrant states will no longer hinder those seeking to make progress , and could even resort to an “ opt-out ” process and “ liberate ” themselves from the EU , perhaps by means of a referendum .
Then there are those who believe that EU enlargement has prevented greater “ deepening , ” and who , with scant regard for the past or the future , argue that pursuing the latter requires abandoning the former .
But who can reasonably claim to know what shape the EU will need to take to meet the challenges of the next 50 or 100 years ?
Already , issues like climate change and energy supply demonstrate the futility of isolated national action and the critical importance of both deepening and enlarging the EU .
Having suffered from disruptions in oil and gas supplies following disputes between Russia and Ukraine and then Belarus , the EU ’ s members have finally understood that their survival depends on their capacity to diversify their energy sources .
Further EU enlargement is undoubtedly in Turkey ’ s interest , and in Europe ’ s , too .
In addition to the constructive role that Turkey could play , especially in the Middle East , its membership is vitally important in terms of energy .
Moreover , admitting Turkey would demonstrate the EU ’ s political consistency , while representing a qualitative step forward in the European project .
For politicians like French President Nicolas Sarkozy , such considerations may be meaningless .
But what if Turkey were to abandon its European ambitions and align itself strategically with Russia or even Iran ?
The consequences for European security would be severe .
Then there is Britain ’ s political leadership , for whom enlargement is a way to avoid deepening , and , indeed , to dissolve political Europe .
While such ideas are not for everyone , certain Continental countries secretly prefer Britain ’ s disjointed scenarios , with some heads of governments even considering their countries ’ commitments reversible .
What , for example , should we make of Poland ’ s governing Kaczynski brothers ?
The quick-tempered twins took issue with the reform treaty ’ s proposed voting system for the Council of Ministers , and then stole the limelight from papacy with their own homophobic declarations , proclamations that seem to exclude any possibility of integrating the EU ’ s Charter of Rights into Poland ’ s domestic law .
Russian President Vladimir Putin may be the only one who welcomes this desertion from Europe ’ s community of values .
In this climate , Dutch Prime Minister Peter Balkenende , still bogged down in his country ’ s “ no ” vote on the EU ’ s draft constitutional treaty in 2005 , has been seeking to win British , Czech , and Polish support for measures to make it possible to diminish the EU ’ s areas of responsibility .
Indeed , he may not even object to ruining the EU ’ s entire legislative engine by granting national parliaments a veto .
What we Europeans now need most of all is to embark on precisely the opposite course .
Only by enlarging the scope of EU decision-making , backed by the commitment of equally responsible partners , can Europe meet the shared challenges of a common future .
