A History Lesson for Koizumi
Once again , protests against Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi ’ s annual visit to the Yasukuni shrine are breaking out in China as well as South Korea .
Koizumi ’ s insistence on paying homage to the war dead interred at Yasukuni , where convicted war criminals from World War II are among the buried , has been damaging relations with Japan ’ s neighbors for years .
Indeed , Chinese President Hu Jintao continually affirms that he will not hold a summit with a Japanese prime minister who goes to Yasukuni , which most Chinese regard as a glorification of past Japanese aggression and colonialism .
Even some in Japan are becoming critical of Koizumi .
While the public remains negative about Chinese outbursts against Japan , a recent survey indicates that more than 70 % of Japanese view the current state of Japan-China relations as unacceptable .
More people are not supporting Koizumi ’ s annual pilgrimage to Yasukuni , with seven former prime ministers jointly demanding that he refrain from the visits .
Yet Koizumi remains defiant .
Moreover , Chief Cabinet Secretary Shinzu Abe , the front-runner to succeed him , has openly declared that he will continue to visit the shrine as prime minister .
Foreign Minister Taro Aso , another possible successor to Koizumi , has called for the Japanese Emperor to pray at Yasukuni .
So pessimism appears to be settling in , and the deadlock over Yasukuni appears to be deepening .
But the past can bring us more than just troubles of this kind . Even on the issue of Yasukuni , there are positive lessons to be learned .
Consider Yasuhiro Nakasone , Koizumi ’ s predecessor in the 1980 ’ s .
Both are master politicians who remained popular and served long terms in office .
Both are conservative and nationalistic , advocating the revision of the constitution and an assertive political and military role for Japan abroad .
Finally , both are pro-American , with Nakasone declaring Japan to be America ’ s “ unsinkable aircraft carrier ” in East Asia and Koizumi sending troops to Iraq in support of the United States-led war effort .
But a crucial difference between Nakasone and Koizumi is often overlooked : their handling of the Yasukuni controversy and relations with China .
Nakasone broke the taboo by being the first prime minister to worship at the Yasukuni shrine in his official capacity on August 15 , 1985 , the fortieth anniversary of the end of World War II .
The decision triggered a severe response from China , where students held demonstrations against his visit .
Bilateral relations were frozen .
But , instead of capitalizing on domestic resentment over China ’ s criticisms , Nakasone decided not to visit Yasukuni again .
He chose to mend relations with China by focusing on the positive aspects of bilateral ties .
In 1986 , Nakasone went to Beijing at the personal invitation of Chinese Communist Party General Secretary Hu Yaobang and laid the cornerstone for a Sino-Japanese Youth Exchange Center , promising to forge future friendships with China .
This genuine embrace of reconciliation provided much-needed support to Chinese leaders , who were eager to control anti-Japanese sentiments .
Hu praised Nakasone ’ s courage and warned Chinese youth publicly that if they “ think merely of the well-being of their own country … they are not sober-minded patriots . ”
Nakasone emerged from the crisis and was recognized as a capable statesman in managing Japan ’ s diplomacy with China .
There was no accusation that Nakasone was “ selling out ” to Beijing .
Nor were his conservative , nationalist , and pro-American credentials damaged .
This episode suggests that Koizumi ’ s hardline position isn ’ t the only option .
A Japanese prime minister can be strong without exploiting domestic resentment against the country ’ s neighbors , and conservative , patriotic , and pro-American while forging a healthy working relationship with China .
Indeed , the cessation of Yasukuni visits would likely open the door to the long-overdue Sino-Japanese summit , which in turn might strengthen moderate voices in China seeking a future-oriented relationship with Japan .
Unfortunately , Koizumi and his allies are not prepared to move forward on the Yasukuni issue .
As Foreign Minister Aso recently put it : “ The more China voices [ opposition ] , the more one feels like going there .
It ’ s just like when you ’ re told ‘ Don 't smoke cigarettes , ’ it actually makes you want to smoke . ”
No one expects the current Japanese and Chinese leaders to embrace , as Nakasone and Hu did two decades ago , but it is a sad state of affairs when the leaders of neighboring giants pretend not to see each other at international forums .
If Nakasone , who now urges Koizumi to stop the Yasukuni pilgrimage , were to respond to Aso , he might simply extend the analogy : it is not in Japan ’ s national interest to continue to inhale Koizumi ’ s second-hand smoke .
