Defeating North Korea ’ s Nuclear Blackmail
North Korea ’ s announcement that it possesses nuclear weapons has fuelled a diplomatic frenzy .
To persuade North Korea to return to the six-party talks – with China , Japan , the US , Russia , and South Korea – on defusing the nuclear threat on the Korean peninsula , Japan , the US , and South Korea have now offered to expand the scope of the talks to allow North Korea to raise any issue that concerns it .
This could be a grave mistake .
The talks ground to a halt in June 2004 , when the North Koreans pulled out , citing the allegedly hostile policies of the US and Japanese governments .
Now they claim to have manufactured nuclear weapons for self-defense .
Although there had been several unofficial statements by Kim Jong-Il ’ s regime admitting that North Korea possessions nuclear arsenal , the announcement was the first official confirmation .
What lay behind the declaration was the regime ’ s recognition that a second-term Bush administration would not soften its demand for a complete repudiation of its nuclear program , but would instead continue to pursue policies aimed at isolating and stifling North Korea .
The same goes for Japan , whose stance on the abduction of its citizens by North Korean agents in the 1970 ’ s and 1980 ’ s was also cited by the Kim regime last June as a reason for walking out of the six-party talks .
With this in mind , the North Koreans ’ motives in playing the nuclear trump card are clear , and the timing couldn ’ t have seemed more advantageous for them : force the Americans into making concessions while the situation in Iraq leaves the US with no room for maneuver , and undercut the rising call in Japan for economic sanctions against North Korea over the abduction issue .
Thus , whereas North Korea ’ s announcement of its nuclear capability strongly condemned Japan and the US , it did not mention China , Russia , and South Korea , which had been more conciliatory during the six-party talks .
Indeed , in withdrawing from the six-party talks , North Korea did not completely abandon the possibility of resolving the nuclear standoff through dialogue .
Rather , North Korea ’ s aim was to postpone the six-party talks as long as possible in order to force direct bilateral negotiations with the US , in which it would presumably extract energy assistance and other aid while demanding a security guarantee for “ Dear Leader ” Kim Jong-il .
America didn ’ t budge on bilateral negotiations , and its response to North Korea ’ s recent announcement that it possesses nuclear weapons likewise emphasized the need to revive the six-party talks .
Japan adopted a similar stance .
Like Japan , the Bush administration ’ s relatively moderate stance toward North Korea has changed since the talks broke down last year .
The US seems to be tightening its diplomatic encirclement of North Korea with a view to shifting the nuclear discussion to the UN Security Council .
Moreover , the Japan-US Security Consultative Committee brought together the countries ’ foreign and defense ministers in Washington in February to discuss common strategic objectives related to the reformation of US forward forces .
This includes US forces in Japan , which will focus on responding to North Korean nuclear and ballistic-missile threats , as well as new threats posed by international terrorism and China ’ s military build-up .
Remaining in step with each other on security issues is essential if Japan and the US are to maintain a firm alliance to ensure the stability of the Asia-Pacific region .
The Japanese government has also been searching for effective measures to respond to North Korea ’ s consistently insincere attitude on regional and bilateral issues , including the abduction cases .
Militarily , Japan revised its law on the Self-Defense Forces to establish procedures for ballistic missile defense , with a strong focus on North Korea .
The decision , coming at the cabinet ’ s regular meeting on February 15th , was not intended to coincide with Kim Jong-il ’ s 63rd birthday the following day .
But it did show that Japan ’ s government , having long suspected that North Korea already possessed nuclear weapons , would not be intimidated into a fundamental policy change by confirmation of the threat .
The revision establishes the future direction of Japan ’ s military posture by delegating greater authority to the commanders of the Self-Defense Forces to initiate defensive actions against immediate threats .
According to South Korean news reports , in addition to its existing mid-range Nodong missiles , North Korea has improved its Scud missiles , extending their range to reach Japan ’ s main islands .
If North Korea is , indeed , continuing to develop not only its nuclear arsenal , but also various types of ballistic missiles , in defiance of international commitments , it is truly a rogue state .
As for the nuclear issue , Japan ’ s policy toward North Korea should continue to emphasize solidifying ties with the US and strengthening cooperation with China , South Korea , and Russia , making every effort to promote early resumption of the six-party talks .
But dialogue with the Kim regime cannot be an end in itself .
Negotiation is necessary , and it must be sufficient , but progress will be impossible if North Korea is allowed to turn its mere participation in the six-party talks into a bargaining chip .
