Europe ’ s Civil War
WASHINGTON , DC – The negotiations leading up to the latest tentative deal on Greece ’ s debt brought into relief two competing visions of the European Union : the flexible , humane , and political union espoused by France , and the legalistic and economy-focused union promoted by Germany .
As François Heisbourg recently wrote , “ By openly contemplating the forced secession of Greece [ from the eurozone ] , Germany has demonstrated that economics trumps political and strategic considerations .
France views the order of factors differently . ” The question now is which vision will prevail ?
The Greeks , for their part , have been putting their national identity ahead of their pocketbooks , in ways that economists do not understand and continually fail to predict .
It is economically irrational for Greeks to prefer continued membership in the eurozone , when they could remain in the EU with a restored national currency that they could devalue .
But , for the Greeks , eurozone membership does not mean only that they can use the common currency .
It places their country on a par with Italy , Spain , France , and Germany , as a “ full member ” of Europe – a position consistent with Greece ’ s status as the birthplace of Western civilization .
Whereas that stance reflects the vision of an “ ever-closer union ” that motivated the EU ’ s founders , Germany ’ s narrower , economic understanding of European integration cannot inspire ordinary citizens to support the compromises necessary to keep the EU together .
Nor can it withstand the inevitable attacks directed against EU institutions for every action and regulation that citizens dislike and for which national politicians want to avoid responsibility .
The original European Economic Community , created by the Treaty of Rome in 1957 , was , as the name indicates , economic in nature .
The Treaty itself was hard-headed , grounded in the converging economic interests of France and Germany , with the Benelux countries and Italy rounding out the basis of a new European economy .
But economic integration was underpinned by a vision of peace and prosperity for Europe ’ s peoples , after centuries of unprecedented violence had culminated in two world wars that reinforced the seemingly eternal enmity between France and Germany .
And , indeed , the language of a larger political union was embedded in Europe ’ s treaties , to be interpreted by the European Court of Justice and subsequent generations of European decision-makers in ways that supported the construction of a common European polity and identity , as well as a unified economy .
My mother , a young Belgian in the 1950s , remembers the idealism and the excitement of the European federalist movement , with its promise that her generation could create a different future for Europe and the world .
To be sure , the vision of a United States of Europe , espoused by many of those early federalists , looked backward to the founding of the US , rather than forward to a distinctive European venture .
Nonetheless , the EU that emerged – which pools sovereignty sufficiently to benefit from being a powerful regional entity in a world of almost 200 countries while maintaining its members ’ distinct languages and cultures – is something new .
That experiment cannot survive if supported only by economic rigor and rules .
What can continue to justify a political entity after the urgent realities and convictions that drove its establishment have faded to the pages of history and civics books or , at best , are the subject of grandparents ’ stories ?
For the US , those questions arose in the 1840s and 1850s , when the urgent need for a union to secure independence had faded , causing issues and conflicts that had been papered over to resurface .
In particular , slavery was allowed in some states , but prohibited in others , and the 1787 compromise to count each slave as three-fifths of a person when determining a state ’ s population for representation and taxation was fraying .
Economic differences between the industrial north and the agricultural south meant that discussions over states ’ rights were about livelihoods as well as lives .
A horrific war resulted , in which the US defeated the secessionist southern Confederacy and imposed its vision of the union .
Before the war ’ s end , President Abraham Lincoln created a new narrative , declaring in the Gettysburg Address that it was fought for democracy as much as equality , with the goal of ensuring that “ government of the people , by the people , for the people , shall not perish from the earth . ”
This account simplified – and , in many ways , distorted – the historical record .
But no matter ; the speech became as important a part of American national identity as the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution .
The EU is now facing its own civil war , though one that , fortunately , is free of physical violence .
Without statesmen and stateswomen able to articulate a vision of a shared future worth working and even sacrificing for , the side of unity may not win .
Europe ’ s national anthem , a circle of stars , and talk of fiscal rectitude and structural reforms cannot compete with the potent messages of the EU ’ s opponents .
Those opponents , on both the right and the left , are focusing on the everyday living conditions of European citizens – those who feel threatened by migrants and those who are suffering as a result of austerity .
For the EU to continue its march toward a stronger and closer polity and economy – one that nevertheless falls far short of a federal state – it must offer the credible prospect of a better life for all of its citizens .
Just before the final round of the recent Greek negotiations , French President François Hollande said that he did not want a Europe that “ no longer progresses . ” Fair enough .
But progress toward what ?
Toward liberty , equality , and fraternity for all of Europe ?
Toward the dignity and solidarity of all European citizens ?
Toward a shared European house that is kept in order ?
These are the questions that a new generation of European politicians must answer .
