Europe ’ s Ethical Eggs
PRINCETON – Forty years ago , I stood with a few other students in a busy Oxford street handing out leaflets protesting the use of battery cages to hold hens .
Most of those who took the leaflets did not know that their eggs came from hens kept in cages so small that even one bird – the cages normally housed four – would be unable to fully stretch and flap her wings .
The hens could never walk around freely , or lay eggs in a nest .
Many people applauded our youthful idealism , but told us that we had no hope of ever changing a major industry .
They were wrong .
On the first day of 2012 , keeping hens in such cages became illegal , not only in the United Kingdom , but in all 27 countries of the European Union .
Hens can still be kept in cages , but they must have more space , and the cages must have nest boxes and a scratching post .
Last month , members of the British Hen Welfare Trust provided a new home for a hen they named “ Liberty . ”
She was , they said , among the last hens in Britain still living in the type of cages we had opposed .
In the early 1970 ’ s , when the modern animal-liberation movement began , no major organization was campaigning against the battery cage .
The Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals , the mother of all animal-protection organizations , had lost its early radicalism long before .
It focused on isolated cases of abuse , and failed to challenge well-established ways of mistreating animals on farms or in laboratories .
It took a concerted effort by the new animal radicals of the 1970 ’ s to stir the RSPCA from its complacency towards the battery cage and other forms of intensive animal rearing .
Eventually , the new animal-rights movement managed to reach the broader public .
Consumers responded by buying eggs from free-ranging hens .
Some supermarket chains even ceased to carry eggs from battery hens .
In Britain and some European countries , animal welfare became politically salient , and pressure on parliamentary representatives mounted .
The European Union established a scientific committee to investigate animal-welfare issues on farms , and the committee recommended banning the battery cage , along with some other forms of close confinement of pigs and calves .
A ban on battery cages in the EU was eventually adopted in 1999 , but , to ensure that producers would have plenty of time to phase out the equipment in which they had invested , its implementation was delayed until January 1 , 2012 .
To its credit , the British egg industry accepted the situation , and developed new and less cruel methods of keeping hens .
Not all countries are equally ready , however , and it has been estimated that up to 80 million hens may still be in illegal battery cages .
But at least 300 million hens who would have lived miserable lives in standard battery cages are now in significantly better conditions , and there is great pressure on the EU bureaucracy to enforce the ban everywhere – not least from egg producers who are already complying with it .
With the ban on battery cages , Europe confirms its place as the world leader in animal welfare , a position also reflected in its restrictions on the use of animals to test cosmetics .
But why is Europe so far ahead of other countries in its concern for animals ?
In the United States , there are no federal laws about how egg producers house their hens .
But , when the issue was put to California voters in 2008 , they overwhelmingly supported a proposition requiring that all farm animals have room to stretch their limbs fully and turn around without touching other animals or the sides of their cage .
That suggests that the problem may not be with US citizens ’ attitudes , but rather that , at the federal level , the US political system allows industries with large campaign chests too much power to thwart the wishes of popular majorities .
In China , which , along with the US , confines the largest number of hens in cages , an animal welfare movement is only just beginning to emerge .
For the sake of the welfare of billions of farmed animals , we should wish it rapid growth and success .
The start of this year is a moment to celebrate a major advance in animal welfare , and , therefore , for Europe , a step towards becoming a more civilized and humane society – one that shows its concern for all beings capable of suffering .
It is also an occasion for celebrating the effectiveness of democracy , and the power of an ethical idea .
The anthropologist Margaret Mead is reported to have said : “ Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful , committed citizens can change the world .
Indeed , it is the only thing that ever has . ” The last part may not be true , but the first part surely is .
The end of the battery cage in Europe is a less dramatic development than the Arab Spring , but , like that popular uprising , it began with a small group of thoughtful and committed people .
