Europe ’ s Vision Deficit
PARIS – In the Western part of Europe – the part that former US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld maliciously labeled “ Old Europe ” – almost every government is in deep political trouble .
The United Kingdom ’ s new coalition government may be the exception – for now .
In the European Union ’ s big member states , the popularity ratings of leaders – Nicolas Sarkozy in France , Silvio Berlusconi in Italy , Angela Merkel in Germany , and José Luís Rodriguez Zapatero in Spain – hover around 25 % or worse .
Whether it is conservatives like Sarkozy , Christian Democrats like Merkel , right-wing populists like Berlusconi , or socialists like Zapatero , political affiliation appears to make no difference .
If you hold office in Europe nowadays , you are in trouble .
What has gone so wrong ?
The economic crisis seems to be the most obvious explanation , but perhaps too obvious .
Two years ago , when shockwaves from the collapse of the US housing bubble crashed onto European shores , these political leaders reacted with apparent vigor , making themselves rather popular for a while .
Paradoxically , the early stages of the financial crisis appeared to favor conservative and pro-market leaders – who seemed to be in a better position to save the economy – more than socialists .
Today , this is no longer the case .
Socialism is on the rise again across Europe , at least in opinion polls .
And right-wing populism has become an electoral force to be reckoned with in France , Belgium , and the Netherlands .
Economic stagnation has come to appear endless .
Jobs are scarce , and the future looks bleak everywhere .
The Greek crisis has cast a pall over the entire eurozone . The common currency is now looked at with suspicion .
On the fringes of public opinion , some people are even muttering suggestions that their countries should revert to their ancient national currencies – which of course would only bring disaster in the form of an even more confusing state of affairs , as EU countries are indebted in euros . To quit the eurozone would only increase their level of indebtedness .
What makes this desolate economic landscape even gloomier is the striking inability of European leaders to explain what has happened and is happening to their citizens .
Indeed , I believe that it is here that the seminal reason for their plunging poll ratings lies .
Europe ’ s leaders seem to lead nowhere , because they have no vision on which to draw .
Consider the euro : no head of state or government has so far been able to present a coherent defense of the eurozone to counter the pervasive unease that now exists towards the common currency .
Or public spending : all European leaders adamantly want to reduce government spending .
But these same leaders , including that supposedly stern mistress of the budget Angela Merkel , were arguing less than two years ago that public spending would provide a “ Keynesian ” way out of the crisis .
Why such a turnaround ?
The European public has discovered that the 2008-2009 fiscal stimulus programs , which were aimed at forestalling an even greater crisis , generated more debts than jobs .
Politicians , however , hate to confess past errors .
Thus , they appear unable to explain their new rationale for the spending cuts that they are now announcing .
Europe ’ s leaders make things worse when they prove unable to connect isolated “ reforms ” – say , a lower public deficit – with any comprehensive vision of the economy .
A good example is Sarkozy ’ s effort to raise France ’ s retirement age from 60 to 62 . Trade unions are up in arms , which , after all , is their duty .
The population at large just does not understand what links raising the retirement age with the crisis .
The truth that politicians ( David Cameron ’ s UK government excluded , at least for now ) are reluctant to admit is that Western Europe ’ s current morass is distinct from the global US-made downturn .
Old Europe has entered into a severe and intractable crisis of the welfare state as ordinary Europeans have come to know it .
The generous retirement pensions , unemployment compensation , health coverage , and all kinds of social programs that make Western Europe a comfortable place to live were established when Europe ’ s economy and population were growing fast .
Now , after one generation of economic and demographic stagnation , the welfare state can be financed only by issuing more public debt .
Financial markets , awakened by the global crisis , will no longer support today ’ s Potemkin-like situation , in which welfare benefits have become a façade propped up by deficits .
Political leadership at such a moment demands a Churchillian accent .
It needs to be explained why the euro remains the best protection there is against inflation , the most dangerous social ill of all ; why government stimulus will not work and never actually has delivered sustained growth ; and why a new equilibrium between welfare and economic dynamism – based on less public debt and more private investment – must be established .
Such a discourse , if clearly articulated , would be understood and could be endorsed by many , if not by all .
At the very least , it would bring a sense of coherence to the actions of politicians , and those opposed to this search for a new European equilibrium – mostly Marxists and populists – would need to compete with a new vision of their own .
Would such an articulate vision make Europe ’ s leaders more popular ?
Maybe , and maybe not , but they would almost certainly appear more legitimate , even in the eye of their adversaries .
