Europe ’ s Naturalized Killers
Europe now seems to be the prime target of Islamist terrorists .
The arrest of 21 British Muslims for conspiring to blow up airlines crossing the Atlantic underscored , once again , the growing sense of dread and inevitability that is rooted in the homegrown nature of the threat .
But what do we really know about these killers among us ?
We know , of course , the broad outline of their of their all-encompassing fundamentalism , and we have some vague ideas about Al Qaeda as a decentralized network of cells in many countries that seeks to acquire chemical , biological , and perhaps even nuclear weapons .
We also know their leaders ’ long-term goals : seize power in Muslim countries and attack the Western states that support secular regimes in the Islamic world .
Finally , we also know that the leaders of this fanatical tide are few , but now have the sympathy of millions of ordinary Muslims .
There have always been fanatical individuals ready to die and kill in the name of their beliefs .
But they seem far more dangerous nowadays as a result of technological advances that have “ democratized ” bomb making .
After all , as the London and Madrid bombings demonstrated , a cell phone is all that is needed to time an explosion – or a series of explosions – with deadly efficiency .
Our freedoms and social fluidity also contribute to the threat .
People move about the globe cheaply and with relative ease .
Immigrants can establish themselves in new societies , and in democratic states they can live completely free of supervision .
Our freedoms are their tools .
So how do we fight such an amorphous enemy ?
President George W. Bush has demonstrated one way
Indeed , here is how one of the Madrid bombers described the psychological preparation to which he had been submitted : his leader “ made us watch DVDs showing pictures of war in Iraq , mostly pictures of women and children killed by American and British soldiers . ”
Simply put , bombs dropped from several thousands meters do not kill less indiscriminately than explosive charges placed in train cars .
Acknowledging this is not to excuse terrorism , but it is a first step toward understanding terrorism ’ s underlying causes , and thus toward their elimination .
Above all , it is to acknowledge that democratic societies must use both political and police tactics in confronting fanatical terrorists .
Politics is necessary for the simple reason that occupying armies and police cannot force hundreds of millions of Muslims to shed their hostility .
Political action implies actually leaving Iraq quickly and finding a fair solution to the Palestinian conflict , which in turn requires ending the occupation of all Palestinian territories .
Of course , extinguishing these hot spots will not erode the fanaticism of diehard and suicidal activists ; nor will it rid us of the avidity and hatred that is so evident among the leaders of Islamic rage .
But it will deprive them of the masses of sympathetic Muslims who view the fanatics as the only people seeking to defend “ Islamic ” values and oppressed Muslim peoples .
Policing is the second part of any effective strategy .
Greater efforts at infiltrating terror networks are needed , as is a deeper knowledge of the social structures created by the terrorists , in order to block their financial support .
This may mean eliminating shadowy “ tax havens , ” tapping phone lines , and identifying individuals considered highly dangerous .
Police actions must be merciless , even if this means more controls and surveillance .
It is precisely to prevent the development of a collective security fear that we need to alter the equilibrium between security and freedom .
While the European Union lags behind the United States in terms of conventional weapons , its capacity to fight terrorism is probably higher .
For historical reasons , Europe benefits from a political maturity that has allowed it to avoid Bush ’ s Manichean worldview , which has merely reinforced , rather than undermined , the enemy ’ s fanaticism .
Moreover , for geographical reasons , Europe also benefits from a better knowledge of Arab and Muslim countries and extensive familiarity with their populations .
The EU can and must prevail in this fight and in the defense of the values that it cherishes .
It might even find , along the way , a new and urgently needed motivation to reinforce its fraying unity .
