Doing Good Efficiently
COPENHAGEN – Policymakers can concoct many excuses not to invest in global aid and development projects .
Three weeks ago , I joined a group of five Nobel laureates and three distinguished economists to undermine one of those excuses , by providing information about where money can achieve the most good .
For each issue examined , we focused on benefits relative to costs .
To guide our thinking , we asked ourselves : if we had , say , an extra $ 75 billion to spend , where could we achieve the most good ?
We put each challenge on an equal footing .
Massive media hype about some problems was irrelevant .
At the bottom of our list were the least cost-effective investments the world could make , with the best places to spend money at the top .
The lowest place ( see list ) was given to dealing with climate change through cuts in CO2 emissions .
This finding was based in part on research by a lead author for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change – the group that shared last year ’ s Nobel Peace Prize – who noted that spending $ 800 billion over 100 years solely on mitigating emissions would reduce inevitable temperature rises by just 0.2 degrees Celsius by the end of this century .
Even taking into account some of the key environmental damage from warming , we would lose money on the investment , with returns of just $ 685 billion .
That does not mean that the planet should ignore climate change .
A better response would be to increase dramatically research and development into low-carbon energy – an option that gained a respectable mid-placed ranking on our list .
It makes little sense for the world to impoverish itself by embracing a poor solution to one problem when there are more pressing challenges that can be resolved at smaller expense .
Similarly , we gave a low ranking to solutions to the challenge of outdoor air pollution .
Many measures used in the developed world to reduce vehicle-caused smog – including particulate filters and “ inspection and maintenance ” schemes – are prohibitively expensive in the developing world .
We could get slightly higher benefits by focusing on indoor air pollution .
One and a half million people die each year from the effects of using solid fuel on poor stoves without ventilation .
Getting improved stoves to half the people affected would cost $ 2.3 billion .
Our top-ranked solutions were in areas that we don ’ t hear much about .
Unglamorous interventions like de-worming would allow children to be better nourished ; lowering the cost of schooling would see children and nations benefit .
We concluded that there would be high benefits from providing micronutrients – particularly vitamin A and zinc – to undernourished children in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa .
These help prevent neonatal death .
The cost is tiny : reaching 80 % of the world ’ s 140 million or so undernourished children would require a commitment of around $ 60 million annually , while the economic gains would eventually clear $ 1 billion a year .
Providing iron and iodized salt is another top investment .
Fortifying products with iron costs as little as $ 0.12 per person , per year .
We know that iron deficiency leads to cognitive and developmental problems .
For $ 286 million we could get iodized salt and fortified basic food items to 80 % of those in the worst-affected areas , with benefits estimated to be roughly nine times that sum .
A solution of a different sort is the removal of trade barriers .
Even accounting for the costs to short-term losers ( say , particular industries or workers with certain skills ) , the overall long-term benefits can be large .
Unless the economies of developing countries grow , they will remain mired in poverty .
By reducing trade barriers , per capita income will grow , enabling poor countries to address other problems by themselves .
This was the second Copenhagen Consensus .
While our bottom-ranked solutions remained more or less the same as four years ago , the top-ranked item in 2004 , prevention of HIV / AIDS , was rated lower this time because of subsequent progress .
This project provides a sound basis on which to measure and compare different uses of scarce resources .
It might be fashionable to talk about just a couple of the globe ’ s challenges , but we could achieve a lot more if we focused first on where our spending would be most rational .
RANKING WORLD INVESTMENTS
1 . Micronutrient supplements for children ( vitamin A and zinc )
2 . The Doha development agenda
3 . Micronutrient fortification ( iron and salt iodization )
4 . Expanded immunization coverage for children
5 . Improving agricultural technology
6 . De-worming and other school-based nutrition programs
7 . Lowering the price of schooling
8 . Increasing and improving girls ’ education by paying mothers to send them to school
9 . Community-based nutrition promotion
10 . Support for women ’ s reproductive role to reduce gender inequity
11 . Low-cost heart attack drugs for developing countries
12 . Malaria prevention and treatment
13 . Tuberculosis identification and treatment
14 . R & amp ; D in low-carbon energy technologies to combat global warming
15 . Bio-sand filters for household water treatment
16 . Pumps and wells to improve water coverage in rural areas
17 . Conditional cash transfers to increase the number of children receiving education
18 . Peace-keeping in post-conflict situations to reduce the risk of civil war
19 . HIV “ combination ” prevention package
20 . Total sanitation campaign to reduce the number of “ open defecation ” areas
21 . Improving surgical capacity at district hospital level
22 . Microfinance to women to reduce gender inequity
23 . Improved stove intervention to reduce indoor air pollution
24 . Large , multipurpose dam in Africa to improve water coverage
25 . Inspection and maintenance of diesel vehicles to reduce outdoor air pollution
26 . Low-sulfur diesel for urban road vehicles to reduce outdoor air pollution
27 . Diesel vehicle particulate control technology to reduce outdoor air pollution
28 . Tobacco tax to reduce heart disease and cancer
29 . A package of R & amp ; D and mitigation to combat global warming
30 . Mitigation of carbon emissions to reduce global warming
