Dream House No More ?
BRUSSELS – The financial crisis that began in 2007 had its roots in excesses in the housing market that remained unresolved in 2010 – and that will continue to roil economies in 2011 and beyond .
Everybody now knows about America ’ s dodgy “ sub-prime ” mortgages ( the term says it all ) .
But it is all too easy to forget that the development of this market was initially welcomed , because it enabled even people who would not normally qualify for a mortgage loan to aspire to homeownership .
Sub-prime mortgages made the American dream come true .
Of course , billions of others around the world share the same dream .
But the way housing finance is organized differs enormously from country to country , and these differences explain the recent global imbalances and financial crashes .
In developed economies , construction can add only a relatively small amount each year to the existing stock of housing .
With populations stagnating ( or declining in many parts of Europe and Japan ) , the existing stock of housing is exchanged among different parts of the population , and typically bequeathed from old to young .
The situation is different in emerging economies , where the quantity and quality of the existing stock of housing is woefully inadequate .
Moreover , most of the existing housing tends to be in rural areas , whereas most of the jobs are in the cities .
This is why urbanization means a huge building boom in emerging economies .
China , as usual , is the most extreme example , now accounting for more than one-half of global cement consumption .
The dream of homeownership is thus very much alive – and is a powerful economic force – in the emerging world .
But mortgage markets remain underdeveloped in most emerging economies .
This means that young Chinese couples will first have to save a large part of their income as a down payment for their dream house ( typically an apartment in a high-rise ) .
The absence of “ no money down ” mortgages might be more important than Confucian ethics in explaining China ’ s high savings rate .
One sure way to reduce the savings rate in China would be to develop an American-style mortgage market there .
The Chinese and others should , however , bear in mind that an increase in housing prices does not make a country richer .
Of course , every homeowner will feel richer if his property ’ s price goes up .
But if the price of all housing goes up , the country as a whole is no better off ; after all , people have to live somewhere , so , other things being equal , cashing in on higher house prices would merely mean paying more for one ’ s next home .
Housing booms thus create only an illusion of wealth , though it is compelling enough to induce excessive consumption , as occurred in the United States over the last decade .
Conversely , a crash in house prices does not destroy any real wealth ( the houses still stand ) .
On the contrary , a crash makes the dream of ownership more affordable , which benefits first-time buyers – typically the young and less well-off .
But , from an economic point of view , the share of homeowners versus tenants is not very important .
If the rental market is well developed ( as in , say , Germany ) , most families might elect not to own .
But Germans still own indirectly the houses they live in through their investments with life-insurance companies and savings societies , which own and manage a large proportion of the country ’ s housing estates .
By contrast , from an economic point of view , many American households really rent their homes from the Chinese government .
They might be proud homeowners on paper , but their mortgage was probably underwritten by quasi-governmental institutions like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , which in turn rely heavily on capital from China for their own refinancing .
The real danger arises when everyone is convinced that investing in real estate is the best way to secure one ’ s own future because house prices can only go up .
This induces lenders to provide not only NINJA ( no income , no job , no assets ) mortgages , but also generous loans to real-estate developers to build ever larger mansions and housing estates .
As long as a boom lasts , everybody benefits .
But when the bubble bursts , the NINJAs cannot service their debt and builders go into bankruptcy .
Lenders find that the collateral ( half-finished or empty houses ) is worth almost nothing , resulting in huge losses in the banking system ( as the US found out in 2008 ) .
In extreme cases , as in Ireland ( one hopes not in Spain ) , the need to save the banking system can bankrupt an entire country .
Housing booms can last a long time , typically more than a decade .
The downside is that housing busts last equally long , because houses are such a durable good .
Once too many houses have been built , the existing overhang depresses the market for a very long time , and unemployed construction workers are usually unable to find jobs elsewhere .
The last decade saw the peak of an unprecedented housing boom in most of the rich world .
The bust , with its banking problems and unemployment , is likely to last for most of the coming decade , depressing growth in all those countries which looked so strong in 2008 .
By contrast , the emerging economies have barely started their own boom , which is underpinned by the spillover of liquidity from the US .
The emerging world ’ s boom might well stretch over the entire next decade , as hundreds of millions of homes are built .
The next bust can be avoided only if emerging markets manage the dream of homeownership better than the US and Europe .
