The Resistible Rise of Marine Le Pen
PARIS – Watching the results of the second ballot in France ’ s regional elections on December 13 , surrounded by my family , I was overpowered by a sense of relief , and even pride .
The party of hatred – Marine Le Pen ’ s National Front ( FN ) – failed to win a single region .
Democracy had prevailed .
The values of the Republic had triumphed .
One month to the day after terrorists killed 130 people in Paris , the French once again demonstrated clear-eyed stoicism .
Just as my countrymen had remained strong in the face of terrorism , they held firm against the siren song of venomous populism .
As the results of the ballot became clear , my eldest son leaned over and whispered into my ear : “ It is in moments like these that it feels so good to be French . ”
To be sure , as welcome as these results may be , we should not allow them to blind us to the message of the first round of balloting , in which the FN finished first in six of the country ’ s 13 regions .
French voters are deeply disillusioned with the establishment .
Since the 2012 presidential election , Le Pen has tripled her party ’ s popular support , attracting nearly seven million voters .
And yet , as alarming as her rapid rise might be , there is much to be learned from her decisive defeat .
To begin with , the FN ’ s effort to present itself as a normal political party has failed .
Despite Le Pen ’ s attempts to soften its tone and broaden its appeal , shedding – at least formally – its anti-Semitic elements , the party continues to be perceived as a risk by a majority of French voters .
“ We are not fools , ” was how my neighbors in Normandy – many of them farmers or artisans – put it shortly after the results of the first vote had come in .
They might use the first ballot to express their anger at the government and discontent with the system , but they know that the FN is made up of incompetent extremists .
They don ’ t want them in positions of real power .
Even in the face of economic stagnation and high unemployment – especially among the young – the French are not ready “ to rock the boat ” to the point of abandoning the euro or the European Union .
French governments – including the incumbent one – may have failed to respond adequately to the country ’ s economic plight .
But that doesn ’ t mean that voters are ready to take a leap in the dark by placing their faith in a pack of preening demagogues surfing on discontent and fear .
Indeed , fear was the dominant factor in these elections .
In the first round , it favored the FN , whose raison d ’ être is popular anxiety about migrants , terrorists , globalization , and openness to the world .
But in the second round , fear was Le Pen ’ s undoing .
Voters not only feared handing over positions of real authority to unqualified counter-elites ; they feared endangering their country ’ s image and damaging its position in Europe and beyond .
After all , France ’ s international identity is an integral component of its national identity .
The country ’ s pride and sense of mission , inherited from the Ancien Régime and reinforced by the French Revolution , may not have prevented collaboration with Nazi Germany under the Vichy government ; but it took a disastrous defeat to force France to bend its knee to the far right .
The situation today is far less dire .
Le Pen might try to paint herself as a modern Charles de Gaulle , leading the resistance against the establishment .
But the public continues to regard the FN as the ideological heir to Vichy France – a party that has barely shed its collaborationist clothing .
The outcome of France ’ s regional elections is relevant not only in Europe , but also across the Atlantic .
French voters have shown that the EU is not condemned to be destroyed by attacks on its legitimacy , and that populism need not triumph .
If democratic leaders – in Europe and the United States alike – heed that message and take their responsibilities seriously , politicians like Le Pen can and will be defeated .
