Creative Self-Disruption
LAGUNA BEACH – Like many readers , I still vividly recall when Nokia was the dominant player in mobile phones , with over 40 % of the market , and Apple was just a computer company .
I remember when Amazon was known only for books , and when dirty taxis or high-priced limousines were the only alternative to public transport or my own car .
And I recall when the Four Seasons , Ritz Carltons , and St. Regises of this world competed with one another – not with Airbnb .
Now , I may be old , but I am not that old .
These changes happened recently – and fast .
How did they occur ?
Will the pace of change remain so rapid – or even accelerate further ?
And how should companies respond ?
An industry can be transformed by top-down economic , financial , political , and regulatory changes .
But companies like Airbnb , Amazon , Apple , and Uber exemplify a different kind of transformation : agile players invade other , seemingly unrelated industries and brilliantly exploit huge but previously unseen opportunities .
Importantly and counter-intuitively , doing so serves their own core competencies , rather than those of the industry that they seek to disrupt .
Indeed , rather than using existing approaches and processes to compete , these entrants created radical new game plans , rewriting the target industry ’ s rules .
Their creativity and passion enabled them to subdue – and in some cases even destroy – less adaptable giants remarkably quickly .
Central to these companies ’ success has been their understanding of a fundamental trend affecting nearly all industries : individual empowerment through the Internet , app technology , digitalization , and social media .
Most traditional companies , meanwhile , remain focused on their macro environment , at the expense of responding adequately to the new micro-level forces in play .
If existing companies hope to compete in this new environment , shaped by both top-down and bottom-up forces , they will to have to adapt , preempting disruptive new players by figuring out how to disrupt themselves .
Otherwise , they could face a fate similar to Nokia , which was disintermediated by one tech company ( Apple ) and acquired by another ( Microsoft ) .
In this effort , companies must recognize that both demand and supply factors are or will be driving the transformation of their competitive landscapes .
On the demand side , consumers expect a lot more from the products and services they use .
They want speed , productivity , and convenience .
They want easy connectivity and expanded scope for customization .
And , as the success of services like TripAdvisor show , they want to be more engaged , with companies responding faster to their feedback with real improvements .
On the supply side , technological advances are toppling long-standing entry barriers .
The online car service Uber adapted existing technologies to transform a long-sheltered industry that too often provided lousy and expensive service .
Airbnb ’ s “ supply ” of rooms far exceeds anything to which traditional hotels could reasonably aspire .
An existing company would have to be highly specialized , well protected , or foolish to ignore these disruptions .
But , while some well-established companies in traditional industries are already looking for ways to adapt , others still need to do a lot more .
One traditional industry in which progress is being made is the automotive branch , where companies are pursuing digitalization .
Though new entrants could undoubtedly disrupt incumbents ’ production platforms – Elon Musk ’ s Tesla Motors is a clear example – they are rare .
These days , the more pervasive competitive threat comes from companies in other domains that can erode the customer value proposition after the car is sold .
Automotive companies are recognizing that , over time , the digital experience in the cars they produce will command a larger share of the consumer surplus , owing largely to the potential for substantial profit margins and economies of scale .
As a result , they are adapting their vehicles to the new sharing economy , helping people to remain well-connected in the car , expanding the scope of after-sale services , and preparing for the shift away from individual car ownership toward car sharing .
Banks are also adapting , but much more slowly and hesitantly .
If they are to make progress , they must move beyond simply providing apps and online banking .
Their aim should be holistic engagement of clients , who seek not only convenience and security , but also more control over their financial destiny .
In these and many other industries , the competitive landscape is undoubtedly becoming more complicated and unpredictable .
But four general guidelines can help managers effectively adapt their mindsets and business models to facilitate orderly and constructive self-disruption .
· First , companies should modernize core competencies by benchmarking beyond the narrow confines of their industry .
· Second , they should increase their focus on customers , including by soliciting and responding to feedback in an engaging way .
· Third , managers should recognize the value of the data collected in their companies ’ everyday operations , and ensure that it is managed intelligently and securely .
· Finally , the micro-level forces that have the potential to drive segment-wide transformations should be internalized at every level of the company .
Companies that apply these guidelines stand a better chance of adapting to what is driving today ’ s rapid reconfiguration of entire industries .
The bottom line , once again , is supply and demand : More than ever , people want – indeed , feel empowered to expect – cheaper , smarter , safer , and more efficient tools to live a more self-directed life .
Companies that fail to deliver will find that their days are numbered .
