Food for Revolution
PRINCETON – Summits are defined by their location .
It is quaint that the 1933 World Economic Conference took place in the Geological Museum in London ’ s Kensington , at a time when international cooperation seemed as alien as a fossilized dinosaur .
On these criteria , Deauville , in French Normandy , with the ( slightly faded ) elegance of a past era of elite luxury , ostentatious consumption , and sumptuous banquets , is also perhaps not an altogether fortunate choice for the G-8 meeting .
This year , the G-8ers are talking about interesting but peripheral issues , such as the economic impact of the Internet .
Worse , they are talking about important issues , like food security , in a peripheral way .
The food issue emerged for the first time as a major theme at the July 2009 summit in L ’ Aquila , Italy , as a response to a commodity boom that was beginning to falter , but that has since reemerged with the force of a hurricane .
Now the G-8 will discuss funding for palliative measures .
The issue of food is , however , intimately tied to a host of much broader economic issues , which the international community is not properly addressing .
Even though the global economy today looks relatively robust in general , international economic cooperation is more fragile now than at any moment in the post-1945 world .
Weak food security highlights all of the major problems of the modern world non-order .
Economic and financial nationalisms threaten .
There is talk of currency wars , national management and regulation of banking , and growing demand for greater levels of trade protection .
And all of these issues are inter-connected .
The discussion of monetary policy is especially divisive .
Because of low interest rates in the United States , major financial institutions can borrow cheaply in dollars and then chase much higher returns in the major emerging-market countries .
The result creates an impossible dilemma for many of the world ’ s most dynamic economies .
If they try to clamp down by raising domestic interest rates , they will only attract greater capital inflows .
If they let the exchange rate rise , they might deter some capital inflows , but they would also penalize their exporters and push up domestic unemployment .
Emerging-market policymakers in big countries such as Brazil , China , and Turkey routinely attack the US and its monetary policy as a source of inflation , social tension , and political instability .
The most obvious and dangerous consequence of low interest rates in the major industrial countries is their impact on commodity prices , which is especially pronounced for food and fuel .
As many economists , notably Jeffrey Frankel , have shown , prices on these markets are established by an auction-like process ; as a result , commodity markets transmit the effects of monetary expansion particularly quickly .
By contrast , branded products , into which producers have sunk major investments in securing the market , have prices that are much stickier and do not reflect the effects of monetary policy as rapidly .
Higher food prices have had a major impact in expanding the area devoted to cultivation in many countries , and have led to higher output levels worldwide .
Brazil , Russia , and China , but also Algeria , Egypt , and South Africa – indeed , all African countries that have maintained functioning governments – have seen dramatic increases in food production over the past decade .
This should be a happy picture : the world is now better able to feed itself .
But the same economic stimuli that underpin higher food output also lead to supply problems , a decline in living standards , and massive social strains , especially in urban centers .
This is important to bear in mind , because rising food prices have historically been the trigger for political revolutions .
The three revolutions that made the modern world , in France , Russia , and China , all had their immediate origins in food shortages , fear of hunger , and disputes about food pricing .
The panic about bread that swept France in 1789 , and the inability of the government to guarantee supplies , destroyed the ancien regime .
Louis XVI was contemptuously called “ le boulanger , ” the baker .
Wartime inflation destroyed stability in the Russian empire in 1917 , as farmers , worried about the declining value of their money , hoarded their output and let the cities starve .
The Bolsheviks came to power on a promise of bread ( and peace ) .
China , too , was paralyzed by inflation after the Second World War , leaving it vulnerable to food panics .
Food prices are usually not limited in their effects to one country alone .
Simultaneous revolutions swept Europe in 1848 , in the aftermath of crop failures whose most notorious manifestation was the Irish famine .
Price rises have been a major trigger of the discontent this year in the Middle East and North Africa .
Though the Egyptian and Tunisian economies were expanding quite satisfactorily , people had to pay much more for food .
Moreover , it would be wrong to view this as a purely regional phenomenon limited to the so-called Arab Spring .
The same kind of unrest , in which the countryside is pitted against the town , with both sides demanding more rights , could undermine the political order in China and other big emerging-market economies .
Recent decades have been replete with contagious financial crises that spread disorder from one country to another .
The effects of globalized money are now producing a new whirlwind .
The coming years or even months are likely to see new forms of these domino effects .
As in 1848 , the struggle for affordable food is producing discontent that transcends national frontiers , threatens established regimes , and fuels popular demand for a more just political order .
