Ecb Is Now Europe ’ s Anchor
The European Central Bank is making its reputation at this time of turmoil and crisis .
Barely a month after the rejection of the European Union Constitution in France and the Netherlands , the EU Summit in Brussels ended in a surprisingly acrimonious orgy of national egoisms and no deal . Then the terrorists struck in London .
With all this trouble , the ECB is showing itself to be an “ anchor of stability ” by steadfastly sticking to its mandate of insuring price stability .
Europe suffers from a profound crisis of confidence .
Its economy , for example , cannot recover properly because consumers , lacking confidence in the ability of their political leaders to solve the economy ’ s manifold economic problems ( budget deficits , pensions , etc . ) , are saving for a rainy day they feel is just around the corner — and businessmen are reluctant to invest , because they don ’ t trust government to make the necessary economic reforms .
The public ’ s lack of confidence in the EU ’ s political leadership is totally justified .
Instead of actually doing something constructive about Europe ’ s essential problem --reforming expensive welfare states to ensure global competitiveness--Europe ’ s political leaders are hiding behind straw man arguments about “ ultra liberal Anglo Saxon models , ” and pressuring the ECB to lower interest rates as if European economic weakness were Frankfurt ’ s fault .
Europe ’ s finance ministers portray the ECB as closed to dialogue .
When testifying before the EU Parliament ’ s Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee , Luxembourg prime minister and Euro-group chairman Jean-Claude Juncker said there should be “ open and frank ” talks between the euro-group ministers and the ECB — and French finance minister Dominique de Villepin said the same thing .
According to a knowledgeable ECB source , however , Europe ’ s finance ministers regularly meet in secret with the ECB leadership for a mutual and frank exchange of views on monetary policy and other issues .
The dialogue already exists though the public does not know it . Such disingenuousness does little to boost confidence in Europe ’ s political leadership .
The ECB has done all it can for growth by giving Europe a prolonged period of monetary stability at record low interest rates .
Does anyone really believe consumers are holding back on spending — and businessmen postponing their investments — in anticipation of that next drop in interest rates ?
To paraphrase Keynes , you can lead a horse to water but you can ’ t make him drink .
“ The last thing Europe needs now is an interest rate cut , ” says one influential member of the ECB Governing Council in a candid assessment of the current situation . Capitulating to outside political pressure is no one ’ s definition of an “ anchor of stability . ”
The euro would collapse , and the ECB finished as a creditable central bank .
Moreover , ECB chief economist Otmar Issing predicts long- term interest rates would go up — not down — as inflationary expectations increased .
So cutting interest rates would not only be stupid — it would be crazy .
But the ECB is not going to cut rates even though , for public relations reasons of keeping the political wolves at bay , it deceptively hints it might .
Don ’ t be fooled by such feints . The ECB is holding fast and , in doing so , demonstrates to Europe ’ s peoples that there is at least one EU institution they can trust .
This is vital .
History shows political turmoil often leads to inflation , which only fuels further turmoil .
Europeans can bet their last euro the ECB will not let the fledgling common currency be ravaged by inflation because their political leaders , having failed to do their jobs , now fear they might lose them .
Indeed , the courage currently demonstrated by the ECB in sticking to its guns should serve as a model for Europe ’ s future politicians .
Once they realize they can ’ t bully the ECB into unwanted and self-destructive interest rate cuts , EU leaders actually might summon up the will to lead — which is , after all , what they have been elected to do .
