Democracy Versus Growth ?
PRINCETON – Europe ’ s ongoing malaise has reignited the old debate over which form of government produces better economic performance .
Are authoritarian regimes , with their ability to ram through unpopular choices , more effective at generating growth ?
Or does liberal democracy , with its built in checks and balances , yield greater material prosperity ?
It is a discussion in which the supporting evidence seems to have oscillated from one side to the other in recent decades .
In the 1980s , economic performance in Chile , under General Augusto Pinochet ’ s dictatorship , and in Singapore , under the more benign but nonetheless authoritarian Lee Kuan Yew , was impressive .
Meanwhile , the democratic countries of the industrialized world struggled against recession and stagnation .
In Europe , this gave rise to the term “ Eurosclerosis . ”
Democracies , according to political scientists , were vulnerable to growth-constraining special interests .
Authoritarian regimes – at least those not committed to pillaging their countries – might be better positioned to implement policies that ensure long-term economic success .
This view crumbled with the fall of the Berlin Wall .
The collapse of Communism and the renunciation of central planning in Eastern Europe gave rise to a new line of thinking , as large numbers of voters demonstrated that they were ready to accept temporary sacrifices if they were linked to a realistic and non-corrupt reform program .
In Latin America , left-wing politicians embraced market principles as the best way to satisfy their constituents ’ aspirations , and growth resumed .
For much of the 1990s , democracies seemed to have the upper hand .
But the tug of war continues .
Since the beginning of this century , China ’ s supercharged economic growth once again seemed to highlight the benefits of authoritarianism .
The Chinese Communist Party ’ s success in navigating the turbulence of the global economic crisis with barely a shudder has attracted the attention of others who would follow its example .
Leaders like Russia ’ s Vladimir Putin , Turkey ’ s Recep Tayyip Erdoğan , Egypt ’ s Abdel Fatah el-Sisi , and Hungary ’ s Viktor Orbán claim that the price of economic stability and growth might sometimes be the suspension of democracy .
The seemingly endless euro crisis has led some European leaders to give credence to that viewpoint .
At the start of the crisis , Jean-Claude Juncker , now President of the European Commission , is reputed to have said , “ We all know what to do , we just don ’ t know how to get re-elected after we ’ ve done it . ”
In May 2010 , the European leaders decided that they could not enforce reform in Greece on their own , and called in the International Monetary Fund less as a financial resource than as a disciplining mechanism .
More recently , German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble sparked controversy when , evidently drawing inspiration from that experience , he said that “ France would be glad if someone could force the parliament ” to reform .
The truth , of course , is that authoritarian systems – whatever their short-term successes in holding the line against irresponsible policies – are unsustainable in the long run .
A lack of accountability inevitably produces corruption and inefficiency – problems with which China is now wrestling .
The challenge for democracies is to develop mechanisms that allow them to set policies that are sustainable in the long term while safeguarding the democratic process itself .
The public consensus supporting difficult reforms in Eastern Europe in the 1990s demonstrates that voters are able to understand and accept tradeoffs when they have no perceived alternative .
( Likewise , the crisis in Greece shows that voters will refuse to make sacrifices if they think there is another way out ) .
Parliamentary debate is an effective way to set long-term priorities ; but politicians need to ensure that the decisions taken are carried out without excessive tinkering or backtracking .
In the aftermath of the Great Depression , for example , there was a widespread consensus in the United States that excessive congressional interference was responsible for the disastrous hike in import barriers under the Smoot-Hawley Tariff .
Trade policy , it was decided , was better delegated to the president , an office better insulated from electoral pressures .
Similarly , the European debate over appropriate fiscal frameworks might be most appropriately settled by a referendum , following public debate on a long-term and sustainable strategy .
But the implementation of the decision would be best entrusted to the member states .
Whether at the European level or in individual member states , the authority for ensuring long-term economic growth should be precisely and clearly delegated to agencies that derive their legitimacy from the democratic process , while being protected from its baser whims .
The sustainable alternative to democratic decision-making is not authoritarianism ; it is the implementation of mechanisms that ensure that cool-headed deliberation is not undermined by the heated response to an immediate crisis .
