Germany ’ s Hegemony Trap
MUNICH – The prolonged Greek debt crisis and the ongoing influx of refugees into Europe have ignited a debate about Germany ’ s role within the European Union .
Has Germany become the European hegemon ?
And if not , should it assume that role , as some commentators have suggested , in order to prevent the European project from failing ?
‎ The idea of German hegemony – as should be clear to any student of history – is self-defeating .
Instead , Germany should assume the position of Europe ’ s “ Chief Facilitating Officer , ” as German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier aptly called it , focused on strengthening the EU by working to create the conditions necessary for a truly common European foreign and security policy , one that proactively prepares the continent to meet the challenges it confronts .
By throwing its full weight into this task , Germany would not only promote Europe ’ s influence in the world ; it would also deflate the discussion of hegemony .
The 2007 Treaty of Lisbon was based on the idea that the EU ’ s prosperity and security depend on its members looking beyond their parochial interests and act jointly , in their common interest .
In order to achieve this , the treaty created posts , such as the President of the European Council and the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , whose incumbents could speak and act on behalf of the entire EU .
As former Belgian Prime Minister Paul-Henri Spaak once noted , “ There are only two types of states in Europe : small states , and small states that have not yet realized that they are small . ”
The new offices established by the Treaty of Lisbon have helped the EU achieve some important successes – most notably during negotiations with Iran and with Serbia and Kosovo .
But there has been no consistent effort to strengthen their powers .
Far too often , when it comes to dealing with foreign-policy crises and strategic challenges , EU institutions are assigned a minor role .
The Ukraine crisis , where France and Germany have taken the lead , is but one example of this .
And yet , even as Euro-skepticism has been rising across the continent , there remains widespread popular support for a common , more powerful European foreign policy .
In a recent article in the Financial Times , former Polish Foreign Minister Radosław Sikorski outlined how this might be achieved .
When a foreign-policy issue arises , member states should assess whether it would be most appropriately addressed by individual states or at the European level .
In the vast majority of cases in which common action would be preferable , member states would provide full support to the EU .
As a result , European Council President Donald Tusk , EU High Representative Federica Mogherini , and EU Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker would play leading roles in European foreign policy .
Unfortunately , this is far from established practice .
The EU ’ s members tend to pursue dissonant policies , weakening , rather than strengthening , Europe ’ s global position .
And there are few things the rulers of China and Russia enjoy more than playing the EU ’ s members off against one another .
Germany has an opportunity to provide a counterweight to long-standing British objections to a unified foreign policy .
By putting its considerable influence in the service of a cohesive , strategically focused foreign and security policy , Germany would simultaneously achieve two key objectives : a stronger and more capable EU and a more European Germany .
A good starting point would be to act on longstanding calls for closer integration of EU members ’ armed forces .
Germany should put its full weight behind “ pooling and sharing ” military resources , even if the United Kingdom is resistant to such an effort .
After all , the time when EU member states went to war alone ended more than three decades ago , with the Falklands War .
“ Poor old Germany , ” Henry Kissinger once quipped . “ Too big for Europe , too small for the world . ”
Fortunately , Germany has a way out of this trap . As a proactive and constructive part of the EU , Germany is big enough for the world , and at the same time not too big for its neighbors .
As Steinmeier and German Minister of Economic Affairs Sigmar Gabriel , recently wrote , “ Only together , and only at the European level , will we be able at all to find rational solutions . ”
