Ending India ’ s Rape Culture
NEW YORK – The crime seems incomprehensible .
A 23-year-old physiotherapy student is dead , 12 days after having been raped for more than an hour by six men in a bus traveling on main roads in the Indian capital .
Her internal injuries from the iron rod that her attackers used were so severe that doctors had to remove her intestines in their effort to save her life .
Indians , it seems , have had enough .
Dozens of large and increasingly angry demonstrations have been held to demand that the government ensure women ’ s security and stop treating rapists with impunity .
While the authorities have sought to quell the protests – cordoning off central New Delhi and subjecting the rest of the city to traffic restrictions – violence has escalated .
After a policeman died , live ammunition was fired into the crowds – killing a journalist , Bwizamani Singh , and provoking a rebuke from Reporters without Borders .
It is not simply the high rate of rape in India that is driving the protests ’ virulence .
In a passionate speech , Kavita Krishnan , Secretary of the All India Progressive Women ’ s Association , spoke to the deeper issue behind the protests : the blame-the-victim culture in India around sex crimes .
She notes that government and police officials recently insisted that most rapists cannot be prosecuted in India , because , as one official put it , they are known to the women attacked .
Other officials have publicly suggested that victims themselves are “ asking for it ” by their use of freedom of movement .
This return to pre-feminist discourse is not confined to India .
Italy is having a similar debate about whether women ’ s clothes and behavior invite rape .
Even in Sweden , activists complain , rapes in which the men know their assailants go unprosecuted , because the victims are not seen as “ good girls . ”
Krishnan assailed the fact that the conviction rate for rape prosecutions in India has fallen from 46 % in 1971 to just 26 % today ( which , it should be noted , is higher than the conviction rates in the United Kingdom , Sweden , and the United States ) .
Indeed , the fact that most rapes are committed by men who are known to the victim should “ only make it easier to apprehend the rapist . ”
Instead , women who go to the police are urged not to file a complaint .
“ Strange people will begin to assemble at the station out of nowhere to ‘ explain ’ to you ” why that advice is correct .
The problem , Krishnan points out , starts at the top .
In the midst of the protests , Delhi Police Commissioner Neeraj Kumar sparked further outrage by suggesting that women carry chili powder to deter would-be rapists .
And , at a press conference , he said that women should not roam around without male escorts .
Otherwise , whatever happens to them is their own fault .
Now , with the protests continuing in the aftermath of the victim ’ s death , officials are emphasizing the need for measures to guarantee the “ safety and security ” of women .
But , as Krishnan notes , “ the word ‘ safety ’ with regard to women has been used far too much . ”
Indian women have heard it all their lives . “ It means , ” she says , “ You behave yourself .
You get back into the house .
You don ’ t dress in a particular way .
Do not live by your freedom … .
A whole range of patriarchal laws and institutions tell us what to do in the guise of keeping us ‘ safe . ’ ”
The six men accused of the bus attack have been arrested and charged with murder , and the government has ordered an inquiry into how rape cases are handled .
But the government ’ s critics remain skeptical of official intentions , noting that only 600 rapes per year are reported in the capital , despite the thousands that are estimated to occur annually .
The deeper truth underlying the protests can be found on blogs , where young Indian men and women bemoan the fact that travel guidebooks routinely warn women about pervasive sexual harassment in India , and advise them to move around in groups .
Movies , religion , music , and women themselves are all blamed for male sexual violence against women , but rapists are not held responsible .
A “ male-cosseting culture , ” as one blogger put it , in turn supports a rape culture .
The connection between rape , male privilege , and female sexual vilification was one of the key insights of feminists in the 1970 ’ s – an insight that they thought had been successfully applied to cultural debate about rape , and to law .
In India – as in Italy , Sweden , and around the world – women and men who support freedom of movement and safety from sex crimes are being forced to refight that battle .
One hopes that the protests in India will inspire the West to emulate the protesters ’ lack of complacency .
In the developing world , women are in special jeopardy .
Their embrace of autonomy and mobility risks putting them in conflict with a law-enforcement establishment and media that still view women through a pre-feminist lens : “ good girls ” who stay at home should not be raped , while “ bad girls ” who stake a claim to public space are fair game .
