A Wiser America
NEW YORK – When America absorbed the bombings at the Boston Marathon , what was striking was what did not happen .
Twelve years after the attacks of September 11 , 2001 , the country was saddened , but it was also better informed .
There was little of the rampant jingoism , get-them-at-all-costs bloodlust , constant speechifying , and flag-waving that followed the 2001 attacks .
Perhaps most remarkable was the absence of reflexive Islamophobia and of the willingness to fight any war – even the wrong war in the wrong country for the wrong reasons – against the supposedly culpable “ other . ”
Instead , this time , Americans ’ sadness was mingled with cynicism and suspicion .
The country is warier of being manipulated .
While Americans certainly mourn the dead and support the city of Boston , there has been a kind of penetration into the national consciousness that , after the 2001 attacks , America ’ s leaders used the bogeyman of terrorism to encroach on individual rights , fund almost every conceivable domestic-security boondoggle , and advance the self-interested agendas of the defense and surveillance industries .
Even conservative , Fox News-watching Americans have become aware , in a way that was not the case in the aftermath of the 2001 attacks , that America has created its own “ blowback . ”
The spin that worked so well back then – that the attacks occurred because “ they hate our freedoms ” – does not ring true anymore .
Americans know that a million refugees have fled Iraq ; the Oscar-nominated documentary Five Broken Cameras and other media have shown how the United States contributes to the brutalization of Palestinians – a major driver of “ jihad , ” or what the US State Department calls “ extremism ” ;
US soldiers have repeatedly been implicated in war crimes ; and Jeremy Scahill ’ s book Dirty Wars , which details targeted assassinations by the US around the world , has hit bookstores .
In short , while no one condones violence against innocents like that suffered by the victims at the Boston Marathon , Americans are far more aware than they were 12 years ago of their own slaughter of innocents around the world .
Their self-image is no longer that of the “ good guys , ” against whom an act of violence is mad and inexplicable .
Americans also are more aware of how such attacks are used to justify abuses of their own rights .
Immediately , the bombings began to be cited by some leaders as a call to limit constitutional rights .
Republican Senators John McCain and Lindsey Graham have called for the surviving suspect , Dzokhar Tsarnaev , to be labeled an “ enemy combatant ” and shipped to Guantánamo Bay – an idea that many Americans find chilling .
Other responses appall many in the US as well .
The fact that Tsarnaev , despite his many requests , was not initially informed of his right to remain silent and be represented by an attorney – normally a required part of any US arrest – caused considerable anxiety .
The panicky public response that permitted the establishment of GITMO is no more .
Americans recognize that a violation of anyone ’ s rights threatens the rights of all .
Notable , too , are the conspiracy theories this time around .
Most Americans probably do not actually believe that the bombing was a “ false flag ” event , perpetrated by others than the Tsarnaev brothers ; rather , the conspiracy theories seem to show how jaded Americans have become about their government ’ s approach to “ terror . ”
After all , US leaders lied about so much in the aftermath of the 2001 attacks .
They lied about Saddam Hussein ’ s weapons of mass destruction ; lied about why Iraq had to be attacked , and then about the course of the war there ; and the head of the federal Environmental Protection Agency at the time , Christie Whitman , even lied about the air quality in lower Manhattan after the attack , leading thousands of New York City children to suffer from severe respiratory problems .
Of course , reliance on fear and misdirection may still be part of official strategy .
With Dzokhar Tsarnaev in custody and his brother dead , the next round of stories reported on alleged “ sleeper cells ” and planned attacks that had been thwarted by America ’ s security services .
The Boston Globe , for example , ran an article about the man – identified only by his first name , Danny – whom the brothers carjacked three days after the attack .
Danny claimed that the only word of the brothers ’ conversation that he understood was “ Manhattan , ” and that the terrorists had asked him if his car could leave the state – say , to get to New York .
The Globe ’ s one-source report proved nothing – and was unverifiable by other reporters or citizens – but it suggested much , leading to a spate of equally unverifiable reports that New York had been targeted .
Other recent “ terror ” -related reporting has been as flimsy .
In Charles Savage ’ s recent account of the Guantánamo “ uprising , ” The New York Times credulously reproduced the “ arsenal ” that GITMO officials showed reporters in a video still .
The “ weapons ” were allegedly made from mop handles and nail files – objects that , as I know from having reported from Guantánamo , are literally impossible for any detainee to obtain .
The prisoners are housed far from anything like mops or other cleaning articles ; they are given no chores to perform ; and they receive no mail .
In swallowing the official account without skepticism – Savage did not ask where any of these items may have come from – The New York Times has apparently learned nothing from its badly flawed reporting on Saddam ’ s supposed WMD .
Fortunately , most Americans have learned from the past , and this was reflected in the public response this time around – sadness , yes , but also some wisdom .
Perhaps Americans have moved closer to understanding that they can and must fight terrorism in a civilized way , as free and thoughtful people .
