Civil Society and Its New Enemies
PRAGUE - Genuine civil society is the truest fundamental of democracy , a truth often forgotten in the heat of election campaigns .
Although Communism could , every now and then , coexist with private ownership , sometimes with private enterprise , it could never coexist with civil society .
So the most fateful attack that accompanied the installation of Communist power everywhere was an attack on civil society .
The freedom of speech that Communism suppressed overnight could , on its fall , be restored overnight .
Restoration of civil society – the many parallel and mutually complementary ways in which citizens participate in public life – has been far more complicated .
The reason is self-evident : civil society is an intricately structured , very fragile , sometimes even mysterious organism that grew over decades , if not centuries .
After years of virtual non-existence , civil society , therefore cannot be restored from above , or by legal fiat .
Its three pillars – private , voluntary associations , decentralization of the state , delegation political power to independent entities – can only be rebuilt patiently .
In the ten years of postcommunist transition our new political elites take either an apathetic stance towards rebuilding civil society or actively oppose it .
As soon as these elites gained power , they became unwilling to surrender any of the state authority they inherited .
Many democratic , even anti-Communist politicians are now , paradoxically , defending the overblown governmental powers that are relics of the Communist era .
This is why many schools , hospitals , cultural institutions and other establishments remain governed by centralized administrations , although they could have transformed themselves into organizations that the state would watch from a distance or support through transparent procedures .
Debate on decentralization of the state has been dragging on for nine years without any government department displaying the willingness to transfer powers to regions or to municipalities without a fight .
This is why taxation in our country remains excessive : the state has to pay for a thousand things which it would not have to pay if an advanced civil society existed , because citizens would pay for them directly .
This inertia has nothing to do with ideology .
If some politicians seek ideological excuses for their unwillingness to reduce state power , they mostly argue the following : " People have chosen us in an election ; it is their will that we rule .
Change is an attack on representative democracy .
Social redistribution of resources is a task for the state , and the central state 's responsibility in this field must not be diffused .
Attempts to build or to support any parallel structures not controlled from the center casts doubt on parliamentary democracy itself . "
Faith in civil society , indeed , is still interpreted by many as leftism , anarchism or syndicalism ; someone has even called it proto-fascism .
At the root of the argument that civil society is an attack on the political system , we find the well known unwillingness to share power .
It is as if the parties are saying : " Governing is our business , so choose between us , but nothing more . "
Nonsense : political parties , democratic institutions , work well only when they draw strength and inspiration from a developed , pluralist civic environment and are exposed to criticism from that environment .
It is not the intention of civil society to circumvent parliament or political parties : it aims to enable them to work to the best of their ability .
Without a life-giving background in the form of a diversely structured civil society , political parties as well as political institutions wither , lose inventiveness , and are eventually reduced to dull , closed groups of political professionals .
Civil society generates genuine pluralism , and pluralism – leading to competition – produces quality .
In this respect , there is a similarity between economics and politics .
The more different initiatives are allowed to operate , the greater is the chance that the best and most inventive ones will triumph .
To rely solely on the capacities of central state authorities or of central political bodies to always decide what needs to be done and how , equates power with truth , the most dangerous political conceit of this century .
Moreover , the more stratified civil society becomes , the more it thrives , the more stable is domestic politics .
Civil society protects citizens from being excessively affected by changes at the center of political power .
It absorbs , at lower levels , some of the effects of such change , even disposes of them .
In this way , it actually facilitates political change so that a change of government does not seem a windstorm leaving nothing in its place .
Where civil society is not sufficiently developed every problem filters up to the center of power .
But the more power is left at the center the more favorable are the conditions for such forces to gain control over the country .
Communists knew this very well ; it is why they even manipulated associations of bee-keepers .
You need not be an economist to discover that civil society also pays its way .
When things are paid by the state budget , more money must be collected in taxes and substantial sums are consumed by such transfers .
In a system that allows tax deductions for charitable giving , beneficial initiatives get more money than they would get if the same amounts were spent by the state .
Even without deductions , civil society takes its own improving initiatives .
The most important aspects of civil society is yet another thing – it enables people to realize themselves .
Human beings are not only manufacturers , profit makers or consumers .
They are also – and this may be their innermost quality – creatures who want to be with others , who yearn for various forms of coexistence and cooperation , who want to influence what happens around them . People want to be appreciated for what they give to their environment around them .
Civil society is one of the key ways in which our human nature can be exercised in its entirety .
The enemies of civil society know this ; it animates their opposition to it .
