The Fed Versus Price Stability
SAN FRANCISCO – There is a big difference between the Federal Reserve ’ s mandate to maintain “ stable prices ” – as enunciated in the Federal Reserve Act – and the Fed ’ s self-selected target of 2 % annual inflation .
So how is it that policymakers have managed to substitute the latter for the former ?
The term “ stable prices ” is self-explanatory : a bundle of goods will cost the same ten , 50 , or even 100 years from now .
By contrast , if a country experiences 2 % inflation over a ten-year period , the same items that $ 100 can buy today will cost $ 122 at the end of the decade .
After 100 years , the price tag will be a whopping $ 724 .
In her recent Congressional testimony , Fed Chair Janet Yellen referred several times to the mandate of maintaining “ stable prices ” ; but she mentioned the Fed ’ s 2 % inflation objective twice as often .
“ US inflation continues to run below the Committee ’ s 2 % objective , ” she said , and the current “ high degree of policy accommodation remains appropriate to foster further improvement in labor market conditions and to promote a return of inflation toward 2 % over the medium term . ”
Does the Fed really want to increase annual inflation to 2 % , such that the price level of the country will increase by more than 700 % over the next century ?
Is that what Congress had in mind when it tasked the Fed with achieving “ stable prices ” ?
Former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan knew that it did not .
On July 2 , 1996 , at a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) , which was devoted to extensive discussion of the appropriate inflation target for the Fed , Greenspan posed a simple question : “ Are we talking about price stability or are we talking about zero inflation ? ” he asked .
“ As we all know , those are two separate things . ”
The discussion quickly turned to the difficulty of measuring inflation accurately and the need to build in a “ safety cushion ” to avoid deflation .
According to Greenspan , “ Price stability is that state in which expected changes in the general price level do not effectively alter business and household decisions . ”
Yellen , then a Fed governor , was not satisfied : “ Could you please put a number on that ? ” she asked .
Greenspan did : “ I would say that number is zero , if inflation is properly measured , ” he replied .
At the time of that FOMC meeting , the consumer price index was increasing at about 3 % per year .
Most of the discussion focused on whether the Fed should slow annual price growth to 2 % or even lower , thereby consolidating the gains made in the difficult fight against inflation that policymakers had waged for the previous 15 years .
Greenspan summarized the consensus : “ ... we have now all agreed on 2 % ... ”
Thus , the Fed ’ s 2 % inflation objective was born .
During the ensuing discussion , several FOMC members argued that the inflation rate might be reduced to less than 2 % , but nobody argued that inflation should be pushed higher if a lower , but still positive , rate was achieved .
Following the discussion , Greenspan exhorted the FOMC members to keep the discussion of the inflation target secret .
“ I will tell you that if the 2 % inflation figure gets out of this room , ” he warned , “ it is going to create more problems for us than I think any of you might anticipate . ”
The official minutes of the meeting make no reference to the entire discussion of the inflation target , which took up several hours , and the FOMC never formally announced its 2 % target for annual inflation until Chairman Ben Bernanke , Yellen ’ s predecessor , finally did so in 2012 .
The 2 % inflation target now is at the forefront of FOMC decision-making .
For example , while annual inflation stood at 0.8 % in December 2014 , the minutes of the January 2015 FOMC meeting refer several times to the Committee ’ s need to make “ progress toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 % inflation ” by maintaining a highly accommodative policy stance .
Increasing the rate of inflation is now the stated objective of Fed policy .
Congress did not give the Fed a mandate to pursue that goal .
The Federal Reserve Act is explicit : the Fed should achieve “ price stability ” for the US currency , along with moderate interest rates and maximum employment .
As long as inflation is somewhere between zero and 2 % , the Fed should declare victory and leave it at that .
