The Grassroots of Climate Change
PARIS – The climate-change agreement reached here on December 12 was a rich victory for diplomacy .
Both the agreement itself and the atmosphere of cooperation that permeated the proceedings represent a sea change from the failed Copenhagen summit in 2009 .
But while we should congratulate world leaders on their success , Paris marks the beginning , not the end , of the road .
It is now our collective duty to hold our leaders to account and ensure that they turn promises into action – especially in the world ’ s most vulnerable regions , such as Africa .
We should applaud China , India , the United States , and the European Union for their pre-Paris pledges on climate action .
These countries ’ commitments created the sense of responsibility , trust , and solidarity that enabled 195 nations not merely to agree on a one-off deal , but to set in motion a series of increasingly ambitious five-year cycles to phase out greenhouse-gas emissions this century .
This is a clear signal that the carbon era has reached a turning point ; as a result , there will be more investment in renewable energy .
Countries also promised to work harder to protect the world ’ s most vulnerable , by aiming to limit average global warming to as little as 1.5º Celsius above pre-industrial levels .
And developed countries pledged at least $ 100 billion of annual climate finance to help the least developed countries cut their carbon emissions and prepare for climate change .
For the first time , an international agreement offers the least developed countries funds to cover some of the loss and damage caused by climate shocks .
But in order to fulfill the Paris agreement , we must ensure that governments keep their promises .
National emissions targets are voluntary , rather than inscribed in the agreement , so they are not legally binding .
In hard , practical terms , there is not yet anything specific to slow the extraction of fossil fuels or stop high-polluting countries from using coal for electricity .
Developed countries made no individual commitments , and the starting year for funding adaptation assistance remains unclear .
We must keep the pressure on to make sure that the promised climate finance is sufficient to enable the least-developed countries to adapt to present and future climate change .
All of this must happen urgently .
The cumulative effect of previous decades of emissions means that there will be no chance for a last-minute solution .
In Africa , climate change may already be responsible for falling water levels in West African rivers ; declining coral reefs in tropical waters ; lower fruit production in the Sahel ; fewer fish in the Great Lakes region ; and the spread of malaria in the Kenyan uplands .
Without significant cuts in greenhouse-gas emissions , we will see far worse .
By threatening basic human needs , such as food and water , climate change will be a catalyst for instability , migration , and conflict .
Africa will pay a heavy price .
Fortunately , we now know that we can prevent catastrophic climate change while still providing the energy needed to sustain economic growth , create jobs , and lift millions of people out of poverty .
The many benefits of pursuing a low-carbon development path include not only cleaner air and better energy security , but also the opportunities that arise from decentralized and renewable power .
These opportunities are particularly crucial for Africa , where more than 620 million people live without electricity .
The falling cost of solar power , batteries , and LED lighting means that renewable sources can now provide affordable , modern energy .
In Kenya , for example , Maasai women in Magadi who have been trained to install solar power have brought electricity to 2,000 households in just two years .
But to realize this economic and social potential , African leaders must combat corruption .
They must make the management of their utilities more transparent , strengthen regulations , and increase public spending on energy infrastructure .
Investment and external financing must follow .
This is not a question of aid , but of fairness , given that Africa contributes so little to global emissions but stands to suffer the most from climate change .
Investing in low-carbon energy also makes sound business sense : It boosts technology companies and promotes social entrepreneurship globally .
I am pleased that two initiatives launched in Paris will take us farther down the renewable-energy path .
Europe and Canada pledged $ 10 billion toward an ambitious project called the Africa Renewable Energy Initiative , which aims to install ten gigawatts of solar , wind , and geothermal capacity by the end of the decade .
And France and India launched the International Solar Alliance to raise more than $ 1 trillion by 2030 to deploy solar power in more than 100 developing countries .
The Paris agreement has drawn the first broad strokes of a solution to climate change .
But until its targets are translated into action , the world ’ s least-developed countries may not be convinced that the developed countries are serious about equity – or “ climate justice . ”
For Africa , 2015 must be a turning point .
If the world ’ s citizens hold their leaders to account for the targets they have set , it will be .
Quite simply , the historic responsibility for the planet ’ s future rests on the shoulders of us all .
