The Roots of German Openness
PARIS – “ Germany , Germany , ” shout thousands of refugees , faced with the obvious bad will of Hungary ’ s political authorities , in front of Budapest ’ s Keleti railway station .
They are dreaming of Germany – not any European country , but specifically Germany – the way , more than a century ago , Europe ’ s poor , fleeing misery – and , in some cases , pogroms – dreamed of America .
This represents a dramatic shift from the past .
What a contrast between the photo , taken less than 80 years ago in the Warsaw Ghetto , of a small Jewish child with raised arms and fearful eyes , and one taken a few days ago in Munich of a smiling refugee boy , his head protected by a policeman ’ s hat .
For the first child , Germany meant certain death ; for the second , it offers hope for a better life .
And Germany does not represent just an abstract hope ; the country is welcoming more migrants than any of its European counterparts , with Chancellor Angela Merkel having announced that the country will take at least 800,000 asylum-seekers this year .
How can a country move so rapidly from darkness to light ?
No one can deny the role of schools , civic and business leaders , and , of course , external forces in bringing about this change .
But nor should one underestimate the importance of political leadership .
Events can create politicians .
Before the Berlin Wall fell , Helmut Kohl was essentially a provincial West German political figure ; the likes of French President François Mitterrand looked down on him with a certain condescension .
Then , as Chancellor – a position he held for 16 years – Kohl played a key role in German reunification and , together with Mitterand and others , drafted the Maastricht Treaty that created the European Union .
Events have similarly transformed Merkel from a cautiously calculating and often-slow decision-maker into a moral force .
With firmness and clarity , Merkel has condemned all forms of xenophobia and criticized her European counterparts for refusing to accept refugees .
Rather than worrying about offending people or losing the next election , she is following the diktat of her conscience .
The daughter of a Protestant pastor raised in East Germany during Communist rule , she is standing up for Christian Democratic values .
Indeed , at a time when most European political leaders are lacking in inspiration and direction , if not courage , Merkel has emerged as Europe ’ s moral compass .
It is time for the rest of the EU ’ s leaders to get on the right path .
When history knocks at the door so powerfully – this time , in the form of hundreds of thousands of refugees – one cannot waste time appeasing or , worse , courting populist movements .
That is the surest route to losing one ’ s soul – and the next election .
Of course , one must not be naive .
Politics and morality are not always compatible , and Germany is in a very different situation from the rest of Europe .
With its shrinking and aging population , Germany needs more young , motivated people to keep its economy thriving – a need that refugees can fill .
By contrast , France and many other European countries face more favorable demographic conditions and worse economic conditions , including high unemployment .
After years of destabilizing economic crisis , which has yet to be fully overcome , most European societies feel wholly unprepared – socially , economically , politically , and even psychologically – to receive the flood of refugees .
If Germany behaves in a more dignified manner , it is thanks not just to Merkel ’ s political leadership , but also to the fact that Germans are more secure than most Europeans .
It is easier to become open to others when you are confident in yourself .
But one must not underestimate the endurance of values like tolerance and solidarity within European societies .
With this in mind , EU leaders should be working to encourage and harness the generosity of some , while containing and resisting the selfishness and xenophobia of others .
To be successful , however , there must be burden sharing .
If those whose instinct is to be generous are left alone to shoulder the burden , that generosity will not last for long .
In the long run , a society can advance only through openness and tolerance .
Rejecting diversity – whether by suppressing differences at home or cutting off outsiders – accelerates decay .
To reverse the formula of former Czech President Václav Klaus , the suicide of Europe will come not from accepting the flow of refugees , but from closing our doors to them and washing our hands of their fate .
Likewise , Hungary is not protecting Europe by building walls to keep the refugees out .
On the contrary , it is not only controverting Europe ’ s fundamental values ; it is also undermining Europe ’ s interests .
After all , the United States would not have become the leading world power in less than two centuries without the successive waves of migrants that landed on its shores .
Europe needs refugees to prosper , and the refugees need Europe to survive .
