The ECB and Its Critics
PARIS – In Northern Europe , especially Germany , the European Central Bank ’ s decision to embark on quantitative easing ( QE ) has triggered an avalanche of indictments .
Many are unfounded or even baseless .
Some are confusing .
Others give greater weight to speculative dangers than to actual ones .
And few point to real problems , while ignoring potential solutions .
Judging by the criticism , one might consider zero inflation a blessing .
But if that were true , central banks around the world would have set it as a target long ago .
Instead , all of them define price stability as low , stable , but positive inflation .
That is because zero inflation has three overwhelmingly negative consequences . First , it erodes the effectiveness of standard monetary policy ( because if interest rates went much below zero , depositors would withdraw cash from banks and put it in safes ) .
Second , it makes relative wages ( of , say , manufacturing versus services employees ) more rigid , because wage contracts are generally set in euro terms .
And , third , it increases the burden of past debts and makes exiting from a private or public debt crisis even more painful .
But , say the critics , there is no reason to worry , because the eurozone ’ s near-zero inflation is merely the result of the sharp drop in oil prices .
Unfortunately , there is indeed plenty of reason to worry .
Consumer price inflation in the eurozone has been below target for 22 consecutive months – long before the price of oil started collapsing .
Cheaper oil is a boon for growth ; but it also lowers long-term inflation expectations , which are the true target of monetary policy .
Then there is the critics ’ claim that below-target inflation is needed to restore competitiveness .
This is just confusing .
It is true that rebalancing competitiveness within the eurozone has not yet been completed , and that some countries thus need to record below-average inflation to cut above-average costs .
But this is not true of the eurozone as a whole .
Eurozone-wide competitiveness depends on product quality and the euro exchange rate , which is flexible .
Inflation is irrelevant in this respect .
Nonetheless , the ECB ’ s critics fear the sorcerer ’ s apprentice : monetary initiatives like QE will ultimately cause runaway inflation .
This reasoning is strange , at best .
If the critics ’ point is that central banks make mistakes , it seems worth pointing out that the mistake made in the eurozone was to let inflation reach excessively low levels .
Now the ECB is reacting with force , but , as Japanese policymakers have found , exiting from deflation is far from easy .
ECB President Mario Draghi may fail to bring inflation back to 2 % .
Or he may overshoot .
Nobody knows .
But it is odd to claim that a speculative danger should prevent the ECB from fighting one that is all too real .
Then comes the claim that QE is illegal .
But the ECB ’ s primary responsibility is to achieve and maintain price stability .
When conventional interest-rate policy becomes impotent , its duty is to rely on other instruments .
The purchase of government bonds is explicitly authorized by the EU Treaty .
This is not to say that QE has no downside .
It probably will create asset-price bubbles .
Ultra-low interest rates lift asset prices in two ways : they increase the present value of the future income stream of a stock or a fixed-income bond ; and they make credit and property purchases more affordable .
So asset-price inflation is likely , and policymakers will have to contain it through regulatory tools , such as credit limits .
Moreover , QE probably will increase inequality .
The rise in the price of stocks , bonds , and land will increase their owners ’ wealth .
Obviously , those without property will not benefit .
But the ECB ’ s monetary initiative will also help reignite growth and create jobs , thereby benefiting the poor .
It is governments ’ task to address the rise in inequality resulting from QE , and they have an instrument for that : taxation .
When the United States Federal Reserve embarked on QE , it was accused of exporting its problems , because aggressive monetary easing inevitably weakens the currency . & nbsp ; The same charge is now being leveled against the ECB . & nbsp ; But this is misleading .
Ultimately , the US recovery helped its trade partners more than it hurt them .
In today ’ s world of global monetary interdependence , the rule of the game is that every currency union should pursue its own price stability .
The ECB has not departed from this standard .
Another major concern in Germany is that QE could be a backdoor means of creating Eurobonds .
But a Eurobond is a pact among issuers offering each other mutual guarantees .
The ECB , however , is not an issuer ; it is an independent agency , and the decision to buy is its own .
Furthermore , 80 % of the risk will be borne by national central banks individually .
Northern European opposition to Eurobonds reflects moral-hazard concerns that monetary activism will discourage structural reforms .
But , in the current context of protracted stagnation , the TINA ( there is no alternative ) argument for reform is losing strength by the day .
Absent a visible payoff , reform fatigue is setting in .
The new policy mix should combine macro-level support and micro-level change .
The argument that QE will destroy fiscal discipline cannot be rejected out of hand , because both its proponents and its adversaries seem to agree that its days are over .
But , though it is true that ECB bond purchases will shelter governments from market pressure , such pressure was already fairly ineffective .
It is governments ’ job to uphold their end of the bargain and ensure that they do not shirk their responsibilities .
This is what the EU ’ s “ fiscal compact ” is for .
Finally , German critics complain that the ECB ’ s monetary policy is not geared to German economic conditions .
This is both true and unavoidable .
The ECB is responsible for the eurozone as a whole .
Its monetary policy cannot be perfectly suited to all members ’ needs all of the time .
For the euro ’ s first ten years , the ECB ’ s policy was too lax for Spain ; now it is too lax for Germany .
