Europe ’ s Nationalist Night Watch
PARIS – Populism is on the rise throughout Europe , as both economically depressed and prosperous countries become increasingly frustrated with their established political elites .
But populists are unlikely to take control of any European government in the foreseeable future , even where the risk currently seems highest , in countries such as Hungary , Greece , and France .
The majority of voters , driven by fear or common sense , remain unwilling to accept the prospect of becoming isolated from the rest of Europe .
But that does not mean that the European Union is safe from divisive forces .
On the contrary , the return of nationalism , even ( and especially ) in the countries that constituted the EU ’ s founding core more than 60 years ago , represents a less spectacular but potentially more corrosive threat to European unity .
This trend was starkly apparent last week during a visit to the Netherlands , one of the six original signatories of the Treaty of Rome .
On my trip , I visited the Rijksmuseum , which was reopened in 2013 , after a decade-long renovation .
The previous building , aging and slightly outdated , was a tribute to the universal appeal of the country ’ s great painters like Rembrandt and Vermeer ; it was a perfect celebration of light and family .
The new Rijksmuseum , despite being a striking and successful reincarnation , conveyed a very different message , serving more as a celebration of Dutch art and history .
One room is devoted to the naval power of the Low Countries in the second half of the seventeenth century , when under the command of Admiral Michiel de Ruyter , the newly independent Netherlands was able to defeat at sea the French , the Spanish , and even the British .
Another room , called “ Waterloo , ” highlights the defeat of Napoleon on what was then Dutch soil .
It is centered on a huge painting , restored using donations from Dutch citizens , that pays tribute to the Duke of Wellington , as well as to the role of William of Orange , the future king of the Netherlands , in the battle .
Of course , I do not take issue with the Waterloo room out of some sense of French chauvinism .
Napoleon was a despot , who waged useless and exceedingly bloody wars from Spain to Russia .
His defeat was no tragedy , to say the least .
But in the old Rijksmuseum , no room was required to celebrate that defeat .
The Dutch people ’ s collective psyche did not need a reminder of their country ’ s contribution to Napoleon ’ s downfall , which led to the restoration of their independence and , for a brief period , their control over present-day Belgium .
Yet in recent years – during the decade since their spectacular rejection of a treaty establishing an EU constitution – the Dutch have increasingly felt the need to celebrate their past glory in the most traditional manner .
They , like other Europeans , are calling upon the past to compensate for the disillusion and frustration of the present and the uncertainty of the future .
Sixty years ago , a return to the past was precisely what European countries sought to avoid .
They did not glorify historical battles , because they could see the ruins of those battles all around them – images that inspired them to build a different kind of future .
By transcending national sovereignty , they hoped to protect themselves from a return to conflict and destruction .
To be sure , pride in one ’ s national identity is not , in itself , a bad thing .
On the contrary , in a Europe composed of diverse nations , confidence in one ’ s own identity is a prerequisite for completing economic and political integration .
To be a proud European , one must be a proud German , Spaniard , or Pole .
But what if that national pride takes hold at a time of deep , even existential , doubt about the value of Europe ?
While most Europeans understand that their countries cannot address the challenges facing them alone , they are losing faith that Europe is the answer .
After all , beyond its enduring economic challenges , the EU has so far proved incapable of finding a common solution to the escalating refugee crisis that is coherent , firm , and in line with European values .
The EU is not inherently incapable of addressing these challenges .
The problem is that what the EU needs – more integration – is precisely what Europeans have become unwilling to support .
It seems likely that only a major immediate threat , such as war with Russia , will drive them to take that step to give more powers to EU institutions in which they have lost faith .
The 70 years since the end of World War II represent only a small fraction of Europe ’ s history – far from long enough to transform the way people view themselves or their countries .
The danger is that 70 years was just long enough for Europeans to begin to forget why they pursued integration in the first place .
If that is the case , the kind of glorification of the past on display in the renovated Rijksmuseum is a very bad sign indeed .
