Damming China ’ s Rivers
Of all China ’ s problems , none will be more critical over the long run than how it resolves the tension between economic development and environmental protection .
Nowhere are consequences of this struggle clearer than in the Himalayan foothills of the southwestern province of Yunnan .
Yunnan is home to three great Asian rivers : the Mekong , the Salween ( or Nu ) , and the Jinsha .
All start on the great Tibetan Plateau and flow in parallel through the northwest corner of the province into Southeast Asia .
They are China ’ s last pristine rivers , but are now slated for sacrifice to satisfy the country ’ s insatiable thirst for power .
Plans call for dozens of dams to be placed along their serpentine courses through the mountains of Yunnan .
I had the chance to see one of these rivers – and the proposed site of one of the country ’ s most controversial dams – on a recent trek through the stunning Tiger Leaping Gorge , north of the town of Lijiang in northern Yunnan .
On its descent from the roof of the world , the Jinsha River , tributary of the mighty Yangtze , cascades through this ten-mile gorge on its way to Shanghai and the East China Sea .
If , or rather when , the river is dammed , it will help power the cities and factories of coastal China .
The sun was high above white-crowned Jade Dragon Snow Mountain when my guide pointed down the gorge at the brown waters churning thousands of feet below .
“ That ’ s where they will build the dam , ” Xiao Chun , a 17-year-old Naxi , one of Yunnan ’ s 22 ethnic minorities , said .
“ It will be very bad for us .
There will be a lot of pollution .
I hope it doesn ’ t happen . ”
The dam will have its uses .
Dianchi Lake near the provincial capital , Kunming , is so shrunken and polluted that the city faces a serious water shortage .
Water from the Tiger Leaping Gorge will be diverted to flush out Dianchi Lake , without which Kunming will not prosper .
As China seeks to keep its economic engine running , dams and hyrdopower do represent a cleaner alternative to coal .
China plans to double its hydropower capacity to over 120 GW by 2010 and to build more hydropower-projects for at least another 20 years .
Experts reckon that only a quarter of China ’ s hydropower has yet been tapped .
Yet the costs may outweigh the benefits .
Northwestern Yunnan is one of the world ’ s most biologically diverse areas , home to half of China ’ s animal species and a quarter of its plant species .
Whatever portions of this ecosystem that the dams don ’ t submerge are certain to be disrupted in potentially disastrous ways .
A more immediate concern is the immense number of people who will need to be resettled when reservoirs inundate the region ’ s densely populated valleys .
Since 1949 , 16 million people have been displaced by reservoirs .
Some 10 million of them still live in poverty .
At Tiger Leaping Gorge , where a mere 100,000 residents will have to be relocated , residents fear that they will be ordered to move up the steep mountainsides to open marginal land at 6,000 to 9,000 feet .
Dam opponents , including vocal indigenous environmental groups , have waged a seemingly successful battle to protect Tiger Leaping Gorge and the Salween ( the Nu River ) .
In early 2005 , three years after a new law on environmental impact assessments ( EIA ’ s ) was passed , the State Environmental Protection Bureau ( SEPA ) , ordered the halt of 30 large projects , including 26 hydropower plants that had failed to submit proper EIA ’ s .
Among the suspended projects was the first dam across the Nu / Salween .
These efforts appear to have catalyzed greater environmental sensitivity among the country ’ s leaders .
The government recently called for more balanced development , even proposing a “ green index ” to measure growth .
Indeed , Prime Minister Wen Jiabao has declared that he wants to see more “ scientific development ” in China ’ s approach to its problems , and even called for a temporary halt of the Salween ( Nu ) River dam .
Environmentalists were even permitted to take part in a public hearing on the Tiger Leaping Gorge project , a first for China .
Unfortunately , the Communist Party ’ s tolerance of such civic activity blows hot and cold .
The Party , alarmed by the “ color revolutions ” that toppled post-Soviet leaders in Georgia , Ukraine , and Kyrgyzstan , is cracking down on domestic non-government organizations for fear that they , too , might become catalysts for popular uprisings .
Support for “ green development ” inside central government organizations like SEPA offers little assurance of an effective countervailing force .
“ We must sharpen our teeth , ” Pan Yue , SEPA ’ s deputy director , said when the agency halted the dam projects .
But China has seen a steady decentralization of power in recent years , making it harder for SEPA to affect policies at the regional and local levels .
Indeed , local governments appear less afraid of Beijing ’ s bite than before .
When boundaries were negotiated for Three Parallel Rivers Park – designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 2003 – local authorities won a fight to exclude Tiger Leaping Gorge , knowing that a dam there would triple tax revenues .
China urgently needs to maintain an annual growth rate of over 9 % as a bulwark against social disorder .
As a result , however , China is slowly consuming itself , and no major part of China may remain pristine .
