A Gasp from Europe
French President Jacques Chirac has alarmed the EU candidate countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
The French president has accused them of being " childish " and " irresponsible " in voicing their pro-US stance on the Iraq issue , and warned that their position could be " dangerous , " as the decision to let them into the EU has not yet been ratified .
Quite a salvo .
Then the French president assumed the role of kindergarten instructor vis-à-vis what he called " badly brought up " candidate countries , telling them that they were " ill-behaved " and that " they missed a great opportunity to shut up . "
To anyone who remembers that 40 years ago President Charles de Gaulle slammed Europe 's door shut in the face of Britain 's request to join the European community--the General thought the British too tied to the US to enter the European family--these remarks are worrying .
But put things in perspective : Jacques Chirac is not Charles de Gaulle ; and Europe has moved far beyond the time when its agenda was unilaterally written by France .
President Chirac 's self-appointed role as an expert in diplomatic good behavior cannot be taken seriously , even by those of us who know ( and love ) France .
Instead , his outburst is best explained as a sign of frustration over the fact that French influence in the EU is being diluted .
Like King Lear after he lost his kingdom , there is nothing France can do about its lost influence but rage impotently .
But this dispute within Europe goes deeper than the matter of France 's lapsed primacy .
I have always been skeptical about the rhetoric of a " common " foreign policy for the EU .
How can you possibly expect a country such as , say , France to accept being voted down by its EU partners on vital foreign and security policy issues ?
At best , Europe should hope for a " more common " foreign and security policy , even though this fails to answer Henry Kissinger 's old question : If you want to speak to " Europe , " whom do you call ?
I have long worked to secure a " much more common " foreign policy within the EU .
Therefore I am worried by today 's split within the EU as well as between some member countries and the US over Iraq .
When eight European leaders published their appeal to heal the growing transatlantic rift , they were accused of undermining European unity .
Nothing could be more incorrect .
They were only exposing the lack of unity that already existed .
It all began last autumn when German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder , desperate to hold on to power , made Iraq an issue in the German election campaign .
He played on Germany 's well-known and respectable pacifist feelings .
But by declaring that he would not , under any circumstance , participate in military actions against Iraq , he undermined the efforts at the UN to put maximum pressure behind the demands that Iraq disarm .
Then France embraced Germany .
French ways in foreign policy are often murky and difficult to decipher , unless it is crystal clear where France regards its interests to lie .
Usually France likes to keep its options open .
But when the French and German governments celebrated the fortieth anniversary of the Elysée Treaty last month , France seemed to paint herself into a corner by supporting the German view .
All this was done without consultations between the French and German governments and their partners within the EU .
It was a demonstration of the special relationship between France and Germany that has for so many years been the driving force in European integration .
The history of Franco-German reconciliation is impressive indeed .
But it can no longer be taken for granted that other EU countries will automatically ratify the agreements that they reach between themselves as the lodestar for common policies .
This is particularly true when their objective is to establish an " alternative " to American leadership in security policy .
Enlargement of the EU with a number of Central and Eastern European countries will strengthen resistance to Franco-German initiatives in this direction .
The letter from the eight European leaders--and the later statement from the " Vilnius Ten " group of Central and Eastern European countries--demonstrated that France ( and Germany ) cannot dictate a European agenda that creates transatlantic rifts .
This has obviously caused frustrations .
But it should not have been a surprise to anyone .
The split within the EU and NATO has increased the risk of armed conflict with Iraq because the pressure on Iraq to comply with the UN resolutions was weakened .
Chirac and Schröder do not seem to grasp this .
So this has not been one of Europe 's finest hours , especially not while the EU 's institutional convention is discussing a text that calls for EU governments to " actively and unreservedly support the Union 's common foreign policy . "
The German acronym for the EU 's " common foreign and security policy " is GASP .
That seems an entirely appropriate expression for what we have been witnessing .
