Designing Regulatory Failure
PRAGUE – At the close of last year , European Union finance ministers gave the green light to a new supervisory architecture for the EU ’ s financial markets . Now it is up to the European Parliament to address this hypersensitive issue , the most controversial part of which is the powers and responsibilities to be given to the three new pan-European supervisory agencies for banking , securities , and insurance .
The parliament ’ s decision will be far-reaching , and will affect European finance for many years to come . Although some complain that December ’ s compromise on financial regulation does not go far enough , there is a case to be made that the opposite is true .
The springboard for this fundamental policy shift was the report issued in early 2009 by former French central banker and IMF chief Jacques de Larosière . But his report ignored many vital issues that were then largely overlooked in the subsequent debate on financial reform .
As the crisis that began in 2008 has shown , there are too many , rather than too few , supervisory and regulatory institutions overseeing European financial markets – almost 70 in the EU as a whole . De Larosière and the political debate he fostered completely gave up on first simplifying and consolidating institutions at the national level , and only then perhaps building a supranational body on that pared-down foundation .
What a mistake . If we merely add new institutions to EU countries ’ already Byzantine arrangements , we will fail to address the effectiveness , flexibility , and smoothness of information transfer through the EU-level supervisory system .
Recall the beginnings of the crisis : the British bank Northern Rock , for example , is now seen as a notorious example of how poor communication and information sharing among just three national authorities can easily make matters worse .
The new regulatory model also fails to address a persistent weakness of the single European financial market : how to pay the costs ( or “ share the burden ” ) when a multinational bank fails .
We Europeans may proudly say that we have a single financial market , but it is configured for good times only . In bad times , it is national taxpayers who pay for any financial-sector trouble , because there is no pan-European taxpayer or plausible burden-sharing models .
Last June , it was agreed at the EU level that European institutions ’ decisions should not impinge on member states ’ control of fiscal policy . How this can be reconciled with pan-European regulation is hard to say .
Many day-to-day cross-border services , ranging from freight transport to hairdressing , face major barriers and restrictions . Yet if the provider of such a service goes bankrupt or runs into difficulties , there is little likelihood that any national government would be called on to bail it out .
By contrast , banks and others can use European “ passports ” to provide financial services – which do have significant public-finance implications – throughout the EU.That is a nice idea , but it is half-baked : it fails to specify which taxpayers should be on the hook if something goes wrong and savers want their money back , as with the Icelandic banks in the United Kingdom , the Netherlands , or even Switzerland .
With these crucial issues unresolved , we are creating a Europe-wide system that violates the golden rule of any institutional design : decisions should be made by those who bear responsibility and who ultimately must pay .
How disturbing , then , that these institutions ’ powers may be increased still further . The three new agencies will not only enforce common technical standards , which may eventually become binding throughout the EU if endorsed by the European Commission , but will also be allowed to settle disputes between national supervisors .
More important , should the Council declare a state of financial emergency – such as the one we are in currently – the EU agencies might exceptionally be given a position of predominance over national supervisory authorities . Needless to say , “ disputes ” and “ emergencies ” are exactly the future situations likely to matter most to national policymakers and taxpayers .
If decisions about systemically important national financial institutions are made at the European level in good times , while in bad times national taxpayers pick up the tab , the whole EU will lose . In good times , we probably would not be able to tell the difference , but the grim reality is that such an arrangement would be unlikely to prevent another crisis .
