Ethiopia ’ s Struggle for Democracy
When we in Ethiopia ’ s political opposition agreed to participate in the election that the government called in June , we were under no illusion that the process would be faultless .
After all , Ethiopia has never known democracy .
The dictatorship of Mengistu Haile Mariam was Africa ’ s most blood-curdling Marxist regime , and was replaced by today ’ s ruling EPRDF , whose “ Revolutionary Democracy ” is but a more subtle variation on the same theme .
So we knew that there would be problems with the election , that voting would not be clean in the way Western countries take for granted .
Yet we nonetheless believed that the opposition , led by the Coalition for Unity and Democracy ( CUD ) , would have room to maneuver and campaign , owing to the government ’ s desire for international legitimacy .
So we decided to test the waters and push for a real political opening and a genuinely competitive vote .
Many Ethiopians appear to have agreed with this strategy .
The government did make some media available and engaged in more than 10 live televised debates .
So , at least at first , there seemed to have been some intention on the government ’ s part to open up the process – if not completely , then somewhat .
Now , however , it appears that the authorities wanted only a small , managed opening , on the assumption that they could control the outcome .
About a month before the election , the government began to shut down the political space it had opened .
Its election campaign took on a vilifying tone , charging that the opposition was bent on destroying ethnic groups through genocide .
Indeed , it called the opposition “ interahamwe , ” invoking the memory of the Hutu militia that slaughtered 800,000 Rwandan Tutsis in 1994 .
The government also began to harass opposition parties , especially in rural areas .
This was unpleasant , but tolerable .
So we continued campaigning .
But things became nastier a week before the vote .
Attendance at an official pro-government rally in the capital , Addis Ababa , was dwarfed by our rally the following day , when millions of demonstrators peacefully demanded change and showed their support for us .
At that point , the government realized that its democratic opening was slipping out of its control .
Two days before the vote , our poll watchers and supporters were searched , arrested , and given one-day trials , with most sentenced to one or two months in jail .
We feared that the voting would take place without the presence of our poll watchers .
So we gave a press conference – all the opposition parties together – the day before the vote , demanding that the government release our party workers and allow people to vote freely .
Although the government met neither of these demands , the early results clearly showed that the opposition was gaining a large number of seats .
It became obvious that we were winning in many constituencies and that we had won in Addis Ababa , as well as in most of the major cities and the rural areas .
What was surprising was the magnitude of the victory .
In Addis Ababa , top government officials , including the ministers of education and capacity building , lost , as did the speaker of the House of People ’ s Representatives .
In rural constituencies , opposition candidates defeated such EPRDF heavyweights as the ministers of defense , information , and infrastructure , along with the presidents of the two largest regions , Oromia and Amhara .
The government wasted little time in responding : the next day , it declared itself the winner , with not even half of the constituencies reporting their results .
No surprise , then , that the public erupted in anger .
When university students protested , the police moved in , killing one .
In demonstrations the following day , 36 more people were killed .
Soon after , our office workers were detained , and Hailu Shawel , Chairman of the CUD , and senior CUD official Lidetu Ayalew were put under house arrest .
One hundred staff members were taken from our head office in Addis Ababa alone , and many more from regional offices .
Up to 6,000 people were jailed – CUD members and even ordinary citizens .
My fear is that the will of Ethiopia ’ s people will be stifled by government hard-liners .
Doubts about the authenticity of the final results will create a danger of instability .
Everyone – the government , the opposition , and the public – must commit themselves to a peaceful resolution .
To restore calm before a recount can be held , confidence-building measures are needed .
The military must be taken off the streets .
The ban on public demonstrations must be lifted .
Those in jail must be released or given a fair trial .
Those held simply because they do not support the government must be freed and allowed to participate in the democratic process .
The government-controlled media must be open to diverse opinions ; in particular , opposition access must be guaranteed .
Equally important , the international community must send observers – and thus a clear signal to the government that any attempt to maintain power by force or intimidation is unacceptable .
The world must keep watching , just as it watched in Georgia , Ukraine , Lebanon , and Palestine .
For the first time in our ancient history , we Ethiopians have voted our conscience .
Our people have played their part with courage and discipline .
They deserve the opportunity to build a genuine democratic political system .
That is their only guarantee to live in peace and to achieve prosperity .
