Europe ’ s Naked Banks
WASHINGTON , DC – European leaders are convinced that bank capital is “ expensive , ” in the sense that raising capital requirements would slow economic growth .
But the latest developments in the Greek crisis show that the exact opposite is true – it ’ s European banks ’ lack of capital that threatens to derail European and global growth .
Banks ’ “ capital ” simply refers to their equity funding – how much of their liabilities are owned by shareholders rather than being owed to creditors as some form of debt .
The advantage of equity capital is that it is “ loss-absorbing , ” meaning that only after losses wipe out all of the equity do they need to be apportioned between creditors .
Banks ’ capital , therefore , is what stands between bad loans and insolvency .
In the Basel III negotiations that concluded last year , the French and Germans strongly favored relatively low capital requirements .
This was folly : for their big banks today , more capital would reduce the probability of needing further government bailouts .
These banks ’ potentially troubled assets include , of course , bonds issued by Greece , Ireland , Portugal , and other eurozone countries whose fiscal prospects are now being marked down by financial markets – but that until recently were regarded as “ zero risk ” by the relevant authorities .
If European banks had enough capital , a reduction in the value of Greek and other debt would reduce shareholder equity and disappoint investors , but it would not cause a banking crisis .
Unfortunately , European banks do not have enough capital , irrespective of eurozone bailout efforts , because the damage will not be limited to Greece .
Big European banks will not actually default on their debts – the governments of Germany , France , and Italy have made it clear that their banks are too big to fail .
And Germany and France – though perhaps not Italy – have enough fiscal firepower to support their banks as needed .
But no European politician would really want to put serious money on the line for the likes of Deutsche Bank or BNP Paribas ; governments will not force recapitalization using public funds .
Nor do politicians care to order banks to raise more capital from private sources – this would be too embarrassing for all involved , because it would expose the full extent of the folly so far .
Finally , the bankers are paid according to return on equity , unadjusted for risk , so it is very much in their interest to continue running their business with very little equity .
If they get lucky , the rewards are immense .
If they hit a difficult patch – as now seems likely – society bears the brunt of the impact as credit dries up and asset prices fall .
To be sure , the European Central Bank could cut interest rates further ( widening the gap between banks ’ borrowing costs and what they charge for loans is a classic way to help them earn profits and recapitalize themselves ) .
But the ECB has signaled that big interest-rate cuts are unlikely as long as the German economy remains strong , with relatively low unemployment .
The most likely course of action will be more regulatory forbearance , allowing banks to hide losses , combined with another round of overly optimistic financial “ stress tests , ” in which regulators pretend that there are no problems .
When the Europeans stress-tested their banks in 2010 , for example , they blithely assumed that Ireland did not face imminent fiscal disaster .
Stress tests have turned out to be an exercise between futility and fiasco .
The reaction of European bank executives in this scenario will be to hunker down , calling in loans to reduce the size of their balance sheets and thereby pushing up equity relative to their total assets .
There is an obvious externality here , with each bank wanting to dump assets without regard for the consequences for the rest of the economy .
Regardless of whether Greece will or should default on its debts – or restructure payments under some euphemism – the banking system ’ s lack of capital means that credit throughout the eurozone will be under pressure .
No one knows how Greece ’ s problems will affect market perceptions of government debt in other eurozone countries .
And the interlinkages between major global banks are a major , if diffuse , worry for all involved .
Equity capital will increase relative to assets – but , under current policies , it will increase because banks reduce their assets , not because they raise capital .
This is exactly the wrong way to handle a financial crisis .
If the International Monetary Fund were calling the shots in Europe , they would be arguing forcefully for tough stress tests and bank recapitalization throughout the eurozone .
But the European Union collectively has roughly 30 % of the votes at the IMF , and can effectively veto a more forceful approach to the European banking system .
Meanwhile , the lack of bank capital will continue , weighing heavily the European economy ’ s short-run performance and undermining its longer-term growth potential .
