Economics in Crisis
BERKELEY – The most interesting moment at a recent conference held in Bretton Woods , New Hampshire – site of the 1945 conference that created today ’ s global economic architecture – came when Financial Times columnist Martin Wolf quizzed former United States Treasury Secretary Larry Summers , President Barack Obama ’ s ex-assistant for economic policy .
" [ Doesn ’ t ] what has happened in the past few years , ” Wolf asked , “ simply suggest that [ academic ] economists did not understand what was going on ? ”
Here is the most interesting part of Summers ’ long answer : “ There is a lot in [ Walter ] Bagehot that is about the crisis we just went through .
There is more in [ Hyman ] Minsky , and perhaps more still in [ Charles ] Kindleberger . ”
That may sound obscure to a non-economist , but it was a devastating indictment .
Bagehot ( 1826-1877 ) was a mid-nineteenth-century editor of The Economist who published a book about financial markets , Lombard Street , in 1873 .
Summers is certainly right : there is an awful lot in Lombard Street that is about the crisis from which we are now recovering .
Minsky ( 1919-1996 ) is best approached not through his collected essays , entitled Can “ It ” Happen Again ? , but rather through the use Kindleberger ( 1910-2003 ) made of his work in his 1978 book Manias , Panics , and Crashes : A History of Financial Crises .
Asked to name where to turn to understand what was going on in 2008 , Summers cited three dead men , a book written 33 years ago , and another written the century before last .
He talked about “ the revolution in finance as it was realized that asset prices show large volatility that does not reflect anything about fundamentals , ” but added that “ macroeconomics [ did not ] keep up with [ this ] revolution . ” As a result , “ to the great detriment of contemporary macroeconomics , ” his fellow economists did not understand asset prices , manias , panics , and liquidity .
For Summers , the problem is that there is so much that is “ distracting , confusing , and problem-denying in … the first year course in most PhD programs . ”
As a result , even though “ economics knows a fair amount , ” it “ has forgotten a fair amount that is relevant , and it has been distracted by an enormous amount . ”
I think that Summers ’ judgments are fair and correct .
And I count myself among those who had forgotten and been distracted , even though I have always assigned Lombard Street to my economic history courses and Manias , Panics , and Crashes to my macroeconomics classes , and have always paid close and respectful attention to Eichengreen , Akerlof , and Shiller .
But I was shocked by how large a panic was produced by what seemed to me – and still does – relatively small losses ( in terms of the size of the global economy ) in subprime mortgages ; by the weakness of risk controls at the major highly-leveraged banks ; by how deep the decline in demand was ; by how ineffective the market ’ s equilibrium-restoring forces have been at rebalancing labor-market supply and demand ; and by how much core-country governments have been able to borrow to support demand without triggering any run-up in interest rates .
It is the scale of the catastrophe that astonishes me .
But what astonishes me even more is the apparent failure of academic economics to take steps to prepare itself for the future .
“ We need to change our hiring patterns , ” I expected to hear economics departments around the world say in the wake of the crisis .
The fact is that we need fewer efficient-markets theorists and more people who work on microstructure , limits to arbitrage , and cognitive biases .
We need fewer equilibrium business-cycle theorists and more old-fashioned Keynesians and monetarists .
We need more monetary historians and historians of economic thought and fewer model-builders .
We need more Eichengreens , Shillers , Akerlofs , Reinharts , and Rogoffs – & # 160 ; not to mention a Kindleberger , Minsky , or Bagehot .
Yet that is not what economics departments are saying nowadays .
Perhaps I am missing what is really going on .
Perhaps economics departments are reorienting themselves after the Great Recession in a way similar to how they reoriented themselves in a monetarist direction after the inflation of the 1970 ’ s .
But if I am missing some big change that is taking place , I would like somebody to show it to me .
Perhaps academic economics departments will lose mindshare and influence to others – from business schools and public-policy programs to political science , psychology , and sociology departments .
As university chancellors and students demand relevance and utility , perhaps these colleagues will take over teaching how the economy works and leave academic economists in a rump discipline that merely teaches the theory of logical choice .
Or perhaps economics will remain a discipline that forgets most of what it once knew and allows itself to be continually distracted , confused , and in denial .
If that were that to happen , we would all be worse off .
