France ’ s Little Big Man
PARIS – National stereotypes do not fade easily , especially if those with the greatest influence seem to be doing their best to justify them .
Consider the case of France .
To outsiders , the land of Molière is a country where political leaders ’ extramarital relationships are tolerated , while badly needed economic reforms are not .
But the world could be in for a surprise – or at least half a surprise .
When it comes to politicians ’ liaisons , continuity may prevail in France ; but on the issue of reform , change may be around the corner .
President François Hollande has announced measures that , if implemented , would amount to a peaceful revolution : a major reconciliation with the industrial and business world that even his more energetic predecessor , Nicolas Sarkozy , dared not attempt , despite – or precisely because of – his more conservative inclinations .
The reality of change , however , has been hampered by the stereotype of continuity .
Hollande ’ s daring pledge of € 30 billion ( $ 40.6 billion ) in tax cuts to boost the economy has been hijacked , at least in part , by revelations about his private life .
Public-opinion polls following the publication of photographs of a helmeted Hollande riding on a scooter behind one of his bodyguards to an assignation with a movie actress suggest that the French are mildly interested .
But the reality is more nuanced .
The French are not morally shocked by such revelations .
Though former President François Mitterrand ’ s second family was virtually a state secret , known only to a select elite and hidden from the public by a reverential press , his mistress and their daughter attended his funeral .
And Sarkozy ’ s tumultuous private life at the beginning of his presidency was on open display .
Unlike the British and the Americans , the French are much less obsessed with sex than they are with financial scandal .
Public-opinion surveys reveal an interesting dualism : the French want maximum freedom in the private sphere and maximum protection in the public sphere .
Thus , the French do not criticize Hollande on the ground of ethics , but on the ground of politics .
The president of “ la Grande Nation , ” political heir of the Sun King and General de Gaulle , has made a fool of himself : he looked simply ridiculous on his scooter .
Victor Hugo coined the formula “ Napoleon le petit ” to describe Napoleon III .
Will Hollande , who seems to take so much inspiration for both his public and private life from his mentor and model , France ’ s first-ever Socialist president , one day be described as “ Mitterrand le petit ” ?
Vaudeville may be a French specialty , like bread , cheese , and wine , but it does not strengthen the dignity and credibility of an already spectacularly unpopular presidency .
Hollande wanted to be a “ normal president . ”
In the stolen images of him en route to a tryst , he seems to be outdoing himself .
And French humorists – and even politicians – have been quick to play on his vulnerability .
Hollande may be in love with another woman ; it does happen .
But , if he is , it could not have been revealed at a worse moment , precisely when he was intent on steering the country onto a new , courageous , and badly needed course .
One may regret the disappearance of boundaries between private and public life in our global Internet age , but one must adjust to it – and Hollande clearly has not .
Of course , the key question is why Hollande waited 18 months before doing the right thing and helping the French economy by alleviating the tax burden that had been reducing French enterprises ’ competitiveness .
The official answer is that deteriorating global economic conditions left no other choice .
For some , including me , Hollande was from the start a true social democrat .
But , having campaigned as a socialist , and with his own camp ’ s deep divisions leaving him no real majority in parliament , he could not afford to reveal his pro-industry orientation ( he continues to denounce the financial sector ) without a significant delay .
Whether one calls that realism or lack of political courage , a year and a half has been lost , seriously hampering France and its economy .
Now , however , the country may at long last be headed in the right direction .
But it is likely to have a weaker president at the helm .
Hollande now has three years to prove that , animated by the right ideas , he can transform his image – and that of France – with economic results , if not by his personal behavior .
