Failure at the Financial Stability Board
WASHINGTON , DC – At least since the fall of 2008 , leading economies ’ officials have agreed – in principle – that something must be done about financial firms that are “ too big to fail . ”
Great efforts , including countless international meetings , working papers , and communiqués have been devoted to this end .
Earlier this month , the Basel-based Financial Stability Board ( FSB ) announced , to some fanfare , the completion of a major stage in this project .
But the announcement only served to underscore how little progress has been made .
The world ’ s largest banks remain too big to fail , and this is likely to have dire consequences in the near future .
The problem of too big to fail is not new – the phrase was first used in the United States in the 1980s .
It refers to any firm – usually in the financial sector – whose failure would have major negative spillover effects for the rest of the financial system and for the real ( non-financial ) part of the economy .
Prior to September 2008 , there was some doubt as to whether large non-bank financial firms would be regarded as too big to fail .
Bear Stearns came close to failing earlier that year , before the Federal Reserve stepped in to facilitate a purchase by JPMorgan Chase .
Bear Stearns ’ shareholders did not do well and much of its management immediately left the scene , but creditors were fully protected ( in fact , ensuring this protection was a central motivation for the Fed ’ s intervention ) .
When Lehman Brothers came under severe pressure in September 2008 , uncertainty reigned in financial markets ( and at the top of Lehman ) : perhaps the Fed would help out again in some fashion .
By all accounts , the US Treasury and the Fed did indeed consider providing assistance , but then held back , worried about overstepping their legal authority and sufficiently confident that permitting Lehman to fail would not have dire consequences for the broader economy .
The second view proved to be spectacularly wrong .
Within 24 hours of Lehman ’ s failure , the US authorities were scrambling to prevent asset fire sales , a run on money market mutual funds , the collapse of other investment banks ( such as Merrill Lynch , Morgan Stanley , and Goldman Sachs ) , and even the demise of large , integrated , global banks ( such as Citigroup ) .
While deploying an unprecedented amount of financial firefighting equipment , officials and lawmakers – on both sides of the Atlantic – were clear that this was a “ never again ” situation .
As soon as the fires were out , they pledged , they would work diligently to ensure that the “ next Lehman ” could fail in a government-managed “ resolution ” process that would not cause panic and a collapse of credit .
This task was taken up at the international level by the FSB , established after the G-20 summit in London in April 2009 .
After many years of working closely with leading national authorities ( including in the US and Europe ) , on November 9 the FSB published “ Removing Remaining Obstacles to Resolvability , ” along with a number of related technical papers .
Unfortunately , there are three flaws in the FSB ’ s framework that will prevent it from being effectively applied to large global banks .
First , by definition , global banks operate across borders , and there is no agreement among different national authorities regarding how to respond in a crisis .
There is , arguably , better communication than there was before 2008 , but when the chips are down , this will be worth little .
The countries involved have different legal rules , different procedures for protecting local assets , and different court systems .
A major international treaty could address all of this , but the immediate prospects for one are nonexistent .
Second , the FSB proposes to require a Total Loss Absorbing Capacity for all large banks .
But TLAC is just jargon for saying that these banks should fund themselves with both equity and “ bail-in-able debt ” – debt that can be converted to equity ( or wiped out ) when there is an official resolution event .
All this really means is that some debt can fall dramatically in value when government officials pull the trigger .
This may seem elegant in theory , but it is completely unworkable in practice .
In any real crisis , the authorities ’ real fear is that the fall in one asset price ( the equity value of big banks ) will cause other asset-price declines – leading to a broader contraction of credit .
The idea of “ loss-absorbing debt ” is an oxymoron .
Third , what really matters for financial systems is the extent of equity financing – including how much equity banks are required to have .
Current levels are so low – debt funds around 95 % of total credit exposure in most big US banks ( and a slightly higher share in big European banks ) – that banks ’ equity can be substantially wiped out by even moderate negative shocks .
The good news is that the Fed increasingly seems to be taking this point on board – and inching toward higher capital requirements for the biggest banks .
Unfortunately , the failure of the international FSB approach means that the Fed must largely go it alone .
