Europe ’ s Crisis of Tongues
ROME – When history repeats itself , it is rarely gentle .
Today , as in the era of colonialism , tens of thousands of ambitious young people from Europe ’ s periphery are escaping the old continent in search of better opportunities in America , Africa , and Asia .
But , unlike in the colonial era , the human outflows are not compensated by inflows of natural resources or precious metals .
European emigrants used to contribute to the glory of their homelands ; now , their exodus is contributing to Europe ’ s decline .
In an extreme attempt to address his country ’ s job shortage , Portuguese Prime Minister Pedro Passos Coelho recently urged his country ’ s young unemployed to emigrate to Portugal ’ s former colonies , such as Brazil or Angola .
Last year , for the first time since 1990 , Spain was a net exporter of people , with 31 % of emigrants going to South America .
Even in countries with no imperial past , but with an enduring migratory tradition , like Ireland , the brain drain to Australia and North America is accelerating .
The severity of Europe ’ s economic downturn , deficiencies in the euro ’ s design , and ill-conceived fiscal-austerity measures are all fueling the exodus .
But the main driver is culture , not economics .
Europe ’ s high degree of linguistic fragmentation does not allow the eurozone to absorb a self-inflicted crisis , so people move out of the currency area rather than within it .
Labor mobility within a currency area represents a key adjustment mechanism to preserve the effectiveness of monetary policy against asymmetries in regional shocks : in theory , workers from the eurozone ’ s shrinking periphery should flow to the expanding core .
In practice , the language barrier impairs this safety valve .
Thus , southern Europe is losing its best talent , northern Europe is struggling to fill its job vacancies , and all of Europe is becoming poorer .
Europe ’ s linguistic variety is immense .
Thirteen official tongues from six distinct branches of the Indo-European group of languages – Germanic , Slavic , Uralic , Romance , Celtic , and Greek – are spoken in the eurozone .
Add to this a plethora of regional dialects , which in Italy alone amount to around 20 ( with several variants each ) .
In many secessionist regions , like Catalonia in Spain , they are de facto the official idiom .
The implications of this linguistic variety are profound .
A language is not just a systematic means of communicating .
It is a sign of identity , culture , and national pride .
According to most experts , linguistic processes shape the way people perceive the world , how they live their lives , and , ultimately , their mindset .
The same concept expressed with different words in different languages generates different emotions .
Indeed , Germany ’ s indifference toward the pain inflicted on Greece is inscribed in its language .
In English , as in several other European languages , the term austerity derives from the Greek austeros , which means harsh and severe , whereas for Germans it is merely a technocratic savings scheme , a Sparprogramme .
So far , political myopia and national interests have prevented European leaders from formulating a common language policy .
According to EUROSTAT , the European Union ’ s statistical agency , just 18 % of people aged 18-34 perceive themselves to be proficient in another language ( usually English ) , and the percentage decreases dramatically with age .
In such a Tower of Babel , German Chancellor Angela Merkel ’ s call for a political union to save the euro is wishful thinking , even for the staunchest European official .
Linguistic barriers will obstruct continental political debate and impede the creation of a truly European identity .
Citizens ’ passion , rather than technocrats ’ creativity , should inspire political unification .
But Europe is still far from that point : after more than 60 years of economic integration , a truly European people , with its own identity and language , has yet to emerge .
The logical implication of a currency that brings together 17 countries is a common , official language .
The EU ’ s founders believed that a lingua franca would emerge through economic and social interaction .
But they were wrong .
To strengthen the euro and establish the foundations for a political union , European leaders should undertake a rapid and explicit process of linguistic integration .
At the same time , national governments could minimize the political and transition costs of adopting a common language – whichever is chosen – by using their own languages for domestic affairs .
Unlike a currency , languages can easily coexist in an economic area .
Indeed , countries should promote their national languages and regional dialects – an invaluable cultural patrimony and source of identity in an increasingly globalized world .
Changing the course of European history requires bold action , particularly the adoption of a common language .
Otherwise , European history will remain a vicious circle of fragmentation and aborted efforts at integration .
