The Czar of the French
MOSCOW – Vladimir Putin has finally done it .
Russia has been vying for the West ’ s esteem for centuries , with approval by the French – a sought-after prize since the time of Peter the Great – coveted the most . But , despite the defeat of Napoleon and the World War I alliance , Russia could never get any respect from France .
Indeed , the Marquis de Custine ’ s Letters from Russia suggested that Russian civilization amounted to little more than the mimicry of monkeys .
But now the French seal of approval seemingly has been bestowed .
And what a gargantuan seal it is , coming in the corpulent form of the actor Gérard Depardieu , who sought – and has now received – Russian citizenship .
Along with a passport comes an offer of a free apartment in the Mordovia region ( still a Gulag site ) and even a job as the local culture minister .
Two centuries after French troops were run out of Moscow in 1812 , Putin has succeeded in making a French popular idol want to be Russian .
In Russia and elsewhere , the French are often perceived to feel and act superior .
And who could blame them ?
French artistic beauty is second to none .
The French are the arbiters of European culture , and have long been among the shrewdest observers of other countries ’ manners and mores .
Indeed , in the 1830 ’ s , two Frenchmen , Alexis de Tocqueville and Custine , went to the outskirts of civilization to describe the future superpower rivals , America and Russia .
Until 1861 , Russia was a backward country in which serfdom reigned and royals and aristocrats envied the latest French fashions .
From Alexander Pushkin ’ s poems to Leo Tolstoy ’ s novels , French influence pervades the commanding heights of Russian culture .
Russia ’ s most famous museum , the Hermitage , is second only to the Louvre in its collection of French art .
Peter the Great , in his eighteenth-century effort to Westernize Russia , invited Jean-Baptiste Le Blond to become the chief architect of his new capital , St. Petersburg .
But forget Peter the Great : Now “ Vova the Little ” – or Lilli-Putin , as Georgia ’ s sharp-tongued president , Mikheil Saakashvili , once dubbed Russia ’ s president – may have pulled off an even greater coup .
When Depardieu was planning to cross the border into dull little Belgium to avoid French taxes , the Russians made him an offer that he could not refuse : not just a flat 13 % income-tax rate , but a chance to poke French President François Hollande in the eye .
The ever-vain Depardieu ( and what actor isn ’ t vain ? ) will be a god in Russia .
We love the French in general , but we adore him in particular .
After all , he starred in the 2011 film about the life of the mad monk Grigory Rasputin .
He was portly Porthos in Alexander Dumas ’ s classic The Three Musketeers ( in 1998 ’ s The Man in the Iron Mask ) , and played the lead in the film version of Edmond Rostand ’ s Cyrano de Bergerac ( 1990 ) , which is almost as popular with Russians as Pushkin ’ s Eugene Onegin .
Like all Russian leaders , Putin affects a deep love of culture .
In the absence of fair elections , Kremlin occupants traditionally seek legitimacy by attracting artists to their side : if a beloved actor , writer , sculptor , or musician loves Putin , how could anyone feel otherwise ?
I myself once witnessed Putin courting culture .
It was New Year ’ s Eve 2003 , during a concert at the newly opened House of Music in Moscow .
Directly across the aisle from me , there was Putin , sitting between the one-time dissident cellist and conductor Mstislav Rostropovich and his equally famous wife , opera diva Galina Vishnevskaya .
Russia ’ s leader was like a kid in a candy store – thrilled to be surrounded by these cultural icons , former exiles no less .
And the icons were obviously flattered by Putin ’ s adoration ( and by their proximity to power ) .
Putin has finally proved that he is capable of exploits that no czar could accomplish .
All that tough anti-Western rhetoric on behalf of the nation – the bare-chested horsemanship , the kissing of tigers , and the flying with cranes – has paid off : the aloof French have at long last recognized Russian superiority and are sending one of their greatest representatives to partake of it .
Indeed , not long after Depardieu ’ s change of allegiance , a French icon of an even older vintage , Brigitte Bardot , suggested that she , too , might embrace Russia .
In her own words , she “ decided to seek Russian nationality in order to flee this country , which is nothing but an animal cemetery , ” because it has “ the cowardice and impudence ” to consider euthanizing two elephants in the Lyon zoo .
Putin does share Bardot ’ s love of animals – not only his pets ( especially his dog Koni , whose consolation he allegedly seeks when grieving ) , but also the co-stars of his mostly animal-centered publicity stunts .
It is with less obedient people that he has problems – say , Mikhail Khodorkovsky , imprisoned for more than ten years after backing Putin ’ s political opponents ; Anna Politkovskaya , brutally murdered in 2006 for her investigative reporting on his regime ’ s misdeeds in Chechnya ; and Sergei Magnitsky , a whistleblowing lawyer who died in prison in 2009 after being refused medical treatment .
Putin ’ s most vocal current foe , the lawyer Alexei Navalny , has been investigated three times for supposedly stealing millions of dollars .
But one has to appreciate the historical absurdity .
Putin , after more than a decade in power , has lost the support of his own , usually quiescent citizens , who have had rather limited experience with democracy .
And it is the French , the avatars of Enlightenment and the Rights of Man , who have stepped in to provide a patina of legitimacy to his political twilight .
