Finance ’ s Crisis of Legitimacy
WASHINGTON , DC – The recent departure of Robert Diamond from Barclays marks a watershed .
To be sure , CEOs of major banks have been forced out before .
Chuck Prince lost his job at Citigroup over excessive risk-taking in the run-up to the financial crisis of 2008 , and , more recently , Oswald Grübel of UBS was pushed out for failing to prevent unauthorized trading to the tune of $ 2.3 billion .
But Diamond was a banker supposedly at the top of his game .
Barclays , it was claimed , had come through the 2008-2009 crisis without benefiting from government support .
And , while his bank had been found in violation of various rules recently , including on products sold to consumers and on how it reported interest rates , Diamond had managed to distance himself from the damage .
Press reports indicate that regulators were willing to give Diamond a free pass – right up to the moment when a serious political backlash took hold .
Diamond started to fight back , pointing an accusatory finger at the Bank of England .
At that point , he had to go .
There are three broader lessons of Diamond ’ s demise at Barclays .
First , the political backlash was not from backbenchers or uninformed spectators on the margins of the mainstream .
Top politicians from all parties in the United Kingdom were united in condemning Barclays ’ actions , particularly with regard to its systemic cheating on the reporting of interest rates , exposed in the Libor scandal .
( The London Interbank Offered Rate is a key benchmark for borrowing and lending around the world , including for the pricing of derivatives ) .
Indeed , Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne went so far as to say , “ Fraud is a crime in ordinary business ; why shouldn ’ t it be so in banking ? ”
His clear implication is that fraud was committed at Barclays – a serious allegation from Britain ’ s finance minister .
After five years of global financial-sector scandals on a grand scale , patience is wearing thin .
As Eduardo Porter of The New York Times put it ,
“ Bigger markets allow bigger frauds .
Bigger companies , with more complex balance sheets , have more places to hide them .
And banks , when they get big enough that no government will let them fail , have the biggest incentive of all . ”
Second , Diamond apparently thought that he could take on the British establishment .
His staff leaked the contents of a conversation he claimed to have had with Paul Tucker , a senior Bank of England official , suggesting that the BoE had told Barclays to report inaccurate interest-rate numbers .
Diamond apparently forgot that the continued existence of any bank with a balance sheet that is large relative to its home economy – and its ability to earn a return for shareholders – depends entirely on maintaining a good relationship with regulators .
Barclays has total assets of around $ 2.5 trillion – roughly the size of the UK ’ s annual GDP – and is either the fifth- or eighth-largest bank in the world , depending on how one measures balance sheets .
Banks at this scale benefit from huge implicit government guarantees ; this is what it means to be “ too big to fail . ”
Diamond apparently believed his own rhetoric – that he and his bank are critical to economic prosperity in the UK .
The regulators called his bluff and forced him to resign .
Barclays ’ stock price rose slightly on the news .
The final lesson is that the big showdowns between democracy and big bankers are still to come – both in the United States and in continental Europe .
On the surface , the banks remain powerful , yet their legitimacy continues to crumble .
Jamie Dimon , CEO of JP Morgan Chase , presided this year over reckless risk-taking to the tune of nearly $ 6 billion ( we might call it a “ three Grübel ” debacle ) , yet his job apparently remains secure .
Dimon even remains on the board of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York , despite the fact that the New York Fed is deeply involved in the investigation not only of JP Morgan Chase ’ s trading losses , but also of its potential involvement in the broadening Libor scandal .
As Dennis Kelleher , the president of the advocacy group Better Markets , documented in recent congressional testimony , two years after the passage of the Dodd-Frank legislation , the US banking system continues to fight hard – and effectively – to undermine meaningful reform .
( Kelleher ’ s testimony is a must-read assessment , as is his opening statement to the hearing ) .
But progress is nonetheless being made .
Dimon is the public face of megabanks ’ resistance to reform ; repeated and public egg on this particular face strengthens those who want to rein in these banks ’ excessive and irresponsible risk-taking .
Meanwhile , the European situation looks explosive .
The European Union ’ s approach to bank regulation encouraged financial institutions to load up on government debt – supposedly a “ risk-free ” asset .
Now , given the profound sovereign-debt crisis in the eurozone periphery , government defaults threaten to take down the big banks .
The European Central Bank has provided a great deal of emergency “ liquidity ” funding to banks , which they use to buy even more government debt .
This holds down interest rates on that debt in the short run , but creates even bigger potential losses in the case of potential default .
Banks and politics are deeply intertwined in all advanced economies .
Diamond discovered that , ultimately , politicians trump bankers – at least in the UK .
But what really matters is legitimacy and informed public opinion .
Do you really believe the increasingly dubious notion that megabanks , as currently constituted , are good for the rest of the private sector , and thus for economic growth and job creation ?
Or do you begin to consider more seriously the increasingly mainstream proposition that global megabanks and their leaders have simply become too powerful and dangerous ?
