Greece ’ s Catharsis ?
ATHENS – Sunday ’ s election in Greece will decide whether confrontation or negotiation will be used to change the terms of Greece ’ s refinancing agreement with the eurozone .
Rather than helping Greece to overcome its crisis , the austerity policies pursued since May 2010 have plunged it into a deep recession that perpetuates fiscal deficits and aggravates financial uncertainty .
It is becoming increasingly clear that if Greece proceeds to unilateral action – whether by repealing unpopular austerity laws or renouncing the loan agreement itself – the eurozone will suspend disbursement of the loan .
The government will find it impossible to fulfill basic obligations , such as paying salaries and pensions , and the country will formally default .
International banks will cease to finance Greek enterprises , including imports , creating shortages of fuel , food , and medicines .
As confidence that Greece will remain in the eurozone plummets , a run on deposits will cause the banking system – and , eventually , the real economy – to collapse .
The next step will be forced exit from the euro and reintroduction of the drachma , implying a dramatic drop in living standards , owing in part to immediate devaluation of the new currency and high inflation .
Meanwhile , the benefits in terms of competitiveness will be very limited , owing to the country ’ s narrow export base , and will evaporate in a vicious circle of devaluations and rising interest rates .
Long-term stagnation and high unemployment are the likely result of confrontation with the eurozone , which leaves only the path of renegotiation .
The new political balance emerging in Europe after the Socialists ’ victory in France ’ s presidential election creates scope for changes in the terms of the loan agreement that would help to boost economic growth .
Opting for renegotiation assumes the victory of pro-euro political forces in Sunday ’ s elections .
New Democracy , Pasok , and Democratic Left belong to this group , as opposed to Syriza and some smaller parties on the extreme right and left , which support a confrontational stance vis-à-vis the eurozone , eventually leading to the euro exit .
If a pro-euro majority emerges on June 17 , the new government ’ s main challenge will be to propose a new policy agenda , and then to negotiate a revised deal with the eurozone .
The key to growth is increased competitiveness through higher productivity and lower production costs .
In the 1990 ’ s , in the run-up to joining the eurozone , Greece achieved substantial gains on this front .
With inflation falling sharply , real incomes increased .
Fiscal deficits were reduced .
Important structural reforms were implemented , particularly privatization .
Investment accelerated , and major infrastructure projects were realized .
High growth rates were achieved in conditions of stability .
Unfortunately , that effort ceased over the last decade .
Selfish interests prevailed .
Business groups attempted to capture specific markets .
Public-sector trade unions fought for preserving privileges .
Tax discipline was further weakened .
The welfare state was transformed into a system of endemic waste .
A gap emerged between the economy ’ s productive base , which remained stagnant , and Greeks ’ expectations ( and demands ) , which were rising fast .
The agreement with the eurozone attempted to close the gap in a clumsy and misguided way .
Instead of focusing on structural reforms to liberate the economy ’ s productive forces , it relied on income cuts and tax increases .
The incompetence of the governments that implemented the agreement exacerbates that defect by sidelining structural reforms and enacting only the terms concerning austerity .
The renegotiation should aim at changing the policy mix in the following directions :
Extending the timetable of fiscal-deficit reduction in order to limit the depth of the recession.Avoiding any new cut in incomes or new taxes , with reduction in indirect taxation to start immediately.Social-protection measures , particularly for the unemployed.A European Marshall Plan , through grants from the European Union ’ s structural funds and loans from the European Investment Bank , in order to sustain economic activity and create new jobs.Achieving these targets presupposes that Greece ’ s new government implements all of the structural changes agreed with the eurozone .
Privatization , opening up closed markets and professions , promoting entrepreneurship , and eliminating public-sector waste should proceed at a fast pace over the next few months .
The European Marshall Plan would offer a unique opportunity to reorient growth policies .
Greece should move beyond its traditional focus on sectors such as tourism , shipping , and construction , and search for new areas of comparative advantage in renewable energy , high-value-added services , and selected lines of manufacturing that benefit from the country ’ s research potential .
If Greece succeeds in fulfilling the requirements of a revised financing agreement with the eurozone , it may win the confidence bet by convincing financial markets that it is determined to achieve the targets .
Confidence will unlock the door to economic recovery .
The fear of a return to the drachma will recede . Consumption levels will begin to recover .
Deposit outflows will cease .
The banking system will be reinforced . Investors will reevaluate opportunities for undertaking new initiatives .
A virtuous circle may be set in motion , leading the country , eventually , to escape the crisis zone .
The outcome of Sunday ’ s election will determine which way Greece goes – and , also , of course , how the unfolding Greek drama affects the eurozone ’ s future .
