Dollar Diplomacy and Japan ’ s Lost Decades
TOKYO – A specter is haunting China ’ s exchange-rate regime : the long-running dispute between the United States and Japan throughout the 1980 ’ s and early 1990 ’ s over the value of the yen .
That dispute ended only when Japan ’ s economy entered its “ lost decades , ” which has made the Chinese determined not to repeat the experience .
Of course , history – particularly financial history – never repeats itself exactly .
But the arguments being heard about the renminbi today certainly give rise , at least for Japanese , to a strong sense of déjà vu .
Now , as then , the United States Congress is the focal point of American anger .
Today , it is preparing retaliatory legislation against China in response to pressure from many in the US who argue that an artificially weak renminbi is contributing to global imbalances , in particular to America ’ s massive bilateral trade deficit .
They are also frustrated that the US Treasury has not “ named and shamed ” China by designating it a currency manipulator .
But , based on Japan ’ s experience , the Chinese do seem to have good reasons to be wary of US pressure to revalue the renminbi .
Indeed , the economists Ronald McKinnon and Kenichi Ohno have singled out US pressure for yen appreciation as a key source of the Japanese economy ’ s long-term deflation and stagnation – the so-called “ lost decade ” of economic malaise that is now well into its second .
The US and China have engaged simultaneously in dispute and dialogue for several years – again reminiscent of what Japan went through with the US in the 1980 ’ s and 1990 ’ s .
Just as China has its “ Strategic Dialogue ” with the US , so Japan had the “ Structural Impediments Initiative ” ( 1989-1990 ) and “ Framework Talks ” ( 1993-1995 ) .
And for China now , as for Japan then , the undercurrent for these discussions is US frustration with bilateral current-account deficits .
Both structural factors and the exchange rate are discussed .
But the weight give to the exchange rate is higher today in the US-China dispute , because , whereas Japan had a “ managed float ” exchange-rate regime in the 1980 ’ s and 1990 ’ s , the Chinese exercise much tighter control over the renminbi .
Chinese officials agonize over the US pressure .
If they yield to it , the Chinese economy , they argue , may fall into the same deflationary trap that ensnared Japan after the yen ’ s appreciation in the 1980 ’ s – under US pressure – inflated a catastrophic asset-price bubble .
But if they continue to resist , China may face hot trade disputes with the US , which could be even messier .
Like Japan in the 1980 ’ s , China must defend itself from US claims that the renminbi ’ s weakness is the source of the imbalances between the two countries .
Currency appreciation , Japan argued then and China argues now , is unlikely to result in a significant current-account adjustment , which requires addressing not only China ’ s high savings rate , but also low savings in the US .
How the situation will develop in the near future can be gleaned from the recent past .
China instituted a flexible exchange rate from July 2005 to the summer of 2008 , and the renminbi gradually appreciated against the dollar – cumulatively by more than 20 % .
Whereas the peg to the dollar was resumed during the global financial crisis , in June China announced a return to flexibility .
The renminbi fluctuated without a clear trend until mid-September , when it appreciated sharply , apparently in response to increased US pressure stemming from the impending congressional vote .
In one respect , then , the dispute appears set to follow a path similar to the US-Japan case .
It will be prolonged and occasionally very tense , but eventually result in appreciation of the renminbi .
But there is a crucial distinction to be made between the two cases : Japan needs the US to ensure its security , while China does not .
Moreover , the size of China ’ s economy will surpass that of the US in about 15 years .
So time is on China ’ s side .
But there is a more fundamental issue : the Chinese authorities , in arguing that it was a mistake to allow the yen to appreciate , may be misinterpreting what happened in Japan – and thus overestimating the risk posed by currency appreciation .
For Chinese officials who believe that yen appreciation was the source of Japan ’ s chronic economic malaise , the Plaza Accord of September 1985 – a concerted effort by the US , the United Kingdom , France , West Germany , and Japan to depreciate the dollar – is Exhibit A. The yen soared from ¥ 240 : $ 1 in September 1985 to ¥ 200 : $ 1 the following December .
The real dilemma for Japan arrived in March 1986 , when the yen neared its then record high , ¥ 178 : $ 1 .
Japan responded by intervening in the opposite direction – dropping interest rates , selling yen , and buying dollars .
That proved decisive .
Keeping interest rates low discouraged capital inflows and encouraged asset-price inflation .
The ensuing bubble in Japanese housing and equity prices inflated and burst not because Japan succumbed to US pressure to allow the yen to appreciate , but because Japan , in the end , resisted that pressure .
So , if China is to draw the correct lesson from the Japanese experience , it must know what really happened in Japan back then .
What China should be carefully watching is whether there are signs of overheating in the domestic economy , and whether asset prices are rising sharply .
Allowing the renminbi to appreciate would be a good way to prevent both .
