Who Won Europe ?
BRUSSELS – The fight over who will be the European Commission ’ s next president is heating up .
Several European Union leaders were recently spotted in a small rowboat on a Swedish lake , reportedly scheming against the frontrunner , and British Prime Minister David Cameron has launched a public campaign to reassert the right of EU member states ’ governments to decide who will occupy the EU ’ s executive arm .
The process of choosing the Commission ’ s president appears to be a conflict between the voice of the people , as expressed in the results of last month ’ s European Parliament election , and backroom deal-making by governments .
But reality is more complex , and the genuine democratic mandate did not go to the person who claims to have “ won ” the election .
In the run-up to the election , the major European party “ families ” ( there are no pan-European parties , only loose alliances of national parties ) each nominated a Spitzenkandidat as their choice for President of the European Commission .
The center-right European People ’ s Party , which gained a narrow plurality of 221 seats in the 751-seat parliament , has claimed victory in the election ; and many others , including socialists , greens , and liberals , concur that the EPP ’ s Spitzenkandidat , Jean-Claude Juncker , has a moral right to be selected as President of the Commission .
In fact , though the EPP won 29 % of the seats , versus 24 % for the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats ( S & D ) , the S & D can claim victory .
After all , its affiliated parties at the national level won a greater number of votes – a combined total of 40 million , compared to 39.9 million for parties affiliated with the EPP .
The difference is small , but there can be no doubt that the S & D won the popular vote ( 24.4 % to 23.8 % ) .
Though the election system is purely proportional and the S & D won the popular vote , the reason that it ended up with fewer seats is simple : its affiliated parties won relatively more votes in the larger countries , where it “ costs ” more voters to gain a single seat .
Conversely , the EPP performed relatively better in small countries , where the vote cost per seat is much lower .
The most extreme example is Luxembourg , Juncker ’ s home country , where the EPP received almost 38 % of the popular vote , versus 11 % for the S & D – a difference , in absolute terms , of only about 52,000 .
But the EPP obtained two more MEPs than the S & D , which implies a per seat cost of roughly 26,000 votes .
The other extreme is Italy , where the S & D won 41 % of the votes , versus 22 % for the EPP .
In absolute terms , the difference was more than five million votes , but the S & D won only 14 more MEPs than the EPP .
In Italy , the S & D needed about 370,000 voters to gain one MEP , more than 14 times as many as the EPP needed in Luxembourg .
The EPP ’ s “ victory ” was thus due mainly to the fact that the ratio of voters per MEP varies greatly across countries .
A single vote in Italy ( and in other large countries ) is worth much less than a vote in smaller countries .
The German Constitutional Court recently relied on this fact in a controversial decision striking down the 3 % electoral threshold for parties to gain European Parliament seats in Germany ( the small far-right National Democratic Party picked up one seat in the European Parliament as a result ) .
The German court ’ s rationale was that the European Parliament election is not a true election , because the principle of “ one person , one vote ” is not respected .
This is not only a problem from the standpoint of democratic principles ; the results of the recent election have shown the extent to which it can influence political outcomes .
Juncker came out ahead in the MEP count for only one reason : he obtained his votes in small countries , and votes are de facto weighted by country size .
Thus , the claim that the European Parliament directly represents Europe ’ s people and that the people have given the EPP ’ s candidate a direct popular mandate that the member states ’ representatives in the European Council should respect rings hollow .
The S & D obtained more votes , giving its Spitzenkandidat , Martin Schulz , a claim to greater democratic legitimacy .
