Globalized Crisis
PRINCETON – If there is a bright side to the turmoil that has roiled the global economy since 2008 , it is that not every part of the world has erupted simultaneously .
The first blow was the subprime mortgage crisis in the United States , to which Europeans responded with self-satisfied reflections on the superior resilience of their social model .
Then , in 2010 , with the outbreak of the European debt crises , it was America ’ s turn for schadenfreude , while Asian countries pointed to the over-extended welfare state as the root of the problem .
Today , the world is obsessed with the slowdown in China and the woes of its stock market .
Indeed , to some , what is happening in China may be a modern version of the American stock-market crash in 1929 – a shock that shakes the world .
And it is not only the Chinese economy that has hit turbulence ;
Russia and Brazil are in much worse shape .
As globalization connects far-flung people and economies , the consequences are not always what was expected – or welcome .
And , with the economic crisis becoming ever more global in nature , the next challenge for policymakers will be to try to mitigate its effects at home – and to contain their constituents ’ impulse to reduce engagement with the rest of the world .
By now , it has become clear that every success story has its dark side , and that no economy is likely to continue to rocket upward indefinitely .
But , to paraphrase Leo Tolstoy , it is important to remember that every unhappy economy is unhappy in its own way , and that a fix for one country ’ s problems might not work for another ’ s .
Europe ’ s problems , for example , cannot be attributed to a simple , single cause – such as the adoption of a common currency .
In the run-up to the euro crisis , Italy had undergone a long period of stagnation , while Spain had experienced an American-style housing bubble and Greece was suffering from too much government-fueled growth .
The uniting factor was that each had adopted unsustainable policies that required corrective action .
Nor was the crisis in the United States evenly experienced ;
Florida and Arizona had different problems than Michigan did .
Similarly , the economies of Russia , Brazil , and China are all slowing for different reasons .
Russia is suffering from its decision to become a big energy producer at the expense of diversification .
The roots of China ’ s problems lie in its attempt to shift from exports and investment in infrastructure to a growth model based on higher domestic consumption .
Brazil is weighed down by costly consumer credit and real-wage gains that have been outpacing productivity growth .
There are ways to deal with each of these problems , but the most effective long-term strategies for raising productivity cannot be reduced to a simple formula .
Unfortunately , part of the standard political response to an economic crisis is the demand that something be done quickly .
And , during the ongoing economic troubles , there is a policy that seems to have worked well so far : currency devaluation .
It is a policy that has had success in Japan , where a weaker yen is the only real accomplishment of Abenomics , and in Europe , where a weaker euro is helping to stave off recession .
Europeans also like to maintain that a weak dollar was behind the US economy ’ s rapid rebound .
Now it is China ’ s turn to hope that currency devaluation will help it regain competitiveness .
The trouble , of course , is that all countries ’ currencies cannot depreciate simultaneously .
In the aftermath of the Great Depression , efforts to do just that pushed governments to adopt increasingly protectionist trade policies , constricting growth for years .
The protectionist impulse has been absent from the response to the current crisis so far , but that could change .
Another uncomfortable consequence of globalization is its tendency to put people and capital on the move .
As large emerging economies hit the skids , more people could be driven to seek a better future elsewhere .
The type of migration that attracts the most attention is the plight of refugees from conflict zones in the Middle East and North Africa .
But that flow is also accompanied by a surge of more economically motivated migration , from the Balkans and West Africa , for example .
And both are triggering nativist responses in destination countries .
Meanwhile , instability in emerging economies leads their wealthier citizens to try to rescue as much capital as possible , driving a surge in real-estate prices in global safe havens like New York , London , and Geneva .
That makes those cities look very glamorous and dynamic , but it also generates huge difficulties as impossibly high housing prices mean overcrowding , longer and difficult commutes , and a decline in the quality of life for the local population .
So far , the advanced economies have dealt with the recent downturns effectively .
But while the economic response has been much more effective than it was in the 1930s , social tensions and resentments have been left to simmer .
Europe and the US now face a new challenge : They must respond not only to their own economic difficulties , but also to the deep human suffering produced by economic and political failure elsewhere .
