Giving the Well-Performing State Its Due
MADRID – The triumph of democracy and market-based economics – the “ End of History , ” as the American political philosopher Francis Fukuyama famously called it – which was proclaimed to be inevitable with the fall of the Berlin Wall , soon proved to be little more than a mirage .
However , following China ’ s intellectual pirouette to maintain one-party rule while embracing the capitalist credo , history ’ s interpreters shifted their focus to the economy : not everybody would be free and elect their government , but capitalist prosperity would hold sway worldwide .
Now , however , the economic tumult shaking Europe , the erosion of the middle class in the West , and the growing social inequalities worldwide are undermining capitalism ’ s claim to universal triumph .
Hard questions are being asked : Is capitalism as we know it doomed ?
Is the market no longer able to generate prosperity ?
Is China ’ s brand of state capitalism an alternative and potentially victorious paradigm ?
The pervasive soul-searching prompted by such questions has nurtured a growing recognition that capitalism ’ s success depends not only on macroeconomic policy or economic indicators .
It rests on a bedrock of good governance and the rule of law – in other words , a well-performing state .
The West overlooked the fundamental importance of this while it was fighting communism .
The standard bearers of the Cold War were not just the United States and the Soviet Union , but , in ideological terms , the individual and the collectivity .
When competing in newly independent or developing countries , this ideological opposition became Manichean , fostering a fierce suspicion , if not outright rejection , of rival principles .
As a result , strengthening state institutions was too often seen in the West as communist subterfuge , while the Soviet bloc viewed the slightest notion of individual freedom and responsibility as a stalking horse for capitalist counter-revolution .
Leading economists have long argued that the West ’ s greater reliance on markets resulted in faster and more robust economic growth .
But viewing the state and the market in terms of their inherent conflict no longer reflects reality ( if it ever did ) .
Indeed , it is increasingly obvious that the threat to capitalism today emanates not from the state ’ s presence , but rather from its absence or inadequate performance .
Consider recent events in Argentina , which is facing certain economic losses as anxious investors have second thoughts about the country in the aftermath of the government ’ s nationalization of energy giant YPF .
That response is only logical , as investors seek the security of a well-functioning legal system to protect them from capricious political decisions .
Mexico provides further proof that the market alone is not enough .
An efficient judiciary and effective policing are necessary for capitalism to thrive .
In Brazil , the government is daring , for the first time , to address the lawlessness of the overcrowded favelas that ring the country ’ s large cities .
Or consider Ghana ’ s prosperity and how , like Brazil ’ s , it is going hand in hand with improved governance .
At the opposite extreme , Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez ’ s undermining of his country ’ s institutions , prodding it onto a narco-state trajectory , places Venezuela alongside Haiti as an exception to Latin America ’ s recent economic success .
More generally , the world ’ s thriving countries are those with strong and effective institutions , backed by legal frameworks that guarantee the rule of law . Latin America and Africa are not the only examples that prove the point .
The European Union ’ s internal problems , and its ongoing sovereign-debt crisis , are clearly linked to the weakness of its institutions , and , on Europe ’ s periphery , it still confronts feckless democracies .
Indeed , on Europe ’ s doorstep , the show trial and imprisonment of former Ukrainian Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko is jeopardizing her country ’ s international economic standing .
In particular , President Viktor Yanukovych ’ s contempt for the rule of law has put Ukraine ’ s relations with the European Union in cold storage , with a comprehensive free-trade and association agreement on hold pending the release of Tymoshenko and other political prisoners .
Meanwhile , political trials in Egypt are attracting international attention and deterring foreign investment .
In Asia , China is exposing the fallacy of looking at state capitalism as a competing alternative to liberal capitalism .
Approaching them as alternatives is , in fact , little more than an intellectual remnant of the Cold War , much like the concept of “ state capitalism ” itself .
With its remarkable ability to adapt , China is making strides to accommodate the rising power of its markets and people .
In the process , officials are acknowledging the importance of good governance , as demonstrated by recent efforts to justify the purge and investigation of Bo Xilai as an example of the Communist Party “ safeguarding the rule of law . ”
Adam Smith , that icon of market theory , argued that wealth is created when public institutions enable the “ invisible hand ” of the market to align interests .
The Cold War distorted that wisdom .
In a world free of that era ’ s ideological constraints , it is time to say loud and clear that the future of capitalism is linked to effective governance and the rule of law , and thus to the consolidation of well-functioning states .
