Genetics for the People ?
LONDON – “ Your genetic information should be controlled by you , ” declares an advertisement for the American direct-to-consumer ( DTC ) genetic-testing firm 23andMe .
Amid the current furor over electronic eavesdropping , the notion that individuals should decide who can access their personal data is particularly appealing .
But whether 23andMe is practicing what it preaches remains dubious , at best .
In fact , even some “ techno-libertarians , ” who believe that government should not regulate new developments in biotechnology , have supported the US Food and Drug Administration ’ s decision – outlined in a scathing letter to 23andMe CEO Anne Wojcicki last November – to prevent the firm from marketing its tests pending further scientific analysis . “ I ’ d like to be able to argue that the [ FDA ] is wantonly standing in the way of entrepreneurism and innovation by cracking down on 23andMe , ” wrote Matthew Herper in Forbes .
According to the FDA , 23andMe ’ s marketing of an unapproved Personal Genome Service ( PGS ) violated federal law , because , after six years , the firm still had not proved that the tests actually work .
23andMe is also coming under fire from its users .
Just five days after the FDA sent its letter , a California woman , Lisa Casey , filed a $ 5 million class-action lawsuit against the firm , alleging false and misleading advertising .
Doubts about 23andMe ’ s PGS go back a long way .
In 2008 , the American Society of Clinical Oncology commissioned a report that declared that the partial type of genetic analysis offered by 23andMe had not been clinically proved to be effective in cancer care .
Two years later , the US Government Accountability Office concluded after a lengthy investigation that DTC genetic tests provide “ misleading ” results – a situation that is complicated further by “ deceptive marketing . ”
What 23andMe offered was a $ 99 test for some 250 genetically linked conditions , based on a partial reading of single nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNPs ) – points where individuals ’ genomes vary by a single DNA base pair .
Given that DTC genetic tests target only a fraction of the human genome ’ s three billion markers , and various companies sample different SNPs , different tests may return disparate results for the same customer , who might then make serious medical decisions based on inaccurate information .
In this context , it is unsurprising that even those who oppose regulation in general see the need for it in the case of DTC testing .
But the issue goes beyond inaccuracy .
As the journalist Charles Seife has pointed out , the retail genetics test is “ meant to be a front end for a massive information-gathering operation against an unwitting public . ” Indeed , when 23andMe customers log in to their accounts , they are invited to fill out surveys about their lifestyle , family background , and health , adding epidemiological value to the genetic data , which are then used by the firm ’ s research arm , 23andWe .
In providing this information , 23andMe ’ s customers are building a valuable “ biobank ” for the company .
Given that the United States decided not to create a national biobank like the United Kingdom ’ s , owing to the high set-up costs – estimated at about a billion dollars – 23andMe may well view its growing biobank as saving it a massive outlay .
Some 60 % of 23andMe customers have agreed to provide the requested information .
Of course , one could argue that they are not “ an unwitting public , ” but altruistic volunteers – so generous , in fact , that , beyond paying for the service , they hand over the value of their subsequent labor in providing epidemiological data .
Tom Sawyer pulled off that business strategy when he persuaded his friends to pay him for the privilege of taking over his hated chore , painting the picket fence .
But most scientific research subjects either receive compensation or contribute their time free of charge ; they do not pay to participate .
“ The long game here is not to make money selling kits , although the kits are essential to get the base level data , ” says board member Patrick Chung . “ Once you have the data , [ 23andMe ] does actually become the Google of personalized health care . ”
That is exactly the problem , according to Seife .
The massive corporate data store that Google has accumulated through all of our individual searches has become its most valuable asset . “ By parceling out that information to help advertisers target you , with or without your consent , Google makes more than $ 10 billion every quarter , ” Seife writes .
In other words , users have become the product .
But it also includes a less prominently displayed qualifier : “ If you do not give consent … we may still use your Genetic and / or Self-Reported Information for R & D purposes . ”
In other words , commercial use of non-identifiable information is still allowed without donors ’ explicit consent .
That is what worries libertarians – and anyone else who is concerned about the expansion of online efforts to gather information about individuals .
As a 23andMe blog post by Wojcicki puts it , “ Wikipedia , YouTube , and MySpace have all changed the world by empowering individuals to share information . We believe this same phenomenon can revolutionize health care . ”
But if individuals share information involuntarily , it is the company – not its customers – that will be empowered .
