Convicts for Export
NEW DELHI – China has devised a novel strategy to relieve pressure on its overcrowded prisons : employ convicts as laborers on overseas projects in the developing world .
The practice has exposed another facet of China ’ s egregious human-rights record , which , when it comes to the overseas operations of Chinese companies , includes the government ’ s failure to enforce its own regulations .
China executes three times as many people every year as the rest of the world combined .
Amnesty International has estimated that , in 2007 , China secretly executed on average “ around 22 prisoners every day . ”
In addition to being the world ’ s leading executioner , China has one of its largest prison populations .
The 2009 “ World Prison Population List ” compiled by the International Center for Prison Studies at King ’ s College , London , put the total number of inmates in Chinese jails at 1.57 million – larger than the population of Estonia , Guinea-Bissau , Mauritius , Swaziland , Trinidad & amp ; Tobago , Fiji , or Qatar .
The forced dispatch of prisoners to work on overseas infrastructure projects raises new issues regarding China ’ s human-rights record .
It also adds a new element — the dumping of convicts — to its trade and investment policy , which has been much criticized for dumping goods .
Thousands of Chinese convicts , for example , have been pressed into service on projects undertaken by state-run Chinese companies in Sri Lanka , a strategically important country for China as it seeks to enhance its regional position in the Indian Ocean .
After providing Sri Lanka ’ s government with offensive weapon systems that helped end the country ’ s decades-long civil war , China has been rewarded with port-building , railroad , and other infrastructure projects .
Chinese convicts also have been dispatched to the Maldives , where the Chinese government is building 4,000 houses on several different islands as a government-to-government “ gift ” to win influence .
So far , however , China has failed to persuade the country ’ s president to lease it one of the 700 uninhabited Maldivian islands for use as a small base for the Chinese navy .
Chinese companies ’ operating practice for overseas projects , including in Africa , is to keep the number of local workers to a bare minimum and to bring in much of the workforce from China , some of which comprises convicts “ freed ” on parole for project-related overseas work .
Convict laborers , like the rest of the Chinese workforce on such projects , are housed near the project site . That way , if any convict worker escaped , he would be easy to find in an alien setting .
In theory , such practices run counter to regulations promulgated by the Chinese commerce ministry in August 2006 , in response to a backlash against Chinese businesses in Zambia following the death of 51 Zambian workers in an explosion at a Chinese-owned copper mine .
These regulations called for “ local ­ ization , ” including hiring local workers , respecting local customs , and adhering to safety norms .
During an eight-nation 2007 African tour , Chinese President Hu Jintao made a point of meeting with Chinese businesses to stress the importance of corporate responsibility in their local dealings .
Moreover , in October 2006 , the State Council – China ’ s cabinet – issued nine directives ordering that Chinese overseas businesses , among other things , “ pay attention to environmental protection , ” “ support local community and people ’ s livelihood cause , ” and “ preserve China ’ s good image and its good corporate reputation . ”
But Chinese regulations are sometimes promulgated simply to blunt external criticism , and thus are seldom enforced , except when a case attracts international attention .
For example , in 2003 China enacted a law on environmental-impact assessments , which was followed in 2008 by “ provisional measures ” to permit public participation in such assessments .
Yet Chinese leaders remain more zealous about promoting exports and economic growth than in protecting the country ’ s air and water .
Similarly , the State Council ’ s 2006 nine directives to Chinese overseas companies have been subordinated to the drive for exports and growth , even when it imposes environmental and social costs on local communities abroad .
Indeed , as part of the government ’ s “ going global ” policy , Chinese companies are offered major incentives and rewards for bagging overseas contracts and boosting exports .
The use of convict laborers adds a disturbing new dimension to this strategy .
But even before convicts became part of China ’ s overseas development effort , some Chinese projects , especially dam-building schemes , were embroiled in disputes with local communities in Botswana , Burma , Pakistan , Ghana , and Sudan .
In fact , several small bombs exploded less than three months ago at the site of Burma ’ s Myitsone Dam , whose construction by a Chinese company in insurgency-torn Kachin State is displacing thousands of subsistence farmers and fishermen by flooding a wide swath of land .
Chinese companies cannot get thousands of prisoners released on their own , let alone secure passports and exit permits for them .
It is obvious that the practice of pressing convicts into service on overseas projects has been instituted at the instance of the Chinese government .
Until the Chinese government ’ s treatment of its own citizens and those of other countries is guided by respect for basic human rights and the rule of law , China is unlikely to command the respect that it seeks on the world stage .
