Cycling and Cancer
The cyclist Lance Armstrong recently celebrated an anniversary .
It has been ten years since he was diagnosed with metastatic testicular cancer , which his doctors believed would kill him .
Based on his inspiring story and his efforts to publicize the disease , Armstrong has become an anti-cancer crusader .
But on examining his foundation ’ s website ( www.laf.org ) and his writings , a nagging question remains : Did the same tenacity that enabled Armstrong to win seven Tour de France bicycle races help cure his cancer ?
Armstrong is careful not to equate cycling with cancer , but he — and his legions of fans — often cannot help but do so .
Such a connection may be highly misleading .
By his early twenties , Armstrong was becoming a force in the racing world , but all was not well .
In 1996 , at age 25 , Armstrong developed fatigue , testicular pain and a bloody cough .
Doctors diagnosed him with testicular cancer .
More distressingly , Armstrong ’ s cancer was far-advanced , having spread to his lungs , abdomen and brain .
He was given roughly a 40 % chance of survival , which was probably an overestimate .
One doctor told Armstrong ’ s mother that her son would die .
After undergoing surgery to remove his cancerous testicle , Armstrong became “ a student of cancer . ” He was treated at Indiana University , perhaps America ’ s leading center for testicular cancer .
Armstrong chose Indiana because its oncologists said they could treat him without bleomycin , a type of chemotherapy that would have damaged his lungs and ended his cycling career if he survived .
They removed his brain tumors with surgery instead of radiation , which might have caused balance problems .
But the doctors made no bones about what Armstrong was to receive : extremely caustic drugs that would make him sick as a dog .
Armstrong later wrote that “ by the fourth cycle [ of chemotherapy ] , I was in the fetal position , retching around the clock . ”
Armstrong ’ s cancer responded extremely well .
He then underwent extensive rehabilitation , gradually regaining strength and confidence .
By 1998 , he was again riding his bicycle .
The illness changed Armstrong ’ s body .
When he resumed serious training , he was leaner and more muscular .
In addition to the emotional advantage that Armstrong believed that cancer gave him , his new body also made him a more effective cyclist .
In 1999 , less than three years after his diagnosis , Armstrong won his first Tour de France .
Six more followed , making him the greatest cyclist in history .
For his part , Armstrong has tried to steer clear of facile associations between his Tour de France triumphs and his recovery from cancer . “ Good , strong people get cancer , ” he has written , “ and they do all the right things to beat it , and they still die . ”
Still , at times , Armstrong seems to slip into the sort of language he wishes to avoid .
At the close of his second book , Armstrong summarized his history with cancer as : “ I got treated , I fought like hell , and I got better . ”
When I race I don ’ t want to lose .
Dying and losing , it ’ s the same thing . ”
More worrisome is the adoption of the same reasoning by those who hear Armstrong ’ s story . “ Lance refused to become a statistic and instead rallied and became cancer ’ s worst enemy , ” wrote a reviewer of his first book .
“ Lance beat cancer and then he went on to win 5 Tour de Frances , ” a computer programmer wrote on his blog in 2003 . “ That pretty much means I can overcome whatever ills I have in my life so I can keep going after that . ”
The trouble is that data about the “ will to live ” among cancer patients are not so rosy .
One 1989 study showed that women with metastatic breast cancer who attended support groups survived longer , but these results have not been duplicated .
A recent study showed that a positive attitude did not lengthen the lives of lung cancer patients .
Anecdotally , clinicians can recall “ fighters ” with cancer who die and others who “ give up ” but live .
This is a sobering message for Armstrong ’ s many fans .
After all , we all want to think that hard work always pays off .
Unfortunately , in the world of cancer , this may not be so .
But Armstrong ’ s legacy is about more than data .
He has educated and provided inspiration to thousands , perhaps millions , of cancer patients and raised money that is being used to finding cures .
Oh , and there are those seven bike races that he won .
