Getting to Yes ( Again ) with Germany
GENEVA – Europe ’ s slow-motion sovereign-debt crisis may appear unique , but it is not .
Just a few decades ago , Europe had the Exchange Rate Mechanism , which collapsed during a crisis very much akin to the one afflicting Europe today .
Will the outcome this time be different ?
The ERM was an arrangement that pegged most European currencies ’ exchange-rate movements within limited bands .
But ERM members ’ monetary policies remained home-grown , which , no surprise , occasionally led to fiscal imbalances .
When capital markets smelled a problem among ERM members , they invariably shorted the most vulnerable currency and pushed that country ’ s authorities to devalue .
Authorities resisted , blamed speculators , and then , usually over a frantic few days , gave in .
Markets also tested the resolve of policymakers in otherwise sound ERM countries , particularly when there were big strikes or important elections .
In those cases , even a government with the proper economic fundamentals and its financial house in order could still run into trouble .
European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet is well aware of this : in the early 1990 ’ s , he confronted such a crisis as Governor of the Bank of France .
Some contemporary observers of the ERM thought that there was an easy fix for these troubles .
If the central bank of the country that printed its “ strong currency ” ( Germany ) had been willing to provide unlimited support to a “ weak currency , ” things would have been sorted out .
Germany ’ s Bundesbank , it was suggested , would stand ready to buy “ unlimited quantities ” of lire or francs , so no one would dare to short either currency .
The notion of “ unlimited quantities ” was important : speculators would force officials to exhaust limited quantities , with the purchasing authority ( the Bundesbank ) eventually bearing the loss .
Monetary support would lead to fiscal transfers , making limited interventions a non-starter .
With unlimited support , by contrast , every single speculator could be quashed , and no loss would be borne ( since intervention to support a weak currency would succeed ) .
The only problem was that both the Bundesbank and the German government always fiercely resisted such an arrangement , on the grounds that it could lead to the printing of unlimited quantities of Deutschmarks , and thus stoke inflation .
Instead , Europe developed the euro , which solved the problem of speculative attacks and monetary credibility by replacing individual currencies with a new one .
It was impossible to short the lira or the franc because there were no more lire or francs .
But Italy and France had to give something in return for this security : the ECB was made independent of all eurozone governments .
Yet the current debt crisis has resurrected the old problem , with debt now filling the role that currencies played under the ERM .
Some eurozone countries borrowed excessively and have been punished by the markets , perhaps deservedly so , while others , in the resulting climate of anxiety , have become targets for speculators .
On July 21 , eurozone leaders agreed to make “ more extensive ” use of the new European Financial Stability Facility ( EFSF ) by permitting it to purchase endangered eurozone countries ’ debt in secondary markets .
But the EFSF ’ s “ more extensive interventions ” recalls the “ unlimited quantities ” of foreign-exchange intervention proposed to rescue the ERM .
If “ more extensive ” means piecemeal limited commitments that will eventually be exhausted , the scheme runs the risk of creating losses ( just as the Bundesbank would have suffered losses had it engaged in limited defense of weak ERM currencies ) .
To rule this out , “ unlimited interventions ” would be needed .
But with whose resources , and under whose authority ?
This explains the growing excitement about issuing “ Eurobonds . ”
The conversion of all eurozone national bonds into obligations jointly recognized by all eurozone governments is a replica of the solution to the ERM ’ s breakdown , which consisted in abandoning national currencies in favor of the euro .
This would cost Germany control over the quality of its credit , just as the replacement of the Bundesbank by the ECB implied Germany ’ s loss of control over the quality of its currency ( though it was given a large role in designing the ECB ) .
What is missing in today ’ s proposals is the equivalent of the ECB ’ s independence , which ensured Germany ’ s participation in the euro .
It is no coincidence that one of the leading opponents – the ECB ’ s first chief economist , Otmar Issing – of the “ unlimited interventions ” policy under the ERM recently rebuked both the “ extended-EFSF ” and Eurobonds .
The current proposals , Issing argues , are “ undemocratic . ”
The concessions needed to ensure German participation are likely to be enormous .
With markets ’ ability to monitor dubious borrowers , the guarantees will probably have to be institutional , constitutional , and political – probably formal control over European fiscal policy by a body at least as credible as the ECB , which would mean a dramatic reduction in the power of national parliaments .
Such radical changes would require the consent of all eurozone countries .
And the Bundestag ( not Standard and Poor ’ s ) would have to be happy .
Anything short of this is bound to fail .
