Iran ’ s Electoral Strategy
WASHINGTON , DC – Negotiations over Iran ’ s nuclear program have again hit a wall , but the country ’ s Supreme Leader , Ayatollah Ali Khamenei , appears unconcerned .
Indeed , Khamenei seems convinced that neither the United States nor Israel will attack its nuclear facilities – at least not before the US presidential election in November . & nbsp ;
Ironically , while Khamenei is no fan of democracy , he relies on the fact that his principal enemies are bound by democratic constraints .
Khamenei controls Iran ’ s nuclear program and its foreign policy , but the US and Israel must work to reach consensus not only within their respective political systems , but also with each other .
Iran ’ s leaders , who closely follow Israeli political debates , believe that Israel would not launch an assault on their nuclear facilities without America ’ s full cooperation , because unilateral action would jeopardize Israel ’ s relations with its most important strategic ally .
Given that an Israeli offensive would need to be coordinated with the US , while an American assault would not require Israeli military support , Iran would consider both to be American attacks .
But Iran ’ s leaders remain skeptical of either scenario , despite America ’ s official position that “ all options are on the table ” to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons capability .
So far , they simply do not feel enough pressure to consider a compromise .
In fact , Iran ’ s leaders continue to deride Israel from afar , calling the country an “ insult to humanity , ” or a “ tumor ” in the region that must be eradicated .
Meanwhile , Iran ’ s citizens – including clergy in the holy city of Qom , near the Fordow nuclear facility – are deeply concerned about the consequences of an attack .
Ayatollah Yousef Sanei , a former attorney general and a religious authority ( marja ’ ) , has asked the government to refrain from provoking Israel .
Indeed , critics of the government believe that its incendiary rhetoric might lead to a devastating war .
But , from the perspective of Iran ’ s leadership , the taunting has tactical value to the extent that it reinforces the view among the Israeli public that Iran is a dangerous enemy , willing to retaliate fiercely .
In fact , anti-Israel rhetoric reflects Iranian leaders ’ confidence that Israel will not attack – a view that is bolstered by the situation in Syria .
They are convinced that , even if Syrian President Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime falls , Iran will be able to destabilize the country in such a way that would pose a major security threat to Israel .
According to this view , it is Israel that has an interest in refraining from further antagonizing Iran , not vice versa .
Recent editorials in Kayhan – the hardline Iranian newspaper that serves as a mouthpiece for the Supreme Leader – indicate that Khamenei is looking forward to the US presidential election .
Regardless of the outcome , he foresees no threat of military action , at least through next year .
A victory by Obama would reinforce America ’ s unwillingness to attack Iran and renewed efforts to rein in Israel .
And , if Republican challenger Mitt Romney is elected , he will need months to form his national security team and assemble his cabinet , leaving him unable to attack Iran immediately .
That said , since the Islamic Republic ’ s emergence in 1979 , Iran ’ s leaders have generally preferred Republican presidents to Democrats : despite their harsh rhetoric , Republicans have been more willing to engage with Iran in practice .
Indeed , given that Iran has so far survived severe international sanctions , its leaders believe that they could get an offer from the US after the election – particularly if Romney wins – that recognizes their right to enrich uranium .
In fact , it is far from certain that Iran will be able to withstand current sanctions-related pressures indefinitely .
But its leaders ’ confidence that they can remains a crucial element of their strategy , and the West cannot afford to ignore their perceptions . & nbsp ; America , whether led by Obama or Romney , must understand that Iran will not negotiate seriously on its nuclear program until it perceives a clear , convincing , and unified consensus in the US and Israel on an approach that addresses both Iran ’ s ambitions and Israel ’ s concerns .
Achieving such a consensus in the context of an American presidential election will be no small feat .
Nor is it easy to create consensus in Israel , especially as its political parties prepare for elections next year .
But only with significantly greater cohesion within the US and Israel will Iran ’ s leaders even consider accepting a compromise on their nuclear program .
