Justice from Tomatoes
NEW YORK – The last fast-food hamburger you ate may have cost you next to nothing .
But what did the tomato slice on that burger cost the worker who got it there ?
Almost anywhere in the world – including in the United States – the cost can be shockingly high .
Appalling wages are just the start .
In Florida , tomato pickers earn an average of just $ 0.50 for every 32-pound ( 14.5-kilogram ) bucket .
A worker who picks all day – backbreaking labor that starts before dawn – is lucky to earn $ 10,500 a year , placing him below the poverty line .
Then there are the alarming human-rights violations .
In Mexico , authorities recently freed almost 300 people , including 39 teenagers , who were being “ held in slave-like conditions at a camp where tomatoes are sorted and packed for export . ”
US federal authorities have called Florida ’ s tomato fields “ ground zero for modern-day slavery . ”
The abuses of farm workers by agribusiness interests there have been serious and systematic .
Enter the Campaign for Fair Food – a fight for better wages and conditions that Florida tomato pickers and their allies have fought and largely won .
Their struggle not only underscores the obstacles confronting workers ’ organizations in an era of outsourcing and global supply chains , but also might serve as a model for workers in other industries .
For many years , the tomato industry in Florida depended on poor white and African American laborers .
Today , it relies mainly on low-wage farmworkers from Haiti , Mexico , Guatemala , and other Central American countries – a change that owes much to two decades of trade liberalization .
Policies like the North American Free Trade Agreement allowed multinational companies to sell cheap produce in Mexico and other countries , undercutting local farmers and driving millions of people off their land .
In search of employment , many migrated to the US , where , as disempowered laborers , they went to work for the same ( or similar ) multinationals .
But globalization is now affecting the tactics that farmworkers have chosen .
As Jake Ratner , a young activist who works for Just Harvest USA , points out , global corporations are often insulated from traditional tactics like boycotts .
So farmworkers and their allies have chosen a novel “ brand-busting ” approach that targets companies ’ public image – and that has gotten the attention of decision-makers at the top of the global food hierarchy .
The Campaign for Fair Food ’ s agenda is to persuade every major tomato purchaser to sign on to the Fair Food Program , which , for a small premium – a penny per pound – changes the lives of workers and their families ’ substantially .
Under the FFP , workers who were paid $ 0.50 cents per 32-pound bucket ( a rate that has not risen in more than 30 years ) receive $ 0.82 – a 64 % increase .
A third-party organization , the Fair Food Standards Council , monitors the industry for compliance with wage and human-rights standards .
Before the FFP was launched in November 2010 , Florida ’ s powerful tomato industry had long resisted increasing the per-bucket rate or signing on to codes of conduct to safeguard workers against abuses .
That changed when activists began targeting the multinational corporations at the top of the pyramid , rather than the growers ( who are now merely middlemen squeezed by global companies ) .
As a result , eleven of the biggest global food corporations that buy their tomatoes from Florida growers – including McDonald ’ s , Taco Bell , and Burger King , and supermarket chains like Whole Foods and Trader Joe ’ s – have adopted the FFP .
The FFP has not only lifted workers ’ wages .
A confidential complaint hotline enables workers to report human-rights violations ; more than 300 calls have been received since 2011 ( all were investigated , and the vast majority were resolved ) .
And corporations that sign on to the FFP also commit to a zero-tolerance policy for forced labor , which creates a market incentive for their growers to police their own operations actively ; in the past , market forces created an incentive to look the other way .
Likewise , before the FFP , Florida tomato workers had to wake up at three or four in the morning to get on buses and be in the fields the minute that orders came in .
But they often were not allowed to start picking until 2-3 hours later , when the dew on the plants dried – time for which they were not paid .
Now , with the introduction of FFP-mandated time clocks , workers can punch in and record their hours , ensuring that at least they will receive the state ’ s minimum wage .
As a result , growers no longer want them starting so early , which gives them more time to sleep – and have breakfast with their families .
Without such programs , the multinational squeeze goes on .
By leveraging their massive purchasing power , big multinational food corporations drive down prices , not only impoverishing farmworkers , but also eroding the profits of the growers who employ them .
Meanwhile , the disaggregation and “ disintermediation ” of global corporations enables them to create formal barriers that prevent senior management from ever seeing , let alone being influenced by , their own workers ( and growers ) .
I experienced this firsthand when I joined a protest organized by the Coalition of Immokalee Workers against a Wendy ’ s fast-food outlet in New York City ’ s Union Square .
( Though four of the five largest US fast-food corporations have signed on to the FFP , Wendy ’ s is the holdout . )
Citing company policy , Wendy ’ s managers refused even to accept a letter from the protesters about signing on to the FFP and gave them the telephone number of Wendy ’ s corporate spokesperson .
Activists say that calling that number elicits a form-letter statement , and that no one ever speaks with them directly .
Nonetheless , the FFP campaigners may eventually get Wendy ’ s to sign on – making that tomato slice a little tastier for customers with a conscience .
Perhaps more important , building a coalition of workers , consumers , and allied activists to apply pressure at the top could be a model for positive change for workers in globalized industries in India , Bangladesh , China , and elsewhere .
