Japan ’ s Beheaded Illusions
TOKYO – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe was on a six-day tour of Egypt , Jordan , Lebanon , Israel , and Palestine , when the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant ( ISIL ) posted a video online threatening to murder two Japanese hostages , Haruna Yukawa and Kenji Goto , if his government did not pay $ 200 million within 72 hours .
Abe had no good options .
Indeed , when it comes to protecting its citizens overseas , Japan never does .
When Abe failed to bow to its demands , ISIL released a second video claiming that Yukawa , who was seized last August in Syria while reportedly preparing to establish a Japan-based private security company , had been beheaded .
Goto , a journalist who traveled to Syria last October to try to secure Yukawa ’ s release , will supposedly be spared if Japan secures Jordan ’ s release of a convicted terrorist .
In fact , Goto ’ s wife had received an email demanding a ransom of ¥ 2 billion ( $ 17 million ) in December .
But it seems that Abe ’ s Middle East tour presented a greater opportunity for ISIL to make the most of its Japanese hostages .
ISIL ’ s ransom demand was not just a bid for cash ; it sent a powerful message .
Just three days before the demand was made , Abe pledged to provide $ 200 million in non-military humanitarian aid to frontline countries in the fight against ISIL , including Jordan , Syria , Iraq , and Lebanon , all of which have taken in large numbers of refugees .
ISIL explicitly directed the video to both Japan ’ s government and its citizens , evidently hoping that the largely pacifist Japanese would press their leaders to back down .
And , to some extent , their expectation was met ; some opposition members of Japan ’ s Diet tweeted that Abe should cancel the promised aid .
Needless to say , Abe ’ s government ignored their advice .
When the ransom demand did not work , ISIL shifted its approach , but not its goal .
The prisoner whose release it has demanded in exchange for Goto is Sajida al-Rishawi , who faces the death penalty in Jordan for her role in hotel bombings in Amman in 2005 .
The group seems to believe that forcing Japan and Jordan to negotiate such a trade could undermine the countries ’ longstanding relationship .
ISIL probably knows that Japan has historically placed the safety of its own citizens above all other considerations – even if it meant bowing to terrorists ’ demands .
When the Japanese Red Army hijacked a Japan Airlines flight to Dhaka Airport in Bangladesh in 1977 , Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda not only paid the $ 6 million ransom ; he also resorted to the “ extralegal measure ” of handing over imprisoned members of the faction . “ The weight of a human life , ” he declared , “ is heavier than the earth itself . ”
This response stands in stark contrast to Israel ’ s behavior a year earlier , when the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine ( PFLP ) hijacked an Air France flight with 256 passengers .
Instead of giving the group what they wanted – the release of 53 militants imprisoned in Israel and four other countries – the Israeli Army launched Operation Thunderbolt , rescuing the hostages at Uganda ’ s Entebbe Airport .
Only three hostages and one Israeli commando – Yonatan Netanyahu , the elder brother of current Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu – were killed in the operation .
But Fukuda ’ s response was not entirely a matter of choice .
Under Japan ’ s constitution , neither the country ’ s self-defense forces nor the police would have had legal grounds to travel overseas to rescue endangered Japanese citizens .
In any case , neither force would have had the training necessary to pull off something like Operation Thunderbolt .
The Dhaka episode was hardly the first time that threats against Japanese citizens had exposed this shortcoming .
Seven years earlier , a forerunner to the Japanese Red Army hijacked another Japan Airlines flight – the “ Yodogo ” – and demanded to be taken to North Korea .
The Japanese authorities got lucky : When the pilot landed first in South Korea , the hijackers released their 129 hostages in exchange for permission to continue to Pyongyang , where they gained asylum .
Two years later , three & nbsp ; members of the Japanese Red Army , recruited by the PFLP , attacked Tel Aviv ’ s Lod Airport , killing 26 people and injuring 80 others .
And , in the late 1970s and early 1980s , the wives of the Yodogo hijackers went to Europe , where they are suspected of abducting young Japanese students and taking them to North Korea .
As ISIL ’ s actions demonstrate , Japanese are still at risk – and their government still lacks adequate tools to protect them .
Fortunately , Abe – whose efforts to rescue Japanese citizens abducted by North Korea fueled his political rise – seems to recognize the need for change .
Since World War II , military considerations have barely factored into Japanese policy , and official development assistance , which began as war reparations , has placed international imperatives above domestic concerns .
But , after playing benefactor to the world for 60 years , Japan ’ s diplomatic and crisis-management capabilities have been severely weakened .
It is unacceptable for a government to be unable to protect its own citizens .
That is why Abe is determined to amend , or at least reinterpret , Japan ’ s constitution to allow for the kinds of defense maneuvers that other countries , from Israel to India , employ when their people are threatened .
As US Supreme Court Justice Robert Jackson once put it , a constitution is not a suicide pact .
