An Accidental Cure for Iraq
Doctors use the word “ crisis ” to describe the point at which a patient either starts to recover or dies .
President George W. Bush ’ s Iraqi patient now seems to have reached that point .
Most commentators appear to think that Bush ’ s latest prescription – a surge of 20,000 additional troops to suppress the militias in Baghdad – will , at best , merely postpone the inevitable death of his dream of a democratic Iraq .
Yet as “ Battle of Baghdad ” begins , factors beyond Bush ’ s control and not of his making ( at least not intentionally ) may just save Iraq from its doom .
One key factor is that , for the first time since the United States and Britain invaded Iraq , Arab Sunni leaders are backing a US military plan for that country .
These Sunni leaders live in abject fear of the geopolitical earthquake that any disintegration of political authority in Baghdad would bring , believing that all-out civil war would invariably follow – a war that would not respect international borders .
Of course , America has been encouraging Sunni leaders in this belief .
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice ’ s recent tour of Middle East capitals helped spread the word to Egypt , Jordan , Saudi Arabia , and the Gulf states that any US failure and sudden withdrawal would be certain to destabilize them .
Given the fragile grip that these leaders have over their societies , America ’ s warnings have been taken to heart .
But the truly curious factor that might bring success to Bush is that those who have opposed or resented America ’ s presence in Iraq , such as the Iranian-backed Shi ’ a parties now also appear to want Bush ’ s new strategy to succeed .
They are for it because they believe it will defang Moqtada al-Sadr , the rogue Shi ’ a cleric whose power has mushroomed over the past three years – to the point that he now dominates much of Baghdad and holds the allegiance of countless angry young Shi ’ a men .
Of course , attacking Moqtada al-Sadr ’ s Mahdi Army in the name of fighting militia death squads has the potential to draw American military forces into a level of urban warfare unseen since the Falluja assaults of 2004 and 2005 .
Al-Sadr is seen as the protector of the Shi ’ a of Iraq and has are an estimated 60,000 fighters in his militia .
But he is deeply mistrusted by other Shi ’ a leaders , who fear that they may one day have to take him on by themselves .
Better to let the Americans do it , though of course these Shi ’ a leaders prefer a slow strangulation of al-Sadr to a direct and bloody assault .
But make no mistake : how al-Sadr is handled is the big test of Bush ’ s new strategy .
Should the US choose to face al-Sadr and his forces head on , they risk alienating Iraq ’ s largest sectarian community , the Shi ’ a , adding fuel to the anti-occupation resistance and thus probably dooming Bush to failure .
Iran and Syria , which have played a spoiler role in Iraq up to now , may also now be anxious to find a way to pull the country back from the brink .
Bush still refuses to talk to either of them , and has lately been having US troops arrest Iranian agents in Iraq .
Yet Iran may already see itself as victorious , with the current Iraqi government friendlier than any the Iranians have ever known .
So maintaining that government in office has now become a strategic priority for Iran , particularly as it is now clear that any US hopes of using Iraq as a permanent military base are dead .
The “ surge ” also opens , perhaps for the first time , a serious possibility of pouring water on the insurgent fires in Anbar province , the heartland of the Sunni insurgency .
The US has achieved relative successes in the province through alliances with Sunni tribes .
The hope is that such realistic and pragmatic accommodations will be extended to Iraqis who are fighting under the banner of a nationalist and anti-occupation agenda .
So some of the stars have come into alignment for Bush .
But to keep them there in the long term , the Iraqi government will need to amend the constitution in a way that appeases the Sunni community .
Reassuring Iraq ’ s Sunnis that they have a place in the new Iraq will also reassure neighboring Sunni governments , which have mostly turned a blind eye to the support for the insurgency that has come from their lands .
Of course , should the US see failure ahead , it could seek to broaden the war beyond Iraq ’ s borders by attacking Iran , a policy reminiscent of “ Operation Sideshow , ” when US failure in Vietnam in the late 1960 ’ s enticed President Nixon into attacking Cambodia and Laos .
But Iran has resources that Cambodia and Laos could never muster ; indeed , its ability to retaliate could set the entire region ablaze .
Whereas America ’ s war in Indochina was a tragic mistake , the cost of a wider war precipitated by the crisis in Iraq would be incomparably greater – for both the patient and the doctor .
