Indianomics
NEW DELHI – Nowadays , economists are assailed by irresolute thoughts : what , for example , is the right term to apply to current global economic conditions ?
Is it “ depression , ” “ recession , ” or , finally , “ recovery ” ?
What of the euro ?
Will it flounder or regain its “ health ” ?
As these debates fill the air in finance ministries and economics departments around the globe , India continues its steady GDP growth , now projected to reach 9.4 % this year .
Indeed , the government says that the growth rate will hit double figures soon .
Although many people seem amazed that India has maintained rapid growth for so long – even in the face of the global downturn – surprise is unwarranted .
India ’ s proportion of global GDP stood at 25 % in 1750 , but slumped to 1.6 % in 1900 , at the high noon of imperialism .
India is simply rising again to reassert its traditional global position .
Can India achieve this ?
Many challenges confront India on its path to sustained strong growth , principally that of converting the country ’ s vast promise into reality .
In order to achieve this in a true democracy , India must ensure distributive justice .
It must ensure that enhanced purchasing power leads to a markedly improved quality of life for all of India ’ s citizens .
Currently , India has a window of opportunity , nearly unique in nature , thanks to a huge demographic dividend : almost 60 % of the country ’ s population is below the age of 30 .
But this advantage is limited in duration , lasting two or perhaps three decades .
If it is not used now , it will dissipate .
To seize this opportunity , India first must move decisively away from state capitalism , the remnants of which continue to retard the country ’ s economic progress .
India ’ s economic future lies in maximizing its private sector ’ s dynamism , which demands an acceleration of institutional reform , including privatization at both the national and state level .
But , as the Indian economist and frequent policymaker Vijay Kelkar has put it , “ India needs to fashion [ its ] own sui generis model of growth and development … towards an advanced economy , always promoting inclusive growth , and thus gain the benefits of enhanced efficiency , greater equity , and better governance under a liberal democracy . ” Simply copying American , British , or other Western policies and institutions will not work .
Moreover , India is not China ; it cannot be – indeed , it must not be .
That is why it should not hanker after any ersatz export-led or state-directed growth .
India ’ s second great challenge is to resolve its enormous infrastructure shortcomings .
India is no longer primarily an agricultural economy ; indeed , agriculture accounts for only around 20 % of GDP .
But this does not mean that agriculture should be neglected ; on the contrary , it remains a way of life for many millions of Indians , who need capital and new technology .
Raising farm productivity and income requires improved irrigation , wasteland reclamation , warehousing , marketing , transport development , and the free movement of produce within the country .
This is why rapid strengthening of India ’ s physical and social infrastructure is central to its progress .
This leads us to examining India ’ s current fixation with GDP growth as a national panacea .
The theory is that the government , as the agent of the people , collects taxes and delivers public goods in return .
In this sense , the Indian state has been rather a poor agent ; it collects little and delivers a pittance – and what it does deliver is of grossly inadequate quality .
Yet the Indian state continues to ask for a disproportionately high price from the people .
This must change , by directly targeting the alleviation of poverty – and ultimately its elimination .
I accept that the most powerful anti-poverty program is economic growth , but it works only if and when it is accompanied by distributive justice .
Only such “ just ” growth can eventually be converted into high GNC : “ Gross National Contentment , ” a truer index of economic well-being .
Rather than endless debates about higher budgetary allocations , India needs to find practical ways to promote effective , targeted , self-adjusting , and self-liquidating anti-poverty programs .
It is not the amount of money allocated by government that matters .
The true litmus test of budget expenditures is what actually gets delivered .
Only an inclusive approach to reform can meet peoples ’ expectations , and in turn spread contentment .
India does not need more laws .
It needs more effective and more accountable governments .
It does not need more regulations , but rather a vastly larger canvas for individual freedom and opportunity .
India ’ s economy must be freed from the organizing principle of state control , so that individual enterprise and creativity can become its main engine .
India is at the threshold of an era of unprecedented growth .
But to cross it , Indians must craft a new idea of India – as the flagship of a modern global economy that unleashes the dynamism of all citizens .
