NATO ’ s Dangerous Signals
COPENHAGEN – Two dangerous signals were sent from NATO ’ s Bucharest summit .
The first was that Russia has reestablished a “ sphere of interest ” in Europe , where countries are no longer allowed to pursue their own goals without Moscow accepting them .
The other was that all NATO member states are free to blackmail their partners into supporting their own narrow goals .
The first signal was sent when Ukraine and Georgia were denied the “ Membership Action Plan ” ( MAP ) that they sought .
Several European heavyweights , led by Germany and France , said no , despite strong support for the idea from the United States .
The second signal was sent when Greece successfully vetoed membership for Macedonia , a move that reflected the two countries ’ unresolved conflict over Macedonia ’ s name ( which Greece insists must be Former Yugoslav Republic Of Macedonia – FYROM – one of the most disgraceful acronyms harassing international politics today ) .
The dispute with Macedonia goes back to the early 1990 ’ s , when Yugoslavia collapsed into independent states .
Greece vehemently opposed its tiny northern neighbor – with only two million inhabitants – using the name Macedonia and symbols from the days of Alexander the Great in its flag and crest .
Macedonia at one point agreed to design a new flag and remove the symbols , as well as to amend its constitution to clarify that it had no territorial claims on Greece , but it flatly refused to live under one of the tongue-twisting names suggested by its bigger neighbor .
So there you are : a Greek veto on Macedonia ’ s national aspirations until it has chosen a name that does not make the Greeks shiver in fear of aggression from the north .
With Macedonia in NATO , any adventurous policy that undermined regional stability would certainly be stopped in its tracks .
If the Greeks cannot see that , their partners must let them know that there is a price for their obstructive behavior .
The problem with Ukraine and Georgia is far more serious .
In a sense , Russia has behaved like Greece in claiming that NATO enlargement threatens its security .
That is nonsense , and Russia knows it .
But the Kremlin has found that behaving like a spoiled child gets results : the right to influence developments in ex-Soviet countries .
In other words , Russia is being allowed to re-assert its “ sphere of influence ” – a concept that should have been superceded by that of “ Europe Whole and Free , ” which the entire European Union appeared to have embraced when communism collapsed .
But no : 1989 was not the end of history .
History threatens to return .
European opponents of a MAP for Ukraine and Georgia argue that neither country is ready for NATO membership .
Too many question marks about their national unity are said to exist , too many internal conflicts linger , and their records on political and judicial reforms are supposedly dubious .
But the MAP process does not imply an automatic right to NATO membership .
On the contrary , MAPs would put heavy demands on Ukraine and Georgia .
Both would have to answer a lot of difficult questions and convince others that they are able to live up to NATO ’ s democratic requirements before being allowed to join .
Therefore , it would also be in Russia ’ s interest to see such a process started .
Russia has valid concerns regarding the huge Russian-speaking minorities in both countries , and these concerns are best dealt within the framework of the MAP process , where the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe ’ s very strict rules on treatment of minorities provide the benchmark .
Indeed , the MAP process ensured protections for Russian minorities in Estonia , Latvia , and Lithuania – all ex-Soviet republics that are now NATO members .
The crux of the matter is Europe ’ s lack of political will to forge a unified stand toward Russia .
This has led Russia to pursue a classic “ divide and rule ” strategy by tempting some big European countries into bilateral agreements – particularly on energy issues – that preclude a common EU position .
This is sad – both for Russia and Europeans – because it strengthens the hand of those in Moscow who want to pursue a policy of national pride rather than national interest , and it weakens the possibilities of establishing a real common European foreign and security policy .
But it is saddest for the countries that are once again being left out in the cold .
NATO is supposed to be a beacon for countries struggling to establish democracy and freedom .
The Bucharest summit suggests that the beacon has been switched off .
