Diplomats Behaving Badly
NEW YORK – Diplomats , normally discreet figures who rarely court publicity , have been in the news a lot lately , for all the wrong reasons .
Two recent arrests of diplomats by their host countries have put a spotlight on the justification for , and limits of , the immunity from local law that such officials typically enjoy .
In the first case , Dmitri Borodin , the minister counselor at the Russian embassy in The Hague , was arrested late one night in October of last year , after neighbors alerted the Dutch police that Borodin , allegedly in a drunken state , was beating his two small children .
He was handcuffed in his own home and taken to the police station .
According to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations , diplomats cannot be prosecuted according to a host country ’ s laws .
So Russian President Vladimir Putin immediately demanded an official apology from the Dutch government for ignoring Borodin ’ s diplomatic immunity .
The rabble-rousing Russian politician Vladimir Zhirinovsky called on his followers to smash the windows of the Dutch embassy in Moscow .
A week later , a Dutch diplomat in Moscow was beaten up at his home by armed thugs ( no connection between the two cases has been proved ) .
The timing of all of this was awkward .
The Dutch king , Willem Alexander , was about to visit Russia to celebrate the two countries ’ friendly relations in the so-called “ Netherlands-Russia Year . ”
The Dutch foreign minister duly apologized to Russia for the conduct of his country ’ s police , and Borodin was recalled to Moscow .
Then , in December , the New York City police arrested an Indian consular official , Devyani Khobragade , for paying a domestic worker less than the minimum wage in the United States and for falsifying the worker ’ s visa application .
Because consular officials do not enjoy the same degree of immunity as higher-ranking diplomats , the police were acting within their authority , even if their methods – strip-searching Khobragade , for example – might be considered excessive .
The reaction in India , however , was much fiercer than in Russia .
Outrage was voiced in the press .
Apologies were demanded .
Demonstrations were held .
US diplomats were stripped of customary privileges .
Threats were made to arrest same-sex partners of US diplomats , because Indian law criminalizes homosexuality .
All of this might seem over the top and childish .
But , because diplomats are their countries ’ official representatives abroad , their symbolic function is much more important than their individual personalities .
They are like national flags : insult them , and you insult the “ nation . ”
And when it comes to preserving national “ face , ” Russia and India are perhaps touchier than most countries ;
Russia has always felt looked down upon by western European powers , and India is still reckoning with a legacy of colonial humiliation .
A writer for the Times of India expressed Indians ’ sensitivity succinctly : “ The sad truth is that India is now viewed abroad as a third-rate banana republic . ”
Many Indians , especially among the Delhi elite , believe it .
The behavior of the New York City police played into their deepest fears .
One of the most interesting aspects of these two diplomatic incidents is what it tells us about the new Russian and Indian elite .
Diplomats have always represented the face of their country , but their own faces have changed .
In the past , diplomats did not actually represent nation-states , but royal courts ( in most monarchies this is still officially the case ) .
As a result , European diplomats , for example , were mostly aristocrats , who all spoke French to one another .
Diplomatic incidents often had to do with the relative status of kings and queens .
One famous incident in the late eighteenth century was Lord Macartney ’ s British mission to the Imperial Court of China .
Macartney refused to conform to Chinese imperial protocol by declining to kowtow to the emperor , because he was not required to do the same to his own sovereign .
This , too , was very much a case of “ keeping face ” : the Chinese expected tribute ; the British lord insisted on the equal status of his king .
As a result , the mission broke down .
Diplomatic immunity from local prosecution was an idea that sprang directly from another incident , almost a century earlier , involving the arrest of a Russian aristocrat , Andrey Matveyev , who represented Peter the Great in London .
Matveyev was detained and roughed up by bailiffs who demanded money from him .
The Russians complained .
The British apologized .
And the British parliament enacted a new law protecting diplomats from suffering similar treatment in the future .
Borodin and Khobragade are not aristocrats .
Far from it .
They represent a very different age , which one is tempted to call democratic , even if Russia today is more like a soft dictatorship .
Perhaps Borodin was just enjoying a rare night out and is normally an abstemious man , but his thuggish behavior is perhaps not entirely atypical of a new class of Russians that has accumulated a great deal of money and power since the Soviet Union collapsed .
Khobragade ’ s case is more interesting .
She was born into the Dalit caste , the “ untouchables , ” who in former times would never have gotten anywhere near the elite , except to sweep their floors .
Since Indian independence , the government has done much to improve the Dalits ’ status , and the deputy consul general is one of the beneficiaries of this policy .
She is a member of the new Indian elite , increasingly wealthy and proud to represent a rising power in the world .
If the allegations that Khobragade systematically underpaid her domestic worker are true , this shows how fully she has adopted the customs of the class to which she has risen .
In all the Indian protests about the terrible blow dealt by the Americans to Indian self-esteem , only a few mentioned the habitual exploitation of the poorer classes .
As with their politicians , a country ’ s people , it seems , often have the diplomats they deserve .
