Latin America ’ s Two Lefts
A perception has been growing over the last few years – and picking up strength in recent months – that Latin America is swinging back to the left .
The unimpressive – and sometimes dismal – results of economic reform seem to have generated a backlash that has elected leftist presidents across the continent , starting with Hugo Chávez ’ s victory in Venezuela at the end of the 1990 ’ s , and continuing with those of Ricardo Lagos in Chile and Nestor Kirchner in Argentina , and more recently that of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva in Brazil and Tabaré Vázquez in Uruguay .
More left-wing victories seem to be in store in Mexico , Peru , and Bolivia .
But while the premises underlying this broad trend are clear , Latin America ’ s voters are electing not one left , but two .
To be sure , although 2004 was one of the region ’ s better years in terms of economic growth , the outcome of two decades of so-called structural reform remains disappointing .
Inequality has increased , poverty has been reduced only slightly at best , employment remains stubbornly low , corruption , violence , crime , and political gridlock continue unabated , and foreign investment and free-trade agreements with the US have yet to deliver the goods .
In these circumstances , a strong ideological and policy reaction against the pro-market “ Washington Consensus , ” with its emphasis on liberalization , deregulation , and privatization , is anything but a surprise .
At the same time , however , that reaction is much less uniform and clear-cut than many observers believe .
To begin with , those parties , leaders , and movements that have truly socialist and progressive roots – such as Lagos and his Socialist Party in Chile , Lula and the Workers ’ Party in Brazil , and Vázquez in Uruguay – are following pragmatic , sensible and realistic paths .
Their policies are remarkably similar to those of their predecessors ; their respect for democracy is full-fledged and sincere .
Their old school anti-Americanism has been tempered by years of exile , realism , and resignation .
Conversely , leftist leaders who arise from a populist , purely nationalist past , with few ideological underpinnings – Chávez with his military background , Kirchner with his Peronist roots , and Mexico City mayor and presidential frontrunner Lopez Obrador , with his origins in the Institutional Revolutionary Party – has proven much less responsive to modernizing influences .
For them , rhetoric is more important than substance and power is more important than how it is exercised .
The despair of poor , provincial , and clientelistic constituencies is a tool rather than a problem , and belittling the US by aligning with Fidel Castro trumps promoting their countries ’ real interests in the world .
Secondly , the left in general – whether of socialist or populist origins – has “ spoken loudly ” and carried a “ small stick , ” so to speak .
Actual policies , with the passing exception of Argentina ’ s negotiation with its international creditors – and the IMF , in particular – are remarkably similar to those of their predecessors .
Chávez continues to invite foreign oil companies to drill in the Orinoco basin , Lula maintains hefty budget surpluses , Kirchner ultimately accepts IMF conditionality , and Lagos maintains unmatched relations with Chile ’ s highly conservative private sector .
Overall , macroeconomic orthodoxy seems to be taking root .
Indeed , it is only on the margins where Latin America ’ s left is striving to differ – and partly succeeding .
The areas where this new and old left can make a difference include improving anti-poverty programs , expanding housing and property rights , effective land reform , developing education , science , and technology , and , perhaps most importantly , strengthening democracy , human rights , and the rule of law in a region where they have been woefully absent for decades .
To succeed with this bold and necessary agenda , Latin America ’ s left must purge its dangerous and destructive nationalist and authoritarian strains .
The new left , if it stays the course on modernization and reform , can be a boon to the region .
