Israel ’ s Nuclear Option in Iran
LOS ANGELES – Revelations in former President George W. Bush ’ s recently published memoirs show that he declined an Israeli request to destroy Syria ’ s secret nuclear reactor in the spring of 2007 .
While the revelation may appear merely to be a historical footnote , more profoundly it raises new uncertainty about whether Israel now thinks that it can rely on the United States to apply military force to stop Iran ’ s nuclear program should diplomacy fail .
The Syrian episode suggests that it cannot , which means that Israel may decide to go it alone once again , this time to eliminate Iran ’ s nuclear facilities .
If Israel did so , however , it would confront a conundrum .
Unlike the attack on Syria ’ s nuclear plant , Israel ’ s conventional forces do not have the capacity to destroy Iran ’ s suspect installations .
Portions of Iran ’ s nuclear program may be too heavily bunkered , dispersed , or concealed .
This raises the question of whether Israel ’ s repeated refrain that “ all options are on the table ” implies that even a nuclear strike is possible .
Israel ’ s nuclear history provides no clear answer , but the future may force the issue .
Israel has never acknowledged having nuclear weapons , let alone the size and scope of its arsenal .
Israeli policymakers refuse to talk about the subject .
Israel ’ s parliament , the Knesset , never discusses the program or appropriates money for it .
Military censors quash public discourse about it .
Yet American and other intelligence services and strategic-research institutes around the world all agree that Israel possesses nuclear weapons .
They disagree about how many , with estimates ranging broadly , from 40 to more than 400 warheads .
Israel ’ s reluctance to rattle its nuclear saber , even in dire circumstances , adds to the mystery .
In the Yom Kippur War , as Syrian forces threatened to break the country ’ s defensive lines , Israeli decision-makers recoiled even from threatening to use nuclear weapons .
While Israel keeps its bomb in the basement , it has a long history of stopping its adversaries .
As Iraq moved to complete the Osirak reactor by the early 1980 ’ s , Israel applied diplomatic pressure and actions against foreign nuclear vendors , sabotaged atomic exports , and assassinated Iraqi scientists , before finally settling on the June 1981 air strike on the plant .
In the Syrian case , with one caveat , Israel decided to dispense with the preliminaries and simply destroy the reactor .
The caveat consists in a plea that Israel made to the US .
According to Bush ’ s memoir , in the spring of 2007 , Prime Minister Ehud Olmert made a blunt request of the US president regarding Syria ’ s reactor : “ George , I am asking you to bomb the facility . ”
After consultation with his staff , Bush responded that , absent a plutonium extraction facility , US intelligence could not confirm that the plant comprised a nuclear weapons program . “ I told him [ Olmert ] I had decided on a diplomatic option backed by force ” to stop Syria , Bush writes .
An apprehensive Olmert responded , “ I must be honest with you . Your strategy was very disturbing to me . ”
Within months , Israel struck .
One year later , it followed up by assassinating Mohammed Suleiman , the Syrian general in charge of resurrecting the nuclear enterprise .
Given its efforts to fend off an attack , Iran represents a far more difficult target for Israel than Iraq and Syria did .
As a result , Israel ceded to the US and others responsibility to move the Iranian regime from its current path .
Since 2002 , the US has applied a multi-pronged approach .
It pressed the International Atomic Energy Agency for greater scrutiny . It got the United Nations Security Council to agree to impose increasingly onerous economic sanctions – and roped allies into even stronger sanctions .
It adulterated nuclear-related exports from European vendors to perform poorly during operation .
It may have inserted computer worms into Iran ’ s atomic infrastructure .
The result of all these efforts has been to slow , but not halt , Iran ’ s nuclear progress .
And , even as the US and its allies attempt to restrain Iran , its regime continues to goad Israel , calling for its extinction and exporting military wares to its Lebanese and Gazan adversaries .
In May 2010 , Israel responded with a new wrinkle .
It leaked to the London Sunday Times that it had placed nuclear-armed submarines off Iran ’ s coast .
In the months before and after , it continued to hold war games and practice air strikes on Iran .
And it repeatedly uttered threats that “ all ” options are on the table .
Iran remains unmoved .
Concerned that President Barack Obama will be less likely than Bush to use force to stop Iran , Israel must now contemplate its next steps should diplomacy continue to stall .
One option would be to pursue a policy of “ opacity plus ” : a further lifting of the veil over its nuclear arsenal in order to caution Iran ’ s rulers about the potential consequences of their actions .
Another option would be to bring the country ’ s nuclear arsenal out of the basement altogether .
Israel could then mimic other nuclear-armed states by flexing its capacity through announcement and transparent nuclear deployment on land and sea , thereby promoting deterrence .
But , for a country that has had little faith in deterrence when it comes to existential nuclear threats , relying on it now would mark a new , uncomfortable bet .
That leaves nuclear use as the final option .
But nuclear attack carries its own heavy burden .
Given Iran ’ s placement of strategic sites in or near population centers , the deaths of many thousands of people would forever tar Israel .
The only worse stain on Israel would be if survivors of an Iranian nuclear strike were to lament that , had their country acted proactively , “ the third destruction of the Temple ” – the end of the Jewish state – could have been avoided .
These sobering prospects should prompt all involved to seek a peaceful resolution .
Time is growing short .
