Lagarde ’ s Challenges
CHICAGO – Now that the dust has settled over the selection of the International Monetary Fund ’ s managing director , the IMF can return to its core business of managing crises .
Christine Lagarde , a competent and well-regarded technocrat , will have her hands full with three important challenges .
The first , and probably easiest , challenge is to restore the IMF ’ s public image .
While the criminal case against Dominique Strauss-Kahn on sexual-assault charges now seems highly uncertain , the ensuing press focus on the IMF suggests an uncontrolled international bureaucracy with unlimited expense accounts , dominated by men with little sense of restraint .
Fortunately , the truth is more prosaic .
Top IMF staff face strict limits on their allowable business expenses ( no $ 3,000 per night hotel rooms , despite reports in the press ) , and are generally underpaid relative to private-sector executives with similar skills and experience .
The IMF , like many organizations where workers spend long trips together , has its share of intra-office romances .
But the environment is professional , and not hostile to women .
A previous incident in which Strauss-Kahn was let off lightly for an improper relationship with a subordinate clearly suggests that the Fund needs brighter lines for acceptable behavior and tougher punishment for transgressions .
But other organizations have dealt with similar issues ; the IMF needs to make the necessary changes , and , equally important , get the message out that the DSK incident was an aberration , not the tip of the proverbial iceberg .
The second , and perhaps most difficult , challenge facing Lagarde , is the mess in Europe , where the IMF has become overly entangled in eurozone politics .
Typically , the IMF assesses whether a country , after undertaking reasonable belt-tightening measures , can service its debt – and lends only when it is satisfied that it can .
The entire objective of IMF lending is to help finance the country while it makes adjustments and regains access to private borrowing .
This also means that a country with too much debt should renegotiate it down before getting help from the IMF , thereby avoiding an unsustainable repayment burden .
Perhaps swayed by promises of eurozone financial support ( and Europe ’ s desire to prevent default-fueled financial contagion from spreading to countries like Spain and possibly Italy ) , the IMF took a rosier view of debt sustainability in countries like Greece than it has in emerging markets .
But this has not “ helped ” such countries , for the availability of soft credit from the eurozone or the Fund only enables a greater accumulation of debt .
Ultimately , debt can be repaid only if a country produces more than it spends .
And the higher the debt , the less likely it is that the country will be able to achieve the mix of belt-tightening and growth that would enable it to generate the necessary surpluses .
Delayed restructuring eventually means more painful restructuring – after many years of lost growth .
If troubled eurozone countries , especially Spain , start growing rapidly again , there is still a “ muddle-through ” outcome that might work .
With too-big-to-save countries like Spain in the clear , the debt of highly-indebted peripheral countries like Greece could be written down through interest waivers , maturity extensions , and debt exchanges .
The eurozone – and the European Union – could survive its fiscal crisis intact .
But having failed to insist on an up-front restructuring , the IMF will face problems .
With private investors reluctant to lend more or even to roll over existing debt , the bulk of Greek debt at the time of any restructuring ( or whatever it is euphemistically called ) will be from the official sector .
How the resulting losses imposed on debt holders will be divided between the various eurozone institutions and the IMF is anyone ’ s guess .
For the first time in its history , the Fund might have to take a significant “ haircut ” on its loans , and it will have to prepare its non-European shareholders for it .
A greater dilemma will emerge if the muddle-through strategy does not seem to be working .
At some point , the IMF ’ s strategy , which should be focused on the distressed country ’ s citizens and its creditors , should depart from that of the eurozone , which is more willing to sacrifice individual countries ’ interests for the larger interest of the monetary union .
Lagarde ’ s challenge will be to chart a strategy for the IMF that is independent of the eurozone ’ s strategy , even though she has been intimately involved in formulating the latter .
The third challenge for Lagarde concerns the circumstances of her election .
It is not inconceivable that a number of emerging-market countries will get into trouble in the next few years .
Will the Fund require the tough policy changes it has demanded of countries in the past , or will Lagarde ’ s need to show that she is not biased towards Europe mean that future IMF interventions will become more expansive and less demanding ?
A kinder , gentler Fund is in no one ’ s interest , least of all the distressed countries and the world ’ s taxpayers .
Finally , there is a challenge that seems to be pressing , but is not .
In her campaign for the position , Lagarde emphasized the need for diversity among the IMF ’ s top management .
But what is really needed is the selection and promotion of the best people , regardless of national origin , sex , or race .
Clearly , the IMF ’ s existing culture and history will bias its selection and promotion of staff towards a certain type of person ( for example , holders of PhDs from US universities ) .
That commonality in backgrounds among IMF personnel allows the Fund to move fast in country rescues , not wasting time in endless debate .
In the long run , more diversity is needed .
But if it is attempted too quickly , in order to paper over the fact that a European is in charge once again , the Fund risks jeopardizing its key strength .
The IMF is perhaps the central global multilateral economic institution at a time when such institutions are needed more than ever .
Lagarde arrives to lead it at a difficult time .
We all have a stake in her success .
