Hunting Tigers in China
CLAREMONT , CALIFORNIA – In the boldest move yet since President Xi Jinping launched his anti-corruption campaign , China has announced the start of a formal investigation into “ serious disciplinary violations ” by one of the Chinese Communist Party ’ s most senior figures , Zhou Yongkang .
Though rumors of Zhou ’ s political demise had been circulating for nearly a year , anyone familiar with Chinese political intrigue knew that , until the CCP made it official , Zhou ’ s many powerful patrons and cronies could still save him .
Now it is official : a “ mega-tiger ” has been brought down .
But is that what China really needs ?
Since 2012 , when Xi began “ hunting tigers , ” as he put it , three dozen government ministers , provincial governors , and other high-level officials have fallen into his net .
But Zhou is no ordinary tiger .
A former member of the Politburo Standing Committee , the CCP ’ s top decision-making body , Zhou was considered untouchable .
Since the end of the Cultural Revolution , the CCP has adhered to the implicit rule that members of the Politburo Standing Committee , sitting or retired , enjoy immunity from criminal prosecution .
Some have , of course , been purged in power struggles , such as the one that led to the fall of Hua Guofeng , Mao ’ s immediate successor , in the early 1980s .
But the defeated have typically retired quietly , and never faced formal corruption charges .
Given this history , the prosecution of Zhou is a watershed event – far more significant than the riveting trial of the disgraced former Chongqing Communist Party Secretary Bo Xilai a year ago .
It unambiguously demonstrates Xi ’ s personal authority and political resolve .
But the question remains : What exactly does Xi hope to achieve with China ’ s most fearsome anti-corruption campaign in more than three decades ?
The conventional wisdom is that the threat of prosecution serves Xi ’ s goals of consolidating power and compelling the bureaucracy to implement economic reforms that run counter to its interests .
The two prongs of Xi ’ s political strategy – cleansing the Party and reinvigorating China ’ s economy – are thus complementary and interdependent .
This strategy has considerable merit .
But even the Machiavellian dictum that a ruler should encourage his citizens ’ fear rather than their love can go only so far .
The most successful political leaders are skilled coalition-builders .
Consider Deng Xiaoping , China ’ s most successful reformer ( the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989 notwithstanding ) .
The grand coalition that he forged , against all odds , upon his return to power in 1979 was essential to bringing about the economic transformation that followed .
The question today is thus not whether Xi has amassed enough authority to effect change in China ( he has ) , but whether he has built a coalition capable of advancing his declared goal of reviving pro-market reforms .
And , so far , the answer seems to be no .
Since taking over the presidency , Xi ’ s actions have been both resolute and contradictory .
On one hand , he has been aggressively pursuing “ tigers ” and “ flies ” ( lower-level officials ) , while curbing , at least temporarily , the privileges enjoyed by Chinese officials .
On the other hand , he has launched an equally ferocious campaign against political liberalization , arresting and jailing leading human-rights activists and cracking down on China ’ s once-vibrant social media .
The risks of waging a two-front war are obvious .
If Xi ’ s fight against corruption is genuine , it will engender fear and resentment among the Chinese bureaucracy .
While officials feign compliance with Xi ’ s economic-reform agenda , they will seek any opportunity to stymie it .
The absence of significant real progress since Xi unveiled his economic blueprint last November suggests that this is already happening .
At the same time , Xi ’ s tough stance against political reform is diminishing hope among liberals .
Of course , this group – including intellectuals , social activists , journalists , and progressive private entrepreneurs – has little institutional power .
What it does have is the capacity to influence ordinary Chinese – making them a valuable addition to a pro-reform coalition .
Deng recognized this potential in the 1980s ; unless Xi follows suit , he will find it increasingly difficult to rally the public behind his vision for China ’ s future .
This is not to say that caging Zhou was not a good move .
But Xi must now shift his focus from bagging another quarry to winning over new and perhaps unexpected allies .
His long-term success – and that of China – depends on it .
