Maradona : Priest and Victim of a Dark Argentine Ritual
At the edge of death , but still clinging to life , Diego Maradona seems these days both priest and victim of a tragic Argentine ritual .
Intense and long suffering , Argentines know how to create universal heroes like Eva Perón and Ché Guevara .
The Argentine football star nearly rose to that lofty pedestal .
Evita and Ché were serious people throughout their public careers .
They gave themselves over to huge , dangerous , and heroic deeds .
They fought to change the world and they willingly carried the burdens of legions of people on their shoulders .
Both demanded too much from their fragile health .
Death at an early age ended their lives .
Political failure killed Ché , and illness took Evita 's life , possibly saving her from the kind of political calamity that befell her husband a few years later .
For both , early death elevated their stature in the alchemy of history .
The old never make good heroes .
Early death evokes a beautiful destiny interrupted before its pinnacle - and hence before it tumbles into inevitable collapse .
However irrational , this is a powerful idea .
So what we celebrate in these tragic heroes are people much like us , but with an uncommon talent and capacity to lend historical resonance to their destiny .
We celebrate them as individuals who demonstrate how far we can travel in life , how beautiful human beings can actually be .
But to be effective in the cause of heroism , the hero must die promptly .
Maradona , however , is no tragic hero .
He is a hero of happiness .
His battles were in a decidedly popular art .
His was a theatrical performance staged in a marvelous setting ; and his victories were triumphs of beauty and intelligence .
His expulsion from the 1982 World Cup for illegal drug use placed him , in the public 's mind , on the path to tragedy , but the long cord of death , already tugging at him , had put him there years before .
Like Evita and Ché , he bore the people 's burden of expectation on his shoulders .
True , his task was lighter , but that didn 't lessen the weight of the burden .
Maradona 's helpless soul was suffocated by the people 's obsessive and suffocating love ; at the same time , he couldn 't live without that addictive drug .
He was a prisoner of both his genius and his insatiable need for the Argentine public 's love .
Now that he 's no longer playing football , Argentines demand even more .
They want to hear him speak , to know his stories , to feel his presence .
But life , unlike football , has more difficult consequences than losing a game .
Maradona fails to understand this .
He fails to face his addictions - to the fast life and to his not always healthy , but always demanding and unreal relationship with Argentines .
Each time , he moves a little closer toward death .
He likes to proclaim , " I 'm only a football player .
I 'm no role model for anyone . "
But no one hears him .
Instead , photographers stake out his hospital room , seeking to show us our hero in his struggle with death .
There he is , vulnerable , fat , and weak , but we expect strength .
Maradona has been condemned to lie naked in front of millions of his fans , and his country has been condemned to pursue and reclaim him with its suffocating passion .
So tragic a ritual can have no good end .
But it tells us something about Argentine heroes and their fans .
The ritual tells us that we are desperately zealous people , seeking mirrors that show our heroes as beautiful , youthful , and exceptional ; that we are fascinated with a form of death that freezes our illusions into permanent images , like Evita 's embalmed corpse .
Poor Maradona .
We , his fellow Argentines , bear ancient sorrows as well as new ones .
We have not yet properly mourned , nor reflected upon , our nation 's systematic fall into poverty ; nor the disappearance of former President Carlos Saúl Menem 's mirage of a First World Argentina ; nor our institutions ' loss of legitimacy ; nor our corruption and our violence .
I don 't blame Maradona for staying away from the country in the last few years .
There is enough sorrow in Argentina without him .
Sadly , he has now become the victim of our collective sorrow .
It 's no surprise that his health has grown worse since his return .
Even when he could scarcely breathe with the help of an automatic respirator , Argentines wanted him to assume his role in their dark ritual : " Show us a good time , bring our hearts some fun . "
Near the hospital , in the clear air , on a street of the sad city that invented the tango , the dark ceremony is nearing completion , just as if it were taking place in a temple .
Messages , snatches of diary entries , and photos are plastered on the hospital 's walls .
Many people gather outside ; some pray ; others have built pagan altars .
The songs of Fito Paéz , another popular artist , rise through the air , accompanied by the necessary melancholy intoned by the crowds .
This seems a desperate farewell :
" Show us a good time , bring our hearts some fun . "
But what can our hero do at this hour ?
He 's preoccupied with his own enlarged heart , which , though weary , continues to beat .
I have some advice for you , Diego : now that the hospital has discharged you , pack your bags and head for the airport .
