King Menem \ u0027s Farewell
Like ancient monarchs , Latin American caudillos believe they have been granted lifetime powers .
The last days of former president Carlos Menem 's political career , furiously fighting his own political extinction , has offered a pathetic example of this tradition .
If he couldn 't win the May 18 th presidential run-off--and it was clear before the vote that some 70 % of voters would reject him in favor of a virtual unknown--he would refuse to play .
So the old tyrant , surrounded by his bodyguards and weeping supporters , announced that he would withdraw from the race .
The scene was Argentine magical realism : Menem , the old but tireless caudillo , kissing the hands of his followers as they cheered from this despoiled garden near the Tropic of Capricorn .
The caudillo who oversaw the glory days of the 1990 's exited the race to save himself , to avoid a defeat , and to weaken Nestor Kirchner , the man from Patagonia who is now Argentina 's 49 th president .
Although the public 's outrage at his tactics makes a comeback unlikely , Menem still dreams of retreating with his defeated troops and reshaping himself from an alternative power base .
Still , Menem 's presence is not the greatest threat Kirchner faces .
The real danger to the president-elect is Menem 's legacy : a judiciary that is subordinate to political might , a system of political parties that cannot stay afloat financially without engaging in corruption , and economic chaos .
The effects can be seen in a 17 % unemployment rate , extraordinarily low salaries , and a high crime rate .
The Argentina that once boasted the highest social mobility in all of Latin America no longer exists .
Nevertheless , beneath the turmoil and scandal of the last few days , one can glimpse positive signs .
The country has tired of the popular but unreliable caudillo .
Menem 's predecessor as president , Raúl Alfonsin , won a pathetic 2.3 % of the vote in the first round of the election .
Menem 's maneuvering notwithstanding , the polls show that the man twice elected president was at the end of his road .
His tactics of the last week produced an array of indignant and amused critiques .
Although only time will tell , it 's possible that Argentina 's suffering has readied the country for a new , efficient kind of leadership .
The man who will be president has not yet displayed any of the attributes of a caudillo .
Kirchner , descended from European immigrants , has not captivated the masses , but he did capture the votes of an electorate with hopes and dreams for a government that can bring more jobs , assure better wages , and increase security against crime .
If he can deliver , Argentines may be ready to bid farewell to the caudillo form of government that has dominated the country 's history .
The difficulties Kirchner faces are enormous .
The country 's new leadership must renegotiate Argentina 's debts .
The IMF and other creditors are demanding economic adjustments to increase the fiscal surplus , including higher tariffs on privatized public services and a wage freeze for public employees .
At the same time , Argentines and their leaders need to consolidate the budding economy , deal with social inequality , and reconstitute the political system and the integrity of the judiciary .
Kirchner appears ready to take on this difficult agenda .
During his university days in the 1970 's , his politics were shaped by the leftist militancy of Peronism .
But both the passage of time and his political maturation as the governor of Patagonia have converted him into a European-style Social Democrat .
True , Kirchner entered the campaign not so much to win as to prepare for the next presidential election , but as Menem 's opponents fell , he captured the spotlight .
To succeed , Kirchner will need the energy and imagination of a great statesman .
From the moment of victory , he will have scant time to put together a pact with the principal political forces that can sustain him .
He will also immediately have to convince a skeptical populace , already hurting , that more sacrifices are needed .
If he fails to get results quickly , his government may not last beyond six months .
If , on the other hand , he experiences a quick series of successes--even small ones--he will have helped usher in a new era .
There have been moments of crisis in Argentina during which great movements have arisen .
At the turn of the 20 th century , the Radical Party offered the middle class an electoral voice .
In the middle of that century , when the country was industrializing , the Peronist Party functioned in much the same say for the working class .
These two historic moments were , however , dominated by two bosses : Hipólito Irigoyen and Juan Perón .
Now that the Radical Party is agonizing over its role and Peronism is divided into three factions , perhaps Argentines will be able to construct a political option that relies on real leaders , and relinquishes caudillos .
But if Kirchner 's presidency gives rise to yet more political frustration , then we Argentines will again make the mistake of looking for a caudillo who promises to answer all our prayers .
Already , democracy has lost legitimacy here and social protest movements grow increasingly violent .
It 's possible that a new caudillo in different robes could lead the masses through yet another round of " magical nationalism , " hating everything foreign and underscoring the dark side of globalization .
