Hope for High-Tech Mothers
NEW YORK – Have two highly skilled women – with four babies and toddlers between them – finally found a way to achieve an ideal work-family balance ?
It looks as if PowerToFly , a new startup launched to place women around the world in tech jobs with flexible hours and the ability to work remotely , has done just that .
The founders have deep roots in news media , social media , and technology : Katharine Zaleski is former Executive Director of the digital Washington Post and the first news editor of the Huffington Post ;
Milena Berry is former Chief Technology Officer of Avaaz.org , the global donations platform .
Both women experienced firsthand how even distinguished careers did not save them – and thousands of their high-achieving peers – from feeling derailed , without adequate options for work-family balance .
When Zaleski had her first child , she thought that three months away from work would be enough – and then found that she was wrong . “ I was at home scratching at the walls .
I was thinking , ‘ This sucks .
I either have to go back into the office ten hours a day or I start dropping out . ’
I was getting really depressed knowing that I only had two options . ”
Then she thought : “ If I have this problem , millions of women must have this problem .
What is the third way ?
Women have changed , yet the nature of work hasn ’ t .
There are more highly skilled women than ever before – they can be productive from anywhere – yet the structure of work is from another century . ”
Meanwhile , Berry had contacted Zaleski to explain her latest idea . “ She said , ‘ I am starting this company .
I am building a network of female developers and will try to place them with companies . ’ ” Zaleski had seen firsthand at Huffington Post how efficient global remote teams could be .
“ It was cost effective , ” she said . “ Our principle managers were in Ukraine and Morocco .
A lot of work could be done while we were sleeping , so we were twice as fast . ” Indeed , Berry had been working remotely for Avaaz.org with three kids at home .
Zaleski realized that the startup Berry was proposing was a way to solve her own problem .
So they joined forces to build a platform that could place skilled women globally to work remotely with American tech companies .
The site has grown 25 % since launching , and now is branching out into editorial jobs in journalism and other industries .
Their goal is to change the nature of work across the board for women . “ You can ’ t expect a woman with ten years ’ experience and a family to uproot and move to your campus in Silicon Valley , ” Zaleski explains , adding that many campuses are deliberately designed so that one never has to leave .
That is great if you are 22 , but terrible if you have small children who need to be picked up from school .
The expectation is archaic .
Many jobs do not require work to be done during certain hours .
PowerToFly finds that remote workers are so happy for the flexibility that their efficiency goes through the roof .
As a one-time working mother of small children , I sometimes wished that I worked only for other people who understood the exigencies of that situation , so I can understand that sense of motivation .
PowerToFly already represents women from 147 countries , working with employers like Buzzfeed , Hearst , and The Washington Post .
It has placed women who are based in Egypt , India , Jordan , and Russia , among other countries .
Their home page shows a smiling young manager based in Chile , and the company is pushing to enlist women in the Palestinian Territories – not for ideological reasons but because there are so many talented programmers there to hire .
“ Thirty percent of women in many countries in the Middle East have university degrees , ” Zaleski explains , but they often cannot get jobs commensurate with their training for cultural reasons .
With PowerToFly ’ s technological ability to transcend cultural barriers , a woman can contribute at the highest levels to an American company – even if local laws prohibit her from driving a car .
Not surprisingly , given such a model , many men want to participate as well .
The founders do not rule out eventually expanding to address that need .
In the meantime , putting substantial pay directly into the hands of women in countries where their legal status is low is bound to bring about social change .
Considering the efficiencies that the founders have identified in highly skilled , underemployed women available for global teams , it is clear that the “ disruptive ” potential of PowerToFly is vast .
Indeed , the platform is likely to integrate more women into the US technology sector and heighten cultural exchange .
As more Jordanian , Moroccan , Ukrainian , Chilean and other women chat every day with their US counterparts , they will lessen the “ otherness ” of the other .
But , most disruptive of all , PowerToFly could subvert our old-fashioned and unimaginative idea of what “ work ” has to be and where and when it has to be carried out .
In short , Zaleski and Berry ’ s venture promises to put positive pressure on other workplaces .
That is good news for anyone , male or female , who has young children or aging parents – or simply wants a more balanced life .
