The Arab Spring ’ s Unlikely Winner
PARIS – The war in Iraq – which led in 2003 to the fall of Saddam Hussein ’ s regime – had one clear winner : Iran .
The United States-led military intervention resulted in the weakening of the Middle East ’ s Sunni regimes , America ’ s traditional allies , and the strengthening of America ’ s principal foe in the region , the Islamic Republic .
Ten years later , we may be witnessing yet another ironic outcome in the region : At least for the time being , Israel seems to be the only clear winner of the “ Arab Spring ” revolutions .
Most Israelis would strongly object to this interpretation .
Their regional environment has become much more unstable and unpredictable .
Only a few days ago , Israel ’ s Iron Dome missile-defense system intercepted a rocket fired from Sinai that was aimed at the port of Eilat .
In contrast to the past , no Israeli border is now secure , especially the long frontier with Egypt .
No implicit alliance can be taken for granted .
All scenarios are open .
Can Israel remain an oasis of stability , security , modernity , and economic growth in such a volatile environment ?
The answer , of course , is no .
Israel may be tempted to regard itself as some kind of latter-day Noah ’ s ark , but it is not .
Tel Aviv has become a cross between San Francisco , Singapore , and São Paulo , but it is still less than 300 kilometers from Damascus .
For the pessimists ( or realists , depending on your perspective ) , Israel must remain on maximum alert to minimize the risks that it faces .
Above all , many Israelis ( if not most ) believe that this is no time to be imaginative and daring .
The resumption of the peace process with the Palestinian Authority can be only a fig leaf .
Israel simply cannot ignore the Americans in the way that the Egyptian army has as it massacres its Islamist opponents .
But a very different reading of the current situation is possible .
What started as a revolution in the eighteenth-century meaning of the term is becoming a reproduction of the religious wars that ravaged Europe from 1524 to 1648 , pitting Catholics and Protestants against each other in the same way that Sunnis and Shia are pitted against each other today .
( In Egypt , however , we are seeing simply the return of a military police state . )
One may disagree with this Euro-centric interpretation , but what is clear is that the Muslim Middle East will be too preoccupied with internecine struggle to worry about the Palestinians or the existence of Israel .
War with Jews or Christians has necessarily taken a back seat ( except where , as in Egypt and Syria , Christian minorities are perceived to be allied with the regime ) .
In some cases , there is explicit cooperation with Israel .
Because it is fighting for its own survival in a highly challenging environment , the Jordanian regime needs Israel ’ s security collaboration .
Indeed , Israeli and Jordanian forces are now working together to secure their respective borders against infiltration by jihadists from Iraq or Syria , while Egypt and Israel now share the same objective in Sinai .
So the paradox of the Arab revolutions is that they have contributed to Israel ’ s integration as a strategic partner ( for some countries ) in the region .
At this point , more Arab lives have been lost in Syria ’ s civil war alone than in all of the Arab-Israeli wars combined .
Of course , one should not draw the wrong conclusions from this .
Israel may have become , more than ever , a key strategic partner for some Arab regimes , or a de facto ally against Iran ( as it is for Saudi Arabia ) .
But this does not imply that Israel ’ s neighbors have resigned themselves , in emotional terms , to its continued existence in their midst .
Nor does it mean that Israel can do whatever it wants , whenever and wherever it wants .
On the contrary , the Israeli government should not use the region ’ s turmoil as justification for doing nothing to resolve the conflict with the Palestinians .
Current conditions , though admittedly confusing , can be seen as opening a window of opportunity – a moment to consider making serious sacrifices for the sake of long-term survival .
Israel should be addressing the Arab world in the following terms : “ You may not like me , and you may never like me , but I am not – and never should have been – your first concern .
Now it is clear that you have other priorities to worry about . ”
The Arab quagmire may not be creating conditions for peace and reconciliation between Israelis and Palestinians .
But it has turned the “ strategic truce ” favored by many Arab leaders into the only conceivable alternative .
Arabs cannot be at war with themselves and with Israel at the same time .
The chaotic events unfolding in the Middle East will – and should – change the approach and perceptions of the protagonists .
Short-term considerations will not suffice .
Israeli leaders must adjust their long-term strategic thinking to the new Middle East that ultimately emerges from the current disarray .
That means not exploiting today ’ s opportunity to build more settlements on Palestinian land , or to expand existing ones , as Binyamin Netanyahu ’ s government appears determined to do .
Israel may well be the current winner in the Arab Spring ; but , if it is wise , it will leave the spoils of victory on the ground .
