Mexico \ u0027s Machismo Machine
Monica rummages frantically in her bag as we dine at a Mexico City restaurant .
She pulls out her cell phone and checks for messages .
" Is anything wrong ? " I ask .
" No , it 's nothing , " she smiles , " just my husband .
He becomes upset if he calls and I don 't answer .
I 'm always supposed to have my cell phone on--he likes to know where I am . "
" You mean he likes to keep track of you , " I say , and she laughs .
As Monica explains , sheepishly , that Esteban is actually open-minded , it dawns on me that I 've been hearing a lot of similar stories recently , from female friends and patients .
The cell phone has become a new way for men to keep tabs on their wives , calling them and pressuring them to come home as soon as possible .
Machismo might be out of fashion in today 's Mexico , but control is definitely in .
You rarely hear of men not allowing their wives to study , work , or go out during the day .
Almost 40 % of working-age women hold jobs , school and university enrollment is evenly split between the sexes , and the average wage differential , whereby women earn about 70 % of what men make , is comparable to that of industrialized nations .
Women are increasingly aware of their rights , demanding equal treatment in the workplace and in politics .
Under these conditions , machismo mutated .
Nowadays , it relies more on psychological coercion and control than on discrimination or physical constraints .
In a sense , machismo has gone underground .
Deeply buried within our daily customs , it is all but invisible among the educated classes--invisible , but ever present .
Women may be considered equal in many areas , but men remain more equal .
In Mexico , women 's time is not their own .
When they go out , spend money , see friends , they are still expected to render accounts .
Fathers , brothers , boyfriends , and husbands feel entitled to a detailed explanation of their everyday activities--but refuse to be questioned about their own .
At home , men can say , " Don 't bother me now , I 'm watching TV " ; women can 't , because they are expected to be available , day and night , for their husband and children .
These double standards form a pillar of today 's machismo .
Of course , it is far more evident in the privacy of the home than in the workplace or in public .
Surveys show that men are willing to go to the supermarket once a week or mind the children for a while ; but they refuse to iron , sew , chop vegetables , or clean the oven or toilet , because these tasks are considered unmanly .
Men help out , but within rigidly defined parameters .
This division of labor in all areas of life means that men and women remain surprisingly inept at tasks assigned to the other sex .
We see educated men who don 't know how to make a cup of coffee , and professional women with no idea about how to change a fuse .
Men know little about babies ; women know little about checkbooks--because they aren 't supposed to .
So machismo creates people with only half the skills that modern life requires .
Far from creating a healthy complementarity between the sexes , it perpetuates dependence on both sides and creates widespread inefficiency .
Part of the problem is the deep-seated assumption that women are meant to attend to men 's needs .
From the moment of their birth , men are surrounded by the constant care of women .
Mothers , aunts , grandmothers , sisters , and later girlfriends , wives , and daughters are expected to fulfill--even anticipate--a man 's every desire .
Mothers tell little girls to " attend " their brothers , while little boys are instructed to " watch over " their sisters .
This non-stop pampering is aggravated by female domestic servants , ranging from the high society governess to the part-time maid of a middle-class family .
Servants , indeed , are a bulwark of Mexican machismo .
Though they allow women to go out and work , they ensure that men continue to be pampered like oriental potentates , never lifting a finger in the home .
Where wives and daughters now refuse to drop everything to prepare lunch for the man of the house , the maid takes up the slack .
The implications of these attitudes and behaviors go beyond the domestic sphere .
Pampered Mexican boys grow into men accustomed to being obeyed instantly , who feel entitled to special attention , refuse to negotiate with those whom they consider inferior , and reject any form of criticism .
The men who dominate public life often fit this mold : they are demanding , impatient , intolerant , and self-centered .
There is an inescapable contradiction between machismo and our supposed transition to democracy .
As Monica sums it up with mock exasperation after our lunch , twice interrupted by her husband , " This machismo business doesn 't make sense any more .
How can we continue to be governed by men who have never set foot in a supermarket ? "
