The Fall of Netanyahu ?
JERUSALEM – The dissolution of Israel ’ s parliament , the Knesset , just a day after Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu sacked two senior cabinet ministers , marks a surprising turnabout .
Indeed , when Israelis vote again in March , more than two years ahead of schedule , Netanyahu could be voted out of office , with important implications not only for Israel , but also for the wider Middle East .
Until last summer , Netanyahu appeared politically unassailable .
His coalition government , despite some internal bickering , was expected to serve out its term .
Not even 10 % of Israelis would have preferred the opposition leader , the Labor Party ’ s Yitzhak Herzog , as Prime Minister .
Things began to unravel when two cabinet ministers abruptly resigned , citing family commitments or policy disagreements .
Then came the inconclusive war in Gaza , which , given Netanyahu ’ s unfulfilled pledge to “ crush Hamas , ” undermined his credibility , especially when ministers like Naftali Bennett , the leader of the nationalist-religious Jewish Home party , openly challenged his policies .
When some European parliaments voted in 2014 to recognize Palestine as an independent state , many Israelis , who had long blamed the Palestinians for the continued failure of peace talks , began to worry .
More significant , Netanyahu ’ s public clashes with US President Barack Obama fueled concerns among Israelis – including supporters of Netanyahu ’ s Likud party – that their government ’ s policies were deepening Israel ’ s isolation and thus undermining its security .
The domestic situation is not much better .
Netanyahu has failed to fulfill his promises since the massive demonstrations of 2011 to address prohibitively high living costs , especially for young couples .
On the contrary , housing prices have continued to rise .
When Yair Lapid – the ambitious but inept finance minister , who leads the centrist Yesh Atid party – proposed waiving the value-added tax on first apartment purchases by young couples , Netanyahu failed to respond decisively , giving the impression that he lacked control over his own cabinet .
But it was Netanyahu ’ s support for draft legislation seeking to constitutionalize Israel ’ s identity as the Jewish people ’ s nation-state – to the detriment of Israel ’ s Muslim , Christian , and Druze citizens – that brought the situation to a head .
The bill , which emphasizes Israel ’ s Jewish identity above its democratic principles , has caused deep divisions not only among the electorate , but also within the government coalition .
Netanyahu , with his weak and vacillating leadership exposed , sacked his opponents , Lapid and Justice Minister Tzipi Livni ( who also denounced Netanyahu ’ s settlement-construction plans ) , and called for new elections .
But the real game changer was the declaration by Herzog and Livni , who leads the small centrist Hatnuah party , that their parties would run jointly in the elections .
If they win , they will rotate in the prime minister ’ s post .
This changed Israeli political discourse almost overnight .
Far from invincible , Netanyahu is now viewed as a failed prime minister , confronted by a center-left bloc that may well become the most powerful voice in the Knesset .
Yesh Atid voters , who have been disappointed by Lapid ’ s failure to deliver the “ new politics ” of efficiency and transparency that he promised , may supply the Herzog-Livni alliance with the necessary votes .
Some of the moderate orthodox parties , which have been undergoing their own internal splits , have also signaled their willingness to work with a center-left bloc that might enable Israel to make real progress .
Even Minister of Foreign Affairs Avigdor Lieberman , head of the right-wing Yisrael Beiteinu party , is now criticizing Netanyahu for alienating the US and has suggested that he would not rule out joining a centrist government .
All of this bodes well for the Herzog-Livni alliance .
But three months is a long time in politics .
Netanyahu may be a dismal prime minister ; but he is also a formidable campaigner .
And if the centrist alliance finishes first in the election , it will still need coalition partners to form a majority in the Knesset .
Gaining fewer than 30 of its 120 seats might drive it to seek potential partners among the orthodox – an approach that could alienate moderate secular voters .
Moreover , once in power , the Herzog-Livni alliance would be met with serious challenges – beginning with reaching an agreement with the Palestinians .
Given that the Palestinians ’ political leadership is divided between the Fatah-led Palestinian Authority , which controls the West Bank , and Hamas , which has established an Islamic fundamentalist regime in Gaza , a deal between Israel and Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas would mean little .
Nonetheless , a Herzog-Livni government would bring significant change , particularly in terms of relations with Europe and the US .
Netanyahu ’ s provocative policies and statements , which have undermined support for Israel among even its closest allies , would be supplanted by a willingness to negotiate in earnest and make genuine concessions .
Such a shift would reinvigorate hope among Israelis – and not a moment too soon .
There is a growing realization in Israel that it is time to chart a new path .
Netanyahu , always eager to impress upon the Israeli public the impossibility of making peace with the Palestinians , failed to address the question of what kind of country Israel will become if it continues to rule millions of people against their will .
This is what has turned so many people in the West against Israel , leading some to question its very legitimacy .
If Zionism means eternal dominion over the Palestinians , is it really worthy of support ?
The Herzog-Livni alliance has tentatively named itself the “ Zionist Camp . ”
It may not be catchy ( and it is likely to be changed ) , but it expresses an essential truth : Zionism is about the right of the Jewish people to self-determination , not about the permanent domination of another people .
