Iran : Another Problem from Hell
WASHINGTON , DC – Throughout 2010 , the pattern for negotiations over Iran ’ s nuclear program held to form .
With just about every diplomatic effort failing to yield results , international efforts have increasingly given way to discussions about sanctions – and what mix of them would be needed to bring Iran to heel .
In 2011 , a renewed focus on comprehensive economic sanctions could turn out to be the bad idea whose time has arrived .
Sanctions , of course , have a dismal historical record in achieving their aims .
Indeed , they have often been more useful in proving the law of unintended consequences .
So it might be useful to step back and take one more look at our disagreeable negotiating partner – Iran – to see what should , and should not , be emphasized diplomatically .
There is nothing easy about negotiating with Iran .
It is one of the oldest states in the broader Middle East , with a deep culture .
Despite its leaders ’ grim public image , Iran has a sense of humanism , as any Kurd who fled from Saddam Hussein ’ s chemical-warfare attacks along the Iranian border can attest .
Bending , much less breaking , will not come naturally to such a prideful country .
Iran also doesn ’ t “ play well with others . ”
Most Americans remember it as the country that abducted US diplomats soon after its Islamic revolution in 1979 , holding them for no apparent purpose for 444 days .
No American diplomat has been stationed in Tehran since .
American attitudes toward Iran are probably far more conditioned by that episode than people realize .
Iran is also internally divided .
Its mullahs bicker constantly , seeming to reflect the country ’ s broader cleavages .
Iran ’ s civilian authorities apparently have limited control over the military and the dreaded security services , which seem to answer to no one but themselves .
Iran ’ s Islamic Revolution , moreover , has run into a familiar contradiction : it cannot further its aims without accepting Westernization and modernization .
Iran ’ s youthful population – a product of the massive post-revolution baby boom – is increasingly frustrated and depressed ; not surprisingly , young Iranians are having fewer children than ever .
As the June 2009 election protests showed , Iran ’ s urban youth desperately want to end the country ’ s isolation , but they have increasingly found that the only way out of isolation is to study or work abroad – and never return .
Iran does not live in a great neighborhood , either .
Turkey can be a good neighbor , but otherwise Iran is bordered by inhospitable states to the east and the north .
And , while its western neighbor Iraq is a fellow Shia-majority state , Iraq ’ s Arab Shia make no secret of their distaste for the Persians and their claim to Shia prominence .
While most of the world may have missed it , there is an ongoing competition between Iraq ’ s Najaf and Iran ’ s Qom over which city is holier .
Iran has virtually no friends among the Sunni Arab states .
As the world recently learned from the WikiLeaks release of US diplomatic cables , Sunni Arab leaders are no more tolerant of an Iranian nuclear bomb than is the US or its allies .
The Sunni reaction to Iran may reflect deep-seated suspicions about the Shia ( witness the cold shoulder given by most Sunnis to Shia rule in Iraq ) .
Iran ’ s only friends , it seems , are those – like the Chinese – who are more interested in its natural resources than its people .
While sanctions may deepen Iran ’ s predicament , they are unlikely to break the diplomatic impasse on nuclear weapons .
But , given the Iranian government ’ s increasingly unhelpful reactions to diplomatic overtures , there is unlikely to be any interest in toning down sanctions .
Indeed , just the opposite response is likely – efforts to tighten sanctions still further .
Yet , just as the US adopted a “ bomb and talk ” approach with the Serbs during the dénouement of the Bosnian war , America must be willing to “ sanction and talk ” when it comes to Iran , thereby creating greater space for an eventual diplomatic strategy .
First , the US should consider establishing diplomatic relations with Iran and putting diplomats on the ground .
This would not be an easy process , and could well meet considerable Iranian resistance .
But the Iranians have diplomatic relations with other members of its main interlocutor in talks on its nuclear program , the sanctions-minded P-5 + 1 Group ( China , France , Germany , Russia , the United Kingdom , and the US ) , and restoring Iran-US diplomatic ties would shorten lines of communications and close the 444-day chapter of 1979-1981 .
Second , even if a stronger bilateral mechanism is forged , it should not be allowed to displace the P-5 approach .
The ability of this group to work together is critical to resolving this and future crises .
Third , the US should continue its efforts to encourage action by Iran ’ s neighbors .
While Turkey ’ s lurch into the fray in 2010 may have been unwelcome , its interest in calming a situation involving an immediate neighbor is understandable .
More problematically , the Sunni Arab states should also give more serious thought to addressing the situation , and should seek to reconcile their private and public postures .
Iran , after all , is not building an Islamic bomb .
It is building an Iranian bomb , or , worse yet , a Shia bomb that Arab leaders must be more resolute in trying to stop .
Private expressions of deep concern do not compensate for public nonchalance ( or changing the topic to Israel ) , and are hardly a basis for a successful policy toward a country whose nuclear ambitions could have a catastrophic impact on the region .
Finally , the Chinese and the Russians have been brought along principally by the US to a more robust policy , yet they remain reluctant .
They need to convey through their own bilateral approaches to Iran a sense of urgency – and perhaps even express a little anger – at Iran ’ s unwillingness to negotiate seriously .
Sanctions should be a tool of diplomacy , not the other way around .
Even as we look to tighten sanctions on Iran in 2011 , we must strengthen our efforts to establish a strong political and diplomatic track .
