Europe ’ s Plan A
FRANKFURT – Europe ’ s politicians nowadays are desperately looking for someone to blame for the euro crisis .
Germany blames France , and vice versa .
Even lawyers are getting into the act , trying to identify legal responsibility for the monetary union ’ s design flaws .
Meanwhile , as the crisis has deepened , a new consensus about Europe ’ s monetary union has emerged .
The euro , according to this view , was devised in a fit of giddy and irresponsible optimism – or , alternatively , panic at the prospect of German hegemony over Europe – in the wake of the fall of the Berlin Wall .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
The Report on economic and monetary union in the European Community , which laid out the euro blueprint , was presented in April 1989 – a time when no one ( with the possible exception of some Kremlin strategists ) was thinking about German reunification .
Moreover , the salient issues concerning monetary unions were well understood , and remedies for the most significant obstacles were proposed at the outset .
The committee that drafted the report – now known as the Delors Report , after its chairman , Jacques Delors – was a fundamentally rather conservative group of central bankers , with even the governor of the Bank of England ( BoE ) signing on .
Its internal debates highlighted two problems of the potential monetary union .
First , the committee explicitly discussed whether the capital market would suffice to impose fiscal discipline on the currency union ’ s members , and agreed that a system of rules was needed .
But those rules were steadily weakened , and by the early 2000 ’ s were widely derided ( including by Romano Prodi , Delors ’ successor as President of the European Commission ) , as governments found that they could run large deficits without paying higher market interest rates .
The second problem was more serious .
In the original plan for the European Central Bank , the proposed institution would have had overall supervisory and regulatory powers . Indeed , the drafters of the ECB statute produced an astonishingly far-sighted approach to banking supervision .
Their 1990 version of the Maastricht Treaty ’ s Article 25 on Prudential Supervision included the following provisions ( placed in square brackets to show that they were not completely consensual ) : “ The ECB may formulate , interpret , and implement policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit and other financial institutions for which it is designated as competent supervisory authority . ”
The demand that the ECB should be the central supervisory authority in an integrated capital market met strong resistance , above all from Germany ’ s Bundesbank , which worried that a role in maintaining financial stability might undermine the Bank ’ s ability to focus on price stability as the primary goal of monetary policy .
There was also bureaucratic resistance from existing regulators . Most important , supervision suggested some potential responsibility to recapitalize problematic banks , and thus involved a fiscal cost .
The most energetic actor behind the early thinking on banking supervision was a BoE official , Brian Quinn .
But his credibility was sapped in the wake of criticism of the BoE ’ s handling of the collapse in 1991 of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International – an episode that anticipated later issues in managing the failure of large , cross-border institutions .
A legal vestige of the original plan may offer an easy path to a greater ECB supervisory role today .
According to Article 25 of the Maastricht Treaty , the ECB may “ offer advice to and be consulted by ” the Commission or the Council on the scope and implementation of legislation relating to prudential supervision .
When that phrase was inserted in the Treaty , it appeared as if the hurdles to effective European banking supervision could hardly be set higher .
The ECB was not given overall supervisory and regulatory powers .
And , until the outbreak of the financial crisis in 2007-2008 highlighted the connections between financial and fiscal health , no one considered that a problem .
They do now .
Nevertheless , fiscal rules and common banking supervision are still regarded in many quarters as an illegitimate encroachment on member states ’ sovereignty .
After all , the European Union has avoided becoming a focus of heated contestation precisely because it never got much of a share of what Europeans produced ( its budget , at just over 1 % of the EU ’ s GDP , has barely changed in relative terms for the past 40 years ) .
It was the member states that did politics and budgets .
Delors had a different vision .
At the time of his report , he concluded that the European budget would amount to some 3 % of GDP – identical to the peacetime US federal budget ’ s share of GDP during the country ’ s first stage of monetary union , in the nineteenth century .
Moreover , as in Europe today , when Alexander Hamilton proposed a central banking system , the Bank of the United States , alongside consolidation of states ’ Revolutionary War debt into federal debt , the implementation of his sensible plan was imperfect .
In the American case , the principles of federal finance were not worked out until the Civil War , and the Federal Reserve System was established even later , coming only in 1913 .
Europeans can learn from the United States and implement a fundamentally sound plan .
But they must also recognize that political backlashes and setbacks are inevitable – and thus that the road from vision to reality may be longer than expected .
