Hobble and Muddle
NEWPORT BEACH – Colleagues from around the world recently gathered at PIMCO ’ s headquarters in California for our annual Secular Forum , when we leave behind high-frequency issues for a few days and , instead , debate what the next 3-5 years hold for the global economy .
The perspective is global , informed by the insights of outside speakers , and the focus is on what is likely to happen , as opposed to what should happen .
The last two Secular Forums projected that , after the global financial crisis , the world economy would not reset in its traditional , cyclical manner . Instead , it faced multi-year re-alignments of both a national and global nature .
The world economy would heal , but in a slow and uneven fashion , as advanced economies muddled through while the more dynamic emerging world gradually closed today ’ s income and wealth gaps .
Developments since then have been consistent with this characterization .
The G-7 recovery has been unusually sluggish , notwithstanding large and unprecedented policy stimulus ( particularly in the US ) .
As a result , unemployment has surged , now exceeding that of emerging economies .
Meanwhile , deficit and debt indicators have worsened , both in absolute terms and relative to emerging economies , and the average risk premium on advanced economies ’ debt now exceeds that for emerging economies .
These are outcomes that fall well short of policymakers ’ expectations , be it in America or in Europe .
Indeed , for most of the post-crisis period , all of them have been understandably fixated on stimulating growth .
Some have even embraced explicit policies to boost asset prices ( e.g. , the US Federal Reserve ’ s second round of so-called “ quantitative easing ” ) .
Yet , along with “ good ” asset-price inflation , aimed at making people feel richer and spend more , these approaches have delivered “ bad ” inflation , owing to surging commodity prices , which impose a tax on both inputs and consumers .
In Europe , every balance sheet available has been tapped to forestall a debt crisis in the periphery , resulting in large bailout packages for Greece , Ireland , and Portugal , and the contamination of the ECB ’ s balance sheet .
Looking ahead , some signs point to the global economy ’ s accelerated healing and growing resilience , which bodes well for an orderly retreat from unconventional policies .
There are also signs suggesting that emerging economies ’ breakout is well anchored , and that China , in particular , will be able to navigate its complicated middle-income development transition .
Unfortunately , other signs point to an uneven , faltering global recovery .
In advanced economies , projected rates of growth are not sufficient to avoid mounting debt and deficit problems .
For some , such as Greece , this means more difficult choices between restructuring and socialization of losses .
For others , like the US , future sacrifices are already required , most likely through a combination of higher inflation , austerity , and “ financial repression , ” as governments seek to impose on savers negative real rates of return .
Needless to say , demographic transitions , commodity constraints , and geopolitical uncertainties complicate all of this .
Most importantly , too many government and household balance sheets remain out of equilibrium in an excessively asset-based global economy .
As a result , many long-standing promises will come under pressure over the next 3-5 years .
Specifically , a variety of social contracts – for example , health-care and pension entitlements , as well as unemployment benefits – will come under greater strain .
At the international level , the standing of US-supplied public goods ( including the dollar as the global reserve currency ) faces gradual erosion .
To the extent that this scenario holds , the next few years will follow the same multi-speed dynamics that we have seen recently .
Specifically :
· Advanced economies will face sluggish ( call it 2 % ) growth and persistently high , increasingly structural ( and therefore protracted ) unemployment .
Already-large disparities in income and wealth will continue to deepen , amplified by higher inflation and financial repression .
And debt and deficit concerns will remain , with the virtual certainty of at least one sovereign-debt restructuring in Europe .
· Emerging economies will achieve higher growth ( in the 6 % range ) , and their income and wealth levels will continue to converge with those of advanced economies .
But this will create its own challenges , including recurrent inflationary pressures and surges in capital inflows , leading to greater policy experimentation .
· Sovereign creditworthiness will continue to diverge , with a further deterioration in advanced countries and continued improvement in emerging markets .
· Inflation convergence – between high headline and low core rates , as well as between high emerging-market and low advanced-country rates – will occur at levels higher than currently anticipated .
· The global economy overall will hobble along , continuing its gradual transition from a uni-polar to a multi-polar world .
This baseline scenario is subject to two-sided risks that could well increase over time .
On the upside , the US could have a “ Sputnik moment ” : a sense of national unity , common purpose , and shared sacrifice leads to structural reforms that focus on re-aligning balance sheets over the medium term , enhancing job creation , and improving competitiveness .
Europe could re-engineer the eurozone to enable debt sustainability and high economic growth .
And emerging economies could unleash their consumers , boosting global demand .
The chances for such “ grand bargains ” have increased in recent months , but , at this stage , they can at best only offset the global outlook ’ s downside risks .
Above all , liabilities have simply been shifted around the global economy , which cannot continue indefinitely .
Meanwhile , excessive income and wealth inequalities are weakening the fabric of societies ; persistent joblessness in advanced countries is undermining productivity and skills ; policy effectiveness and flexibility are deteriorating ; and the world economy is facing increasing challenges in accommodating the development breakout phase in systemically important emerging economies .
Multi-year re-alignments are messy and complex , especially when they occur simultaneously at the national and global levels , and when multi-speed growth , inflation , and credit dynamics are at work , as is the case today .
Parameters become variables ; balance sheet repairs proceed in a slow and uneven fashion ; and policymakers experience an uncomfortable shift in the balance of benefits , costs , and risks .
As much as we may wish for a more reassuring outlook , the world economy will remain unusually fluid in the coming years .
What appears as a systemically interconnected world will also turn out to be increasingly fragmented cognitively , with weak global governance and policy coordination .
This is a global economy that must be navigated carefully , lest those that seek to benefit from change find themselves falling victim to it .
