Europe ’ s Act in Ukraine ’ s Tragedy
BERLIN – Grand political strategy and everyday experience often have a lot in common .
Try , for example , to swallow a salami whole , and you will probably choke to death .
In the world of high politics , people behave no differently : they slice their salami before consuming it .
If they cannot achieve an objective immediately , they approach it patiently , step by step .
Today , the Kremlin is employing such “ salami tactics ” vis-à-vis Ukraine . Before our eyes , a tragedy in several acts is unfolding , in which the players and their aims are clear .
What is not known is how many more acts this sad political spectacle will have , and thus when – and how – it will end .
Instead , he chose to have Ukraine enter a customs union with Russia , in exchange for a pile of cash and cheap oil and natural gas . Russian President Vladimir Putin seemed to have achieved his political aim , namely to bring Ukraine , which had been drifting toward Europe throughout the post-Soviet period , firmly back into the Kremlin ’ s sphere of influence .
The second act was staged by the Ukrainian people , who , in the west of the country and on the Maidan in Kyiv , rebelled against Yanukovych ’ s effort to align their country more closely with Russia . After three months of protests , the uprising led to Yanukovych ’ s ouster , temporarily derailing Putin ’ s plan to vassalize Ukraine peacefully .
It was not NATO , the EU , or the United States that acted to block Ukraine ’ s shift eastwards . Yanukovych was chased from power by a significant majority of Ukrainians themselves .
The third act was born of Putin ’ s domestic political situation , and resulted in a stopgap solution that led to Russia ’ s poorly disguised armed invasion , and then annexation , of Crimea .
Without Crimea ’ s annexation , Putin faced domestic political disaster and a premature end to his dream of reenacting Ivan the Great ’ s “ gathering of the Russian lands ” and restoring Russia ’ s global power .
But Putin ’ s aim has never been Russian control only of Crimea ; he has always wanted all of Ukraine , because he fears nothing more than a successful , democratic , modern neighbor that undermines by example the authority of his own “ managed democracy . ”
So now we have reached the tragedy ’ s fourth act , in which Russia attempts to grab eastern Ukraine , and the West responds .
Annexing eastern Ukraine – and thus splitting the country in two – by force has much less support , even among Russian-speakers , than the operation in Crimea . The aim of Russia ’ s covert military intervention there is to destabilize Ukraine in the long term by using stage-managed “ unrest ” to delegitimize the May 25 presidential election in the short term , thereby preventing consolidation of the post-Yanukovych political order .
The task for the West is to stabilize Ukraine by economic and political means and contain Russian expansionism .
The Kremlin , not surprisingly , is seeking to make any Western response as expensive and uncomfortable as possible , by implementing its destabilization strategy before our eyes , step by step , hoping that a frustrated Europe and America will one day throw in the towel .
It is foreseeable that neither Russia nor the West will be strong enough to achieve its aims fully in Ukraine .
It would therefore be sensible for both sides to try , together with the Ukrainians , to reconcile their interests . But that would require Putin to abandon his strategic ambitions , which he will never do so long as he can continue to slice the salami .
Dulling Putin ’ s knife and ending the Ukraine crisis peacefully depends largely on the EU .
Sanctions will not impress Putin ( he and his cronies are isolating Russia economically and financially more effectively than most sanctions could ) ; peaceful yet tangible political steps within Europe will .
Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk has made the right suggestion here : prompt establishment of a European energy union , starting with the market for natural gas and including joint external representation and a common pricing policy .
This step , combined with further differentiation among supplier countries and progress toward implementing renewable-energy technologies , would invert the balance of power between the EU ( Russia ’ s most important customer for oil and natural gas ) and the Kremlin .
If , at the same time , Poland resolved to join the euro at the earliest possible opportunity , Putin ’ s challenge to Eastern Europe would receive a powerful and completely peaceful answer . And Poland would assume the role of a major player at the center of an increasingly integrated Europe .
It has largely been Germany that has opposed integrating Europe ’ s energy and natural gas markets . After the tragedy in Ukraine , no one in Berlin will be able to defend this stance , particularly given that Germany ’ s leaders do not want to confront Russia through sanctions .
There will no longer be any room for excuses about why an energy union should be rejected . Everyone knows now what this communality called Europe is about .
To borrow from Aesop ’ s “ The Braggart ” : Hic Rhodus , hic salta !
Read more from " Cold War II ? "
