Japan ’ s Vote for Bold Reform
TOKYO – With the powerful mandate of the Japanese people , demonstrated by their overwhelming vote of support in our country ’ s December 14 election , my government ’ s ability to act decisively has been strengthened immeasurably .
Indeed , we now not only have the authority to act , but a clear and definitive message from the electorate that we must do so .
In particular , we now have a mandate to launch what has become known around the world as the “ third arrow ” of so-called Abenomics : structural reform .
And it is structural reform that will unleash the competitiveness , and long-pent-up dynamism , of Japan ’ s firms and people .
By calling in November for a snap general election , my aim was to consolidate the government ’ s political capital – not in order to hoard it , but to spend it on the reforms that were first promised two years ago .
Now , with our renewed mandate , that is what we will do .
First , we intend to subject Japan ’ s tax regime to a fundamental review .
This entails not only an increase in the consumption-tax rate , the second round of which we have postponed , but also making the necessary adjustments so that our tax system no longer impairs investment incentives .
Some of the agro-business organizations – the epitome of vested interests – must change , and we will push them to do so .
Second , we must adapt Japan ’ s labor regulations to the norms of modern life almost everywhere , which means allowing every individual to strike a beneficial balance between life and work .
We Japanese will always work hard – I have no doubt about that .
But we also need to enable and encourage more Japanese women to participate in the workforce , whether at the beginning of their careers , or after choosing to have and raise children .
Moreover , it is not just bold domestic reforms that must be embraced .
Japan also needs to change how its economy interacts with the world .
Consider the Trans-Pacific Partnership ( TPP ) and the Japan-European Union Economic Partnership Agreement .
Completion of both trade and investment deals are among the most urgent tasks we face , because Japan ’ s economy needs powerful external catalysts to spur change in how we compete at home and for export markets .
Japan has no alternative other than to do everything necessary and feasible to enhance its labor productivity .
We now have the Japanese public ’ s support to make all of these changes happen .
That support is based on explicit statements of the government ’ s intentions .
For example , it is now well understood – and approved – by voters that , come April 2017 , my government will raise the consumption tax .
Until then , we will no longer be bogged down in debating the merits of this decision .
But we also know that the political space that we have secured is too precious to be squandered . We must use it single-mindedly to implement reforms that enhance Japan ’ s long-term growth potential .
Our country ’ s global standing depends on it .
Over the last two years , I have traveled 354,200 miles , visited a total of 62 countries , and conducted 246 one-on-one meetings with heads of state and other national leaders .
These experiences have convinced me that there is an enormous amount of trust in the world about the path that postwar Japan has taken .
In particular , there is no doubt about the norms and principles that our people and our government have long upheld , such as popular sovereignty , respect for human rights , and peace – all pillars of the Japanese constitution .
Japan has also gained international credibility for the fact that , for seven decades , its diplomacy has not once sought to coerce or intimidate any other country with threats of military force .
Most significant , global trust in Japan reflects the modesty and decorum that countless Japanese have exemplified as they worked to make our economy one of the world ’ s three largest .
The faith that the world has placed in Japan and its people has been Japanese diplomacy ’ s most valuable asset .
Our mandate from the Japanese people is to ensure that this tradition continues , undiminished , into the future .
That is the oath I will be making as I assume leadership of Japan for the coming electoral term . For me and my government , the main task ahead – working even harder to restore Japan ’ s economy – is inseparable from safeguarding our country ’ s position in the global vanguard of peace , progress , and prosperity .
