Libya ’ s Unwilling Revolutionaries
TRIPOLI – Egypt is not the only place where the bright hopes of the Arab Spring are fading .
From attacks against Western governments to ethnic clashes in remote desert oases , Libya ’ s revolution is faltering .
The blame for Libya ’ s current travails rests largely with the interim government that led the uprising .
The National Transitional Council refuses to make difficult decisions , instead palming them off to a future elected government .
The NTC has preserved much of the institutional paralysis and knee-jerk behavior typical of Colonel Muammar al-Qaddafi ’ s overthrown regime .
If the Libyan revolution is to succeed , the country ’ s new leaders must make a clean break with the spirit of the past .
During his 42 years in power , Qaddafi surrounded himself with advisers who were companions from his youth , supplemented by a small coterie of technocrats .
As a result , the leaders of the revolt that overthrew him have little government experience .
And , in a country where any political activity was considered treasonous , many expected the neophyte NTC to stumble early and often .
And so it has .
Indeed , the revolution was never a smooth affair .
When fighters failed to defeat loyalist forces on their own , outside powers were compelled to intervene .
Later , the NTC was unable to impose discipline on the myriad militias that formed to fight Qaddafi ’ s troops , or even to direct foreign weapons efficiently to the fledgling Libyan National Army .
When the military chief of staff was assassinated in July under mysterious circumstances , the NTC could not offer concrete answers to an angry public .
With no access to Libyan assets frozen abroad , it frequently paid salaries weeks in arrears .
While the battle against Qaddafi was still raging , Libyans considered it unpatriotic to point out the NTC ’ s weaknesses .
Today , however , those flaws have been magnified by its paralysis .
The NTC deliberates rather than decides .
The two-thirds majority required to pass legislation means that many bills die after extensive debate .
Many NTC members believe that the Council lacks the legitimacy to make tough choices .
They argue that the NTC should limit itself to serving as a caretaker government , implementing only the most essential decisions until elected officials take office .
As a result , the NTC and the cabinet that it appointed , known as the executive committee , merely want to pass the baton of authority .
Hesitant to leave a large imprint in their wake , some ministries have no budgets , and ministers are reluctant to sign deals with foreign firms .
But , beyond the question of the proper role of custodian governments lies the indecisiveness of the NTC ’ s leaders , who simply prefer to defer to others .
When a colonel recently asked NTC Chairman Mustafa Abdel-Jalil why he has not moved to merge the militias into a national army , Abdel-Jalil replied , “ I head the legislative branch .
You must speak with the executive ( committee ) . ”
Other senior Libyan officials suffer from the same managerial torpor .
The NTC ’ s first prime minister , Mahmud Jibril , was praised by the international community for his vision .
But much like Abdel-Jalil , Jibril proved unable to make decisions .
The NTC ’ s paralysis is clearly reflected in the trial of Qaddafi ’ s son , Saif al-Islam el-Qaddafi . & nbsp ;
Though considered the most prized captive of the ancien regime , the Council has made little progress in prosecuting him .
Ahmad Jihani , Libya ’ s representative to the International Criminal Court , recently told me that , “ we as Libyans cannot begin Saif ’ s trial .
There is no central power to prosecute him . ”
The ICC prosecutor echoed his sentiments in a June 5 legal brief , noting that “ the Government of Libya may be unable to move the case forward . ”
With no progress toward trying Qaddafi for war crimes , the NTC is holding him on the innocuous charge of failure to possess a camel license .
Bureaucrats lament ministerial dithering .
“ Everyday people come with ideas to demobilize the fighters and integrate them into society , ” notes an official in the Labor Ministry , referring to the most pressing problem facing the NTC .
“ But , with no one to make a decision , all of these plans just sit on our desks . ”
One reason for this inertia can be found in Libya ’ s prevailing political culture .
For decades , Qaddafi personally reviewed every agreement worth more than $ 200 million and often chose which foreign firms would receive contracts .
When he devolved ministerial planning to bureaucrats in 2008 , many were not pleased .
“ Unused to planning and possessed of limited human capacity , senior officials in the ministries are very nervous , ” an American diplomatic cable released by WikiLeaks reported .
Libya ’ s new leaders suffer from something worse than foot-dragging .
They are falling back on the same facile , prefabricated responses that Qaddafi used to demonize his domestic and international opponents for four decades .
For example , when eastern Libyans recently announced the formation of an interim regional council as a first step toward declaring a federalist state , Abdel-Jalil alleged “ the beginning of a conspiracy against Libya ” in the brewing crisis between the country ’ s provinces .
“ Some Arab nations , unfortunately , have supported and encouraged this to happen , ” he said .
But Abdel-Jalil named no specific foreign powers and offered no proof to support his allegations , which sounded much like Qaddafi ’ s frequent rants against “ imperialist-Zionist plots . ”
After an eight-month revolution that devastated the country , Libyans are demanding real reforms .
But , without a new leadership that is willing to implement them , it will be a long time before Libya turns a new page .
