Anatomy of the Party of Power
More than anything else , Vladimir Putin understands power : how to get it ; how to consolidate it .
His predecessor , Boris Yeltsin , knew how to seize power but not how to consolidate it , which partly explains why power seeped away throughout his presidency .
President Putin 's success , however , has bred its own problem : he consolidated power at the center so well that opposition is brewing in Russia 's regions .
Yeltsin 's biggest failing was in not creating a viable , non-ideological party - a " party of power " - to buttress his regime .
He tried to do so in 1995 , but the Chechen War drove Russia 's democrats away from him .
Moreover , his efforts here were amazingly clumsy .
Yeltsin once spoke about his scheme to link two centrists .
With " Ivan Rybkin ( then Duma 's speaker ) , " Yelstin said on TV , " leading the left flank , and Viktor Chernomyrdin ( then prime minister ) leading the right , we will encircle everyone . "
But by linking both parties to his very unpopular self , Yeltsin damaged both .
Perhaps if both wings had united , that single party would have appeared as an unbeatable juggernaut .
Such unity , however , was impossible , for an obvious Russian reason : the faction leaders hated each other too much to get together , even for their own good .
Indeed , Rybkin was told to pretend to be opposed to Yeltsin 's policies , but when he did object , Chernomyrdin summoned Rybkin to his office for " clarifications . "
When businessmen learned about this " dressing down , " they became afraid to finance Rybkin 's party .
In the end , Rybkin went unelected and Chernomyrdin 's ' Our Home Is Russia ' ( NDR ) came third .
Yeltsin failed to consolidate political support for other reasons as well , the most important being his unwillingness ( or inability ) to forcefully manipulate the media .
Of course , transformation of the presidential administration into a public relations machine began under Yeltsin when Anatoli Chubais directed the 1996 election campaign .
Before that , the Kremlin had little idea about how to manipulate the new media outlets that Russia 's infant democracy had produced .
Today 's Kremlin , however , is full of clever ideas about how to control and intimidate newspapers , radio , and television .
In the 1995 election , Yeltsin would have been happy if the NDR secured 25 % to 30 % of the vote .
Putin is far more ambitious .
He will be displeased if ' United Russia ' - the " party of power " he has built - wins less than 50 % of the seats in the next Duma .
But are the results of the parliamentary elections due this coming January truly a foregone conclusion ?
Or are surprises in store for Putin ?
Surprises seem likely because Russia 's political dividing line has shifted , but the President 's political strategy hasn 't recognized that fact .
Indeed , he appears set to be waging battles against the communists that are already won .
Putin 's re-consolidation of power within the Kremlin , after much of it escaped to the regions during the Yeltsin years , dramatically shifted Russia 's political dividing line .
In the past , that dividing line separated right and left , but the line at the forthcoming elections will run between the federal center and the regions .
The loss of political power in the regions ( regional governors , for example , were evicted from the Duma 's upper house ) has incited serious discontent that is spilling over into the public sphere .
That discontent will likely gather momentum as elections near , which may be enough to stop the federal authorities from meeting their strategic goal of winning an unchallengeable majority of seats in the new Duma .
Vast administrative resources are being used to secure the desired result .
But Russia 's bureaucracy is no disciplined machine , and the lower reaches of the state 's ' vertical ' power structure may well ally themselves - quietly - with regional authorities to prevent the center from gaining too many votes .
Regional administrations also possess their own instruments of obstruction , including propaganda outlets in the regional media , as well as the ability to manipulate ballot papers .
Indeed , President Putin 's failure to " reconquer " his home city of St. Petersburg , now controlled by a bitter political opponent of the President , Vladimir Yakovlev , demonstrates the bureaucratic powers that local leaders retain .
So the real issue in the forthcoming Duma elections will be how powerfully regional elites confront Putin .
Their ability to defy the president may be aided by the fact that the Kremlin is failing to recognize the potential of their challenge .
So far , the main target of its campaign is the communists , whom Kremlin political operatives hope to destroy in the way they destroyed Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov and former Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov , head of the Fatherland party , who were the leading non-communist challengers during Putin 's first presidential campaign .
That focus on the battle with the communists may allow other forces to sneak into the Duma by the back door .
The Boris Nemtsov / Sergei Kiriyenko ' Union of Right Forces ' ( SPS ) is one party that seems certain to benefit in this way .
Indeed , the SPS electorate is growing faster than that of other parties .
In principle , all of Russia 's political elites appear to have - or pretend to have - resigned themselves to a political landscape with Putin alone on the mountaintop and everyone else consigned to the valley below .
The upcoming elections won 't knock the president off that mountain , but his ' party of power ' is not omnipotent enough to silence the dissenting echoes rising from below .
