Sanctions Blowback
BERLIN – With the crisis in Ukraine intensifying , the United States and the European Union are locked in a battle of wills – and sanctions – with Russia .
Indeed , in retaliation for the intensification of Western financial sanctions , Russia has announced a ban on food and agricultural imports from the US and the EU .
But the real threat to the West lies in the potential impact of a financial crisis sparked by its own sanctions against Russia .
Consider Russia ’ s 1998 financial crisis .
In August of that year , then-President Boris Yeltsin declared , “ There will be no devaluation – that is firm and definite . ” Three days later , the ruble was devalued , and Russian financial markets went into a tailspin .
With capital pouring out of the country , the Russian government was forced to restructure its debt , and the economy entered a deep recession .
Though Russia was relatively insignificant financially , its crisis had far-reaching consequences .
Among the worst affected was Argentina ; the Russian crisis exacerbated a decline in investors ’ confidence in emerging markets that culminated in Argentina ’ s sovereign default less than four years later .
Even the US and Europe were not immune , with the collapse of the major hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management ( LTCM ) fueling anxiety about the viability of many other financial institutions .
Today ’ s financial dramas bear a striking resemblance to this experience .
Argentina has technically defaulted ; American and European financial institutions and markets are jittery ; and Russia is promising that the sanctions it faces will have no impact on its economy .
The most obvious similarity is Russian President Vladimir Putin ’ s assertions that his country can weather any and all Western sanctions .
That may be wishful thinking .
In fact , barring most major Russian banks from operating freely in Western capital markets could affect the entire Russian economy , not just the banks themselves .
And the central bank ’ s decision to raise interest rates to buttress the ruble may lead to much tighter credit conditions for companies and households , pushing the Russian economy into recession this year and next .
The problem with financial sanctions is that no one knows precisely how they will unfold – especially in an economy as large as Russia ’ s .
If they prove to be more effective than intended , they will pose a serious threat to global financial stability .
The restrictions on Russian banks operating in Europe and the US appear modest .
The banks can still access money markets , cover their short-term financing needs , and count on the central bank for support .
But investors ’ risk appetite could easily shift , spurring them to withdraw large amounts of capital .
Though Russia ’ s public debt is modest , its foreign-exchange reserves large , and its economy much stronger than in 1998 , once the herd is running , it is impossible to stop it .
Europe ’ s banks have extended almost € 200 billion ( $ 268 billion ) in loans to Russian institutions and firms , and hold a significant share of Russia ’ s euro-denominated assets , making them especially vulnerable .
Moreover , the eurozone ’ s current stress tests may well reveal significant capital holes in major European banks in the coming months .
Having just emerged from a deep recession , financial disruptions could easily cause Europe to slide back into recession , particularly given the eurozone economy ’ s close links to Russia via trade and energy .
Compounding the problem , no one truly understands the precise connections among Russian and European institutions and markets .
The collapse of LTCM in 1998 was completely unexpected .
Is Europe today prepared to deal with a similar failure of an important financial institution ?
The financial sanctions on Russia are not targeted , temporary , or fully credible .
If they affect Russia ’ s entire economy , hitting ordinary citizens the hardest , popular support for Putin ’ s regime may solidify further .
Of course , an economic slowdown could erode Putin ’ s popular support , which is based on the gains in living standards made under his leadership .
In that case , Putin ’ s response could be even more damaging .
Another problem is that implementing sanctions that cannot be reversed quickly removes the incentive for Russia to return to the negotiating table , especially because the threat of an escalation of financial sanctions lacks credibility , given the risk to European and US financial stability .
Once these sanctions begin to bite , no one can say who will be hurt – or how badly .
And , as Russia ’ s experience in 1998 , and Argentina ’ s after 2002 , demonstrated , the process of restoring confidence among market participants is a long and painful one .
These concerns do not mean that the US and the EU should not impose sanctions on Russia for its illegal annexation of Crimea and continuing efforts to destabilize eastern Ukraine .
But sanctions that hit the real side of the Russian economy – such as energy , natural resources , and the military – could provide a better solution .
Though such sanctions may not work as quickly , they would be targeted , temporary , and credible , enabling the US and Europe to control – and adjust – the impact on the Russian leadership and economy .
In any case , US and European leaders must recognize that all sanctions will have costs – many of them unexpected – for both sides .
If they are not willing to risk global financial stability in an unpredictable game of chicken with Putin , perhaps it would be wise to re-think the composition of the sanctions that they impose .
