Is Neo-Conservatism Dead ?
Neo-conservatism has served as a badge of unity for those in the Bush administration advocating an aggressive foreign policy , massive military spending , disdain for international law and institutions , an assault on the welfare state , and a return to “ traditional values . ”
So , with the Bush era winding down in a tailspin of plummeting popularity and high-level resignations , has the neo-conservative movement , too , run its course ?
Neo-conservatism began with different premises from traditional forms of conservatism .
Because reforms can become part of “ our ” heritage , traditional conservatives can adapt to change , even taking credit for negotiating the connection between past and future .
By contrast , neo-conservatism ’ s adherents are unconcerned with what Edmund Burke called the ties that bind “ the dead , the living , and the yet unborn . ”
On the contrary , they are revolutionaries or , rather , “ counter-revolutionaries ” intent upon remaking America and the world .
Indeed , in a certain sense , Irving Kristol , Norman Podhoretz , and other neo-conservative elder statesmen remain defined by the communist dogmatism they sought to oppose when they were youthful Trotskyists .
The virtue of their “ party ” or clique needs no complex justification : it stands for “ American values , ” while critics merely provide an “ objective apology ” for the “ enemies of freedom . ”
Until the 1960 ’ s , future neo-conservatives shared the Democratic Party ’ s vehement anti-communism , acceptance of the Civil Rights Movement , and support for President Franklin Roosevelt ’ s New Deal welfare-state policies .
Tellingly , the influential neo-conservative Richard Perle said in 2003 that he was still a registered Democrat , out of “ nostalgia ” for Henry “ Scoop ” Jackson , the powerful former Senator who embodied these commitments .
For future neo-conservatives , however , the 1960 ’ s produced a “ trauma ” that transcended the humiliation of a lost war and the disgrace of Richard Nixon .
What in the 1950 ’ s had seemingly been a culture of contentment was transformed into what Podhoretz called an “ adversary culture . ” New social movements , seeking to de-mythologize history , rejecting platitudes justifying the policies of elite interests , and demanding greater institutional accountability , seemingly threatened the entire “ establishment . ”
Nevertheless , it was not until Ronald Reagan forged an alliance between conservatism ’ s two traditionally warring factions that the political foundations of neo-conservatism ’ s triumph were secured .
One faction primarily comprised elites opposed to state intervention in the market .
Its members cared little about the verities associated with “ community ” or “ family values . ”
Their best intellectual arguments derived from Milton Friedman , Friedrich von Hayek , and Robert Nozick , who sought to challenge collectivist theories of society in general and “ socialism ” in particular .
The other faction was rooted in nineteenth-century “ know nothing ” populism , with its flights of nationalist hysteria , defense of traditional prejudices , and resentment of intellectual and economic elites .
However , its members do not necessarily oppose social legislation that benefits working people – especially when white workers are privileged – and some even retain a positive image of the New Deal .
Neo-conservatism thus cannot be reduced to advocacy of the free market or right-wing populism , since its ideological specificity consists in the fusion of these contradictory outlooks .
The question was how to package elites ’ interest in free-market capitalism with the provincial temperament of a parochial constituency .
What sold best was an image of oppressive “ big government , ” reflected in a tax system that was increasingly burdensome to ordinary people , combined with anti-communist nationalism and barely veiled racism .
After all , everyone understood who the “ welfare cheat ” was , and who Kristol had in mind when he famously quipped that a neo-conservative is “ a liberal who has been mugged by reality . ”
But , with the demise of communism , neo-conservatism ’ s two factions once again seemed fated to clash .
Economic globalization risked provoking a backlash by provincial populists , while the external enemy – the glue that held the neo-conservative movement together – had disappeared .
Then came the terrorist attacks of September 11 , 2001 .
From the beginning , senior Reagan era officials were wary of pursuing a unilateral response .
It was clear to many that Islamic fundamentalism was not comparable to communism , and , particularly in Iraq , military leaders saw the dangers in stretching American forces too thin .
But their arguments did not carry the day .
For the neo-conservative enterprise , 9 / 11 helped create a new context for linking the quest for American hegemony abroad with intense nationalism – and an even more intense assault on the welfare state – at home .
Employing a crude form of “ realism , ” which has traditionally viewed the state as the basic unit of political analysis , neo-conservatives portrayed al-Qaeda in terms of familiar enemies , namely fascism and communism , with backing from “ rogue ” states that must not be “ appeased . ”
Thus , the “ axis of evil ” and the “ pre-emptive strike . ”
This new “ hyper-realism ” has little in common with old-style realism .
Churchill and Roosevelt did not lie to the international community about the threat of fascism , construct an artificial “ coalition of the willing , ” or employ violence without accountability : these were the tactics of their totalitarian enemies .
Today , a meaningful realism calls for recognizing the constraints on building democracy : suspicion of western values generated by imperialism , the power of pre-modern institutions and customs , and the still-fragile character of the state system in most of the world .
But genuine realism , unfortunately , is beside the point .
Given the inherent tension implied by neo-conservatism ’ s simultaneous embrace of secular free-market capitalism and “ traditional ” values , its strategy , perfected since the Reagan era , has been to re-draw the lines of division : then , as now , the West is “ at risk , ” which requires nurturing a strongly emotional distinction between “ us ” and “ them . ”
That strategy ’ s popular appeal will not end with the Bush administration , because neo-conservatism feeds on a set of public fears that are deeply rooted in American history .
Changing that will require not merely confronting a new ideological outlook , but also deciding which policies reflect what is best about the American political tradition .
