Lebanon ’ s Time of Trial
ISTANBUL – As Lebanon braces for the possible indictment of Hezbollah operatives for the murder of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri , the country ’ s economy is wobbling .
The International Monetary Fund ’ s Mission Report of March 2009 , pointing to the country ’ s 30 years of chronic political tumult , concluded that “ Lebanon will remain vulnerable to shocks for many years ” to come .
While welcoming the anti-crisis action plan of the government at that time , the Fund held no illusion that it would be up to the task .
Later that year , however , the government of Saad Hariri , Rafik Hariri ’ s son , brought new hope , prompting the IMF to declare that it had “ opened a new window of opportunity for invigorating economic reforms . ”
But the success of the planned reforms depends heavily on cooperation between Lebanon ’ s main political groups , the Sunni and the Shia , and there has been little of that so far .
Indeed , the influence of outside powers remains a central part of the equation .
The meeting last July in Beirut between Syria ’ s President al-Assad and Saudi King Abdullah was tagged as a sign of rapprochement between two Sunni antagonists .
But one of its purposes was to obtain the Syrian-backed Hezbollah ’ s support for an IMF-style recovery program .
It remains unclear whether or not that goal was fulfilled .
Meanwhile , Lebanon ’ s main economic indicators show steady improvement : GNP increased from $ 21 billion in 2004 to $ 32 billion in 2009 , inflation remains under control , foreign trade is balanced , and the unemployment rate is tolerable .
Moreover , the Lebanese pound is pegged to the US dollar .
According to the IMF , “ the crisis did not directly affect the Lebanese economy , the banks are solid and the funds are flowing in . ”
But , although the World Bank classifies Lebanon as an “ upper middle income ” country , with a per capita GNP of $ 10,800 , 28 % of the population lives below the poverty line .
As many of Lebanon ’ s poorest are Shia , this provides fertile ground for Hezbollah recruiters .
Other economic shadows remain , with serious potential political implications .
The IMF forecasts that the Hariri government should be able to tap capital markets to cover its financial needs for 2010 .
But the current budget relies on foreign aid to cover a $ 3 billion ( 10 % of GNP ) shortfall .
The issue is not so much where the funds will come from as the amount itself .
Lebanon ’ s growth rate , which has averaged 3.7 % over the last 10 years , has been , according to the Fund , “ lower and more volatile than ( averaged ) in the MENA [ Middle East-North Africa ] region . ”
Under these conditions , it is difficult to see how the country can ever offset the damage caused by the various wars of the 1975-2006 period , estimated to have caused $ 35 billion in damage .
The “ emergency post-conflict assistance ” ( under $ 100 million ) provided by the IMF after the 2006 fighting with Israel fell well short of the amount needed to rebuild .
The Lebanese government has been boasting about the US aid that it has received .
But this assistance – military hardware and a five-year military training program – does not address the country ’ s fundamental economic problems .
Moreover , although the World Bank accepted the country ’ s reconstruction program – called “ Horizon 2000 ” – the money for it , from the European Investment Bank and Arab funds , has barely trickled in .
In order to get further assistance , Lebanon urgently needs to strengthen its ties with the US , as well as those that it has been developing within the framework of EU Mediterranean Cooperation .
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan , as part of his recent drive to become the de facto leader of the Sunni world , and as part of his “ zero problems with neighbors ” policy , has lifted visa requirements for Lebanese traveling to Turkey .
But this did not prevent a decrease in Turkish-Lebanese trade last year .
Worse , a bilateral free-trade agreement has not been finalized , despite seven years of negotiations .
Yet this did not deter Turkey from organizing the Third Turkish-Arab Forum on July 10 , 2010 , with Syria , Jordan , and Lebanon .
After much old-style “ Nasserite ” rhetoric , they decided to create the Close Neighbors Economic and Trade Association Council .
While Turkey ’ s objective is a free-trade zone and economic integration between the four countries , Lebanon has been much more cautious .
The Web site of its Ministry of Economy and Trade does not even mention such a plan ( but does quote the Arab League ’ s anti-Israel Central Boycott Office ) .
The four countries will hold their next meeting in Damascus this coming December to decide on further steps .
But the three Arab states are already members of the Arab Free Trade Zone GAFTA , which normally prevents participation in another free-trade zone .
Moreover , in 2009 , the Lebanese set World Trade Organization membership as a priority , and the proposed new free-trade agreement may not advance that goal .
Turkey , for its part , finds itself in a similar situation with its candidacy for the EU .
Hariri ’ s government is set to keep its 71-member majority in Lebanon ’ s 128-seat parliament , helped by the 8 % economic growth projected for this year .
But there is always the risk that the IMF ’ s recommendations calling for more taxation – an increase in value-added tax and higher energy tariffs – together with Hezbollah ’ s recurring demands , might create a political earthquake .
That earthquake could prove monumental , depending on how Hezbollah responds to any indictment over Hariri 's murder .
