Ukraine ’ s Prisoner ’ s Dilemma
WASHINGTON – The European Union ’ s most important decision this fall will be whether to sign an Association Agreement with Ukraine at the EU summit in Vilnius on November 28-29 .
The issue will turn on whether Ukraine ’ s President , Viktor Yanukovych , fulfills one vital condition : a full pardon for political prisoner and former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko .
The Association Agreement , which runs to some 1,200 pages , would remove almost all EU tariffs on Ukrainian goods , boosting the country ’ s long-term GDP by an estimated 12 % .
It would also establish a political , economic , and legal reform plan for the country , supported by roughly 60 state agencies in EU member countries .
Although the Association Agreement does not lead automatically to EU membership , it is an important step in that direction .
Under the Treaty of Rome , Ukraine , as a European country , qualifies as a potential EU member .
But it would have to fulfill the EU ’ s “ Copenhagen criteria , ” established in 1993 , which sets out the basic entry standards .
The Copenhagen criteria are met when the candidate country has achieved “ stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy , the rule of law , human rights , and respect for , and protection of , minorities ” ; can ensure the existence of “ a functioning market economy and the capacity to cope with competition and market forces ” ; and has sufficient “ administrative and institutional capacity ” to adopt and enforce EU law and “ take on the obligations of membership . ”
Ukraine is a long way from achieving this , but signing an Association Agreement would pave the way toward entry talks , while also creating tremendous economic opportunities .
Ukraine ’ s alternative would be to join a Russian-dominated Customs Union that includes Belarus and Kazakhstan .
Membership would require Ukraine to double import tariffs on EU goods , at an annual cost equivalent to 4 % of GDP ; and it would not even guarantee free trade among its members ( Russia already applies trade sanctions against Belarus and Kazakhstan ) .
The Customs Union thus appears to be little more than a Russian neo-imperialist venture .
Unsurprisingly , Yanukovych has consistently stated his preference for an Association Agreement .
His political future may depend on it .
His advisers , and recent opinion polls , suggest that if he fails to sign a deal , he will lose the March 2015 presidential election .
The electoral math is stark .
While 40 % of Ukrainians , based mainly in Yanukovych ’ s electoral heartland in the east and south of the country , would prefer to join the Customs Union , 60 % of voters see their future with or in the EU .
Even allowing for widespread electoral fraud ( which would hardly endear him to Brussels ) , Yanukovych would still struggle to win a majority .
It is not just the swing vote that Yanukovych needs to attract .
Ukraine ’ s powerful oligarchs are also looking West rather than East for business .
Many are fed up with the arbitrary imposition of trade barriers – affecting goods ranging from chocolate to steel pipes – in their former Soviet markets .
EU markets , by contrast , are viewed as being not only bigger , but safer as well .
Meddling from Moscow has certainly focused minds in Kiev .
Russia ’ s brief trade war in August frightened Yanukovych into pledging to fulfill all 11 of the EU ’ s legal and political conditions .
These require Ukraine to overhaul its judiciary and law enforcement , and ensure greater adherence to democratic norms .
The parliament currently is considering 15 bills along these lines , all of which have the full support of the main opposition parties .
But the EU ’ s demand that Yanukovych pardon Tymoshenko , who narrowly lost the 2010 presidential election , may prove harder to satisfy .
Tymoshenko was arrested in August 2011 and , after what was widely seen as a show trial , received a seven-year prison sentence for “ abuse of power ” ( though she was not accused of benefiting personally ) over a 2009 natural-gas deal with Russia .
An EU-appointed mediation commission that includes former Polish President Alexander Kwasniewski and former European Parliament President Pat Cox has proposed a solution .
At the commission ’ s request , Yanukovych would pardon Tymoshenko , who would be allowed to travel to Germany for medical reasons .
Tymoshenko has accepted the deal ; Yanukovych has not .
Rather than a pardon , he wants parliament to pass a law allowing Tymoshenko to go to Germany for treatment , but on the condition that she would resume her prison sentence should she return to Ukraine .
The EU says that those terms are unacceptable .
Acquiescing in Tymoshenko ’ s political imprisonment would negate the very foundations of the legal and democratic standards that the EU purports to represent .
Any subsequent legal reform in Ukraine would appear hollow .
Some argue that the EU should ease its conditions : the case of a single , albeit important , individual should not stand in the way of Ukraine ’ s future .
But , far from this being a one-off case , the Tymoshenko affair exposes a deeper malaise .
Even now , Yanukovych is attempting to amend tax rules in order to disqualify the popular Vitali Klitschko , a champion boxer and former German resident , from standing for President .
The corruption and lawlessness that characterizes Yanukovych ’ s Ukraine should spur the EU to hold fast both to the letter and the spirit of its conditions .
Time is not on Yanukovych ’ s side .
The European Council of Ministers will make its final decision on November 18 .
If Yanukovych has not amnestied Tymoshenko by then , the EU can , as the Polish MEP Jacek Saryusz-Wolski suggests , wait for a Ukrainian president that will uphold EU values .
Yanukovych will be the one blocking Ukraine ’ s path to the future .
