The Feminine Leadership Mystique
NEW YORK – In a single week earlier this month , Jill Abramson , the first woman to serve as Executive Editor of the New York Times , resigned under duress , and Natalie Nougayrède resigned as Editor-in-Chief of France ’ s leading newspaper , Le Monde , complaining in an open letter of having been undermined .
What , if anything , do these high-profile dismissals tell us about women in senior workplace positions ?
The Times announced Abramson ’ s departure in a front-page story filled with barbs and swipes , the kind of piece that even the most ineffectual senior male editor never sees in print upon his dismissal from a job .
Abramson fought back assertively in a brief battle for public perception , with someone having leaked details of an $ 80,000-plus gap between her salary and that of her male predecessor in the same role .
On both sides of the Atlantic , observers mused predictably over the women ’ s “ management style . ”
Abramson was described as “ pushy , ” while Nougayrède was “ authoritarian ” and “ Putin-like . ”
No one , incidentally , friend or foe , made the case that either woman failed in their business objectives during their tenures .
Their style was the substance of the coverage – and thus of the backlash to that coverage .
It was bizarre to see Abramson , a top investigative reporter whose task was to help reporters get the story against many obstacles , be castigated as “ peremptory , ” aggressive , tough , and “ sharp ” -tempered .
How was she to do her job without those attributes ?
Had she been otherwise , she would have been castigated as a weak , indecisive leader .
One would think that by now we had moved beyond a double standard in how men ’ s and women ’ s leadership styles are perceived .
Unfortunately , for women in charge , a “ management myth ” – akin to the “ beauty myth ” or to Betty Friedan ’ s “ problem that has no name ” – persists .
And , as long as there is a perceived problem with women ’ s leadership styles , no woman can lead a major organization so soothingly , diplomatically , and charmingly that epithets like “ pushy , ” “ bossy , ” and “ Putin-like ” will not follow her the minute someone wants to shove her out the door .
The question is not about women ’ s leadership styles at all ; it is simply about moving the goalposts .
So let us speak frankly , facing a taboo , about what it means to be a senior woman leading effectively : it means that one will occasionally contradict a man , however politely ; overrule a man , however courteously ; disregard a man ’ s strategic advice , no matter how gently the decision is put ; and tell a junior man , however tactfully , that he is not performing well enough .
And this is the problem with women ’ s leadership style : By definition , doing one ’ s job means angering certain kinds of men .
The truth is that there are not two kinds of women who lead in different ways , one magically soothing and impeccably feminine , and the other dictatorial and insufferable .
Rather , there are two kinds of men : those who can handle the moments described above , and who can , through their own maturity , personal evolution , or fortunate family upbringing , manage to process those moments in a purely professional context , and those who , for whatever reason , simply cannot .
The problem with senior women ’ s management style lies with the second category of men at work .
This is the untold secret of women ’ s struggle in the workplace : if you ask any senior woman off the record , she is likely to agree that most of her male colleagues have no problem with women ’ s authority , but that some simply cannot abide it , no matter how it is wielded .
So we should stop analyzing women ’ s management style as if there were some foolproof way to cross the minefield of power .
Instead , we should start to analyze why most men have evolved to the point that they accept women ’ s authority , while others – like whoever commissioned that front-page annihilation of Abramson at a time when smearing her served no professional purpose – still cannot .
Interestingly , in fields where women hold many senior positions , like book publishing , it is rare to see analyses of women ’ s management styles .
The same is true of academic administrators , whether they are presidents of women ’ s colleges or mixed-gender colleges and universities . Women lead on the micro level as well , as development projects like Grameen Bank have shown , and outperform men in comparable roles .
These publishers , presidents , and micro-entrepreneurs all have track records of accomplishment .
Could their matter-of-fact achievement be due in part to the fact that their presence is taken for granted and that they are often allowed simply to get on with being effective ?
What if all workplaces were like that ?
What if we dropped once and for all the impossible mirror that always distorts female leadership into something monstrous ?
Part of strong leadership is to trust your gut instincts .
The cultural second-guessing surrounding the dismissal of Abramson and Nougayrède ensures that women leaders cannot do that without having their leadership instincts held up to constant inspection .
