Fascism with a Feminist Face
NEW YORK – Western feminism has made some memorable theoretical mistakes ; a major one is the frequent assumption that , if women held the decision-making power in society , they would be “ kinder and gentler ” ( a phrase devised for George H.W. Bush in 1988 to appeal to the female vote ) .
Indeed , so-called “ second-wave ” feminist theory abounds in assertions that war , racism , love of hierarchy , and general repressiveness belong to “ patriarchy ” ; women ’ s leadership , by contrast , would naturally create a more inclusive , collaborative world .
The problem is that it has never worked out that way , as the rise of women to leadership positions in Western Europe ’ s far-right parties should remind us .
Leaders such as Marine Le Pen of France ’ s National Front , Pia Kjaersgaard of Denmark ’ s People ’ s Party , and Siv Jensen of Norway ’ s Progress Party reflect the enduring appeal of neofascist movements to many modern women in egalitarian , inclusive liberal democracies .
The past is prologue : Wendy Lower ’ s recent book Hitler ’ s Furies : German Women in the Nazi Killing Fields adds more data to the long record of women embracing violent right-wing movements .
And the rise of far-right movements in Europe – often with women in charge – confronts us with the fact that the heirs to the fascism of the 1930 ’ s have their own gender-based appeal .
One obvious reason for the success of women like Le Pen , Kjaersgaard , and Jensen is their value for packaging and marketing their parties .
Just as Bush sought to revamp the Republican Party ’ s “ brand ’ of cold-hearted elitism and hostility to women , so Europe ’ s far-right parties today must appeal to citizens by not seeming dangerously extreme and marginal .
How dangerous can the movement be , after all , if women are speaking for it ?
Such parties come to be seen as more mainstream , and their appeal to traditionally harder-to-win women supporters receives a boost .
As Lower shows , the Nazis reached out with special programs – from organizing homemakers to colonizing the conquered Eastern territories – that gave working-class women things they craved : a sense of belonging to something larger than themselves ( fascism ’ s eternal draw ) , backed by a complex official iconography in which the traditionally devalued roles of wife and mother held a crucial place in the national drama .
Young unmarried women who were sent to administer the neocolonial efforts in conquered Poland and other territories gained adventure , advanced professional training , and opportunity .
And , for all of these women , as for any subordinate group anywhere , fascism appealed to what social scientists call “ last-place aversion ” : the desire to outrank other groups .
Add , finally , the gendered appeal of the strong authority figure and rigid hierarchy , which attracts some women as much as some men , if in different psychodynamic ways . As Sylvia Plath , the daughter of a German father , put it in her poem “ Daddy ” : “ Every woman adores a Fascist / The boot in the face , the brute / Brute heart of a brute like you . ”
Certainly , many of the same themes in far-right ideology attract the support of some women in Europe today .
And we can add the fact that right-wing movements benefit from the limitations of a postfeminist , post-sexual-revolution society , and the spiritual and emotional void produced by secular materialism .
Many lower-income women in Western Europe today – often single parents working pink-collar ghetto jobs that leave them exhausted and without realistic hope of advancement – can reasonably enough feel a sense of nostalgia for past values and certainties .
For them , the idealized vision of an earlier age , one in which social roles were intact and women ’ s traditional contribution supposedly valued , can be highly compelling .
And , of course , parties that promote such a vision promise women – including those habituated to second-class status at work and the bulk of the labor at home – that they are not just faceless atoms in the postmodern mass .
Rather , you , the lowly clerical worker , are a “ true ” Danish , Norwegian , or French woman .
You are an heiress to a noble heritage , and thus not only better than the mass of immigrants , but also part of something larger and more compelling than is implied by the cog status that a multiracial , secular society offers you .
The attraction of right-wing parties to women should be examined , not merely condemned .
If a society does not offer individuals a community life that takes them beyond themselves , values only production and the bottom line , and opens itself to immigrants without asserting and cherishing what is special and valuable about Danish , Norwegian , or French culture , it is asking for trouble .
For example , upholding the heritage of the Enlightenment and progressive social ideals does not require racism or pejorative treatment of other cultures ; but politically correct curricula no longer even make the attempt to do so .
Until we stop regarding cultural pluralism as being incompatible with the defense of legitimate universal values , fascist movements will attract those who need the false hope and sense of self-worth that such movements offer , regardless of gender .
