Grading Abenomics
TOKYO – It has been almost a year since Prime Minister Shinzo Abe launched his plan to lift Japan ’ s economy out of two decades of deflation and recession .
How has “ Abenomics ” fared so far ?
Answering this question requires breaking Abenomics down into its three components – massive monetary easing , expansionary fiscal policy , and a long-term growth strategy – which Abe , referring to the tale of Motonari Mori , a sixteenth-century daimyo ( feudal lord ) , calls the “ three arrows . ”
According to legend , Mori instructed each of his three sons to snap an arrow in half .
After they had succeeded , he told them to tie three arrows together , and break the whole bundle at once ; none was able to do it .
Like Mori ’ s three arrows , the three arrows of Abenomics are supposed to reinforce each other .
But Mori ’ s arrows were bound together in parallel , whereas Abe ’ s policy arrows are connected through underlying structural relationships .
While the first and second arrows aim to transform Japan ’ s actual growth path , the third operates on the economy ’ s potential growth path , which assumes the optimal use of all available resources and technologies .
Since Abenomics was launched , the “ deflation gap ” ( the difference between actual and potential output ) has dropped from roughly three percentage points to below 1.5 .
This implies that , while the first two arrows are helping to improve Japan ’ s actual growth path , the third arrow has yet to do much for potential growth .
In fact , since Abe ’ s first arrow took flight , Japan ’ s stock market has soared with it , recording an unprecedented 40 % annual gain , while the yen has depreciated against the dollar by 20 % , boosting Japanese firms ’ export competitiveness .
Moreover , credit growth has accelerated and asset prices have risen – trends that will encourage consumption by triggering the wealth effect ( when people spend more because they feel richer ) .
And monetary expansion is also having a positive impact on the labor market : the unemployment rate has fallen to 4 % , and the job-to-applicant ratio is nearing parity .
With real GDP growth around 4 % in the first half of the year ( though it did fall below 2 % in the third quarter ) , the first arrow has already hit the bull ’ s eye – a performance worthy of an A + .
The second arrow entails a sharp increase in short-term fiscal expenditure , especially investment in infrastructure projects .
While those who , like me , adhere to the Mundell-Fleming framework ( according to which fiscal stimulus will be offset by the resulting increase in capital inflows , currency appreciation , and reduced export competitiveness ) do not stress the impact of flexible fiscal policy , Keynesians take it very seriously .
On the assumption that faster growth will neutralize any threat to debt sustainability , the second arrow receives a B.
When the first and second arrows lift actual growth above potential growth , monetary expansion will no longer be able to produce substantial GDP or employment gains .
That is when the third arrow , which aims to boost Japan ’ s potential growth through structural change ( including increased private investment , technological innovation , improved trade links , and reformed corporate-tax policy ) , will become far more important .
Abe has set out the vision behind his long-term growth plan . “ Japan is a country that challenges , that is open , and that innovates , ” he says .
Japan ’ s longtime approach to industrial policy , in which the Ministry of International Trade and Industry provided support and subsidies for selected industries , helping them to compete in world markets , is now obsolete ( indeed , MITI ’ s role was taken over by the Ministry of Economy , Trade , and Industry in 2001 ) .
When Japanese firms operate at the frontier of industry , bureaucrats cannot choose the winners .
Given this , the government ’ s role should be confined to areas where externalities exist , such as carbon-emissions reduction .
Unfortunately , a new , clearly defined approach to industrial policy is still missing .
In fact , descriptions of some third-arrow projects seem to be based on little more than wishful thinking , with new technology or knowhow apparently expected simply to fall into Japan ’ s lap .
A more effective approach would entail achievable , concrete goals like relaxing labor- and financial-market regulations , reducing corporate income taxes , liberalizing trade by joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership , and perhaps easing immigration policy .
The problem is that bureaucrats like the power that regulation affords them .
Indeed , deregulation would require them to put their country ’ s long-term interests above their own short-term interests – a choice that they have so far resisted .
To paraphrase John F. Kennedy , it is time for Japan ’ s leaders to ask not what their country can do for its government , but what the government can undo for its country .
In this context , the third arrow of Abenomics cannot yet be fairly assessed .
While its impact has so far been lacking , it certainly cannot be deemed a failure , with Japan ’ s top leaders still working tirelessly to build the needed momentum .
The most appropriate grade is therefore an “ E ” for effort .
One hopes that it is an effort that proves adequate to overcome bureaucratic resistance to deregulation in the coming year .
With an A + , a B , and an “ E , ” Abenomics ’ s first-year report card reflects important progress , providing plenty of reason for enthusiasm .
