Machiavellian Economics
PRINCETON – When is it legitimate to lie ?
Can lying ever be virtuous ?
In the Machiavellian tradition , lying is sometimes justified by reference to the higher needs of political statecraft , and sometimes by the claim that the state , as an embodiment of the public good , represents a higher level of morality .
That tradition is once again in the spotlight , as the question of political untruth has recently resurfaced in many bitter disputes .
Did German Defense Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg have to tell the truth about the massive plagiarism that pervaded his doctoral thesis , or could a lie be justified because he was performing an important government job ?
Was the 2003 United States-led invasion of Saddam Hussein ’ s Iraq illegitimate because it was predicated on a falsehood about the existence of weapons of mass destruction ?
Or were conservative US anti-abortionists justified in sending actors with a false story into the offices of Planned Parenthood in order to discredit their opponents ?
The economic variant of Machiavellianism is as powerful as the claim that political untruth can be virtuous .
Lying or hiding the truth in some circumstances can , it appears , make people better off .
Deception might be a source of comfort .
We might find ourselves warm and contented in a cocoon of untruth .
One of the most famous examples concerns the Great Depression – an epoch that policymakers frequently drew upon in trying to come to terms with the post-2007 financial crisis .
Many countries in the early 1930 ’ s had terrible bank runs , which inflicted immense and immediate damage , decimating employment by bringing down businesses that were fundamentally creditworthy .
There was one exception to the general story of Depression-era bank runs : Italy , where Mussolini ’ s fascist government controlled the press , including the financial press .
Although the major Italian banks were constructed on the same model as the German and Austrian banks whose collapse had ignited the global conflagration , and although the Italian banks were just as insolvent , the press never discussed these unpleasant problems .
Financial journalism was soothing .
There were no bank panics , and the depression was milder .
Since confidence plays a large part in financial crises , Mussolini ’ s example immediately took hold .
States could apparently almost magically create security and trust simply by imposing it .
Adolf Hitler liked to say that the ultimate cause of the Reichsmark ’ s stability was the concentration camp .
Deception is instantly appealing to many individual businesses .
Would it not be desirable just to hide losses until uncertainty passed and confidence returned ?
In that case , new profits could quickly be used to plug the gaps , and no one would ever know about an apparently successful deception .
They anticipate revenue in order to appear creditworthy . They reclassify foreign borrowing as domestic debt in order to look better in the International Monetary Fund ’ s statistics .
For individual businesses , financial misrepresentation is illegal .
Most people can easily see why .
The legal enforcement of honesty in keeping and reporting financial records is an indispensable feature of a well-functioning market economy .
Without some degree of certainty that financial statements are meaningful , there would be a complete loss of confidence .
But government dishonesty is not that different .
Deceptions , when they are revealed and the untruths unravel , are deeply disturbing .
Indeed , misrepresentation by governments – driven by the belief that political ingenuity can stabilize expectations – is actually at the root of many financial crises .
In 1994 , Mexico shook the global economy when the extent of its domestic ( but dollar-denominated ) debt in the so-called tessobonos became apparent .
The Greek government ’ s misstatement of its fiscal position , coupled with the realization that the European Commission had overlooked or tolerated the Greeks ’ accounting legerdemain , triggered the euro crisis in 2010 .
The revelation of deception makes it impossible to believe that governments are really enforcing rules adequately and fairly .
But misrepresentation is not just at the heart of financial and economic crises ; it is also the stuff that drives revolutions .
The immediate cause of the protests against President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali in Tunisia was WikiLeaks ’ revelations of US diplomatic cables detailing the regime ’ s corruption .
The domino effect from the Tunisian revolution has produced further vivid accounts of corruption and deception , from Egypt and Libya to the Gulf , in each case stoking even greater anger and making more regimes vulnerable .
There is a powerful pragmatic argument against Machiavellianism , as well as a principled one .
Given modern communications , a cover-up of the kind engineered by Mussolini in 1931 would most likely be unsustainable today .
Moreover , any attempt to misrepresent requires further and more complex misrepresentations , which have serious consequences as subsequent decisions come to be based on erroneous assumptions .
To revert to the example of Depression-era Italy : the state holding-company edifice created to save the banks and maintain confidence proved to be an increasingly bureaucratic and costly burden on the Italian economy .
A nearly indestructible behemoth outlasted Mussolini ’ s regime and survived for 50 years .
Markets work by a process of continuous discovery of information .
Choking off the flow of information leads to distortion , not confidence .
And , as we are now witnessing in the Middle East , the same is true of political systems .
Still , no economic crisis or political revolution is likely to change governments ’ inherent proclivity to think that they can know better .
