The Poverty of Hillary Clinton
NEW YORK – Hillary Clinton is annoying people again .
Recently , she said in an interview that she and her husband were “ dead broke ” when they left the White House .
This led to unhelpful headlines such as “ Bill Clinton : Hillary Is ‘ Not Out of Touch . ’ ”
The gaffe also opened the door for Republican attacks – this being a standard campaign strategy that has dogged wealthy major-party candidates ( as they all are ) since George H.W. Bush was astonished by a grocery scanner .
You would think that Clinton , the first wife and mother to have a good shot at being America ’ s next president , would easily pass the “ relatability ” test .
But last weekend , she did it again , telling The Guardian that , “ unlike a lot of people who are truly well off , ” she and her husband “ pay ordinary income tax , ” and that their wealth came only “ through dint of hard work . ”
Clinton ’ s supporters are right to worry about her nails-on-blackboard elitism .
Her presumptive candidacy ’ s trump card is supposed to be her advantage among critically important women voters – the deciding factor for Democrats in national elections .
Had Al Gore maintained her husband ’ s high margin among women in the presidential elections of 1992 and 1996 , the Supreme Court would not have decided his 2000 election fight with George W. Bush .
Hillary Clinton has raised millions on the premise that she can restore the Democrats ’ traditional advantage .
But most of the women sought as voters are not corporate attorneys or secretaries of state .
The gender gap that has benefited the Democratic Party is attributable mainly to struggling working-class and pink-collar women ; someone on Clinton ’ s staff needs to tell her to stop offending them .
Clinton ’ s rhetoric , as I wrote in a review of the hagiographic “ campaign biography ” HRC , often alienates many women because of flaws in how she views and expresses herself and her mission .
For starters , she frames her quest in terms of outdated , unappealing , and irrelevant rhetoric . HRC ’ s iconography includes all-female pictures of her former staff , as if a single-gender – or single-race – photograph would not affront thoughtful people in 2014 .
She also seems to believe that women voters see in her the embodiment of their own struggles and will cheer her on vicariously when , by becoming America ’ s president , she shatters the last “ glass ceiling . ”
But American women voters know quite well what their own struggles are : paying the bills , educating their kids , dealing with a degenerated , costly health-care system , and so on .
They are interested in a candidate , male or female , who speaks to their life issues , and are turned off by a woman who assumes that they are just waiting , sheep-like , for a Joan of Arc figure who will serve “ lesser ” women as what Jungian psychologists call an “ ego ideal . ”
The term “ glass ceiling ” is itself elitist , deriving as it does from the corporate struggles of a few professional women .
Most American women are having a hard enough time on the factory floor or the unemployment line or making minimum wage at Wal-Mart ; when working-class women hear a former corporate attorney carry on about a glass ceiling , they think not about gender identification but about the class divide that has widened since the term came into vogue in the 1980s .
Yet Clinton keeps telling her angry female constituents – as a campaign message ! – that she is a member of the 1 % .
Finally , she alienates her potential gender-based voters by being perfect .
Clinton ’ s advisers confirm that never showing weakness is a key component of her strategy .
This was her approach with the Monica Lewinsky scandal – which is predictably rearing its head again , as Lewinsky has come forward ( we can ’ t know the machinations that may have been behind that timing ) to muse on old events .
As one of her advisers told me in a TV debate , Clinton ’ s approach was not to address any pain that she might have felt , as that would have been “ the biggest press conference ever . ”
That may be true , but it is bad advice nonetheless .
By never showing weakness or honesty about her own suffering or any imperfection in her life , negative stories and hostility continue to percolate .
If she had held a press conference and said something like , “ I feel what anyone would feel at this painful time , and I ask for privacy for myself and my family as we try to get through this , ” the scrutiny of her would have ended much sooner , along with the story itself .
But the larger issue concerning Clinton ’ s perfectionism is what it means for her possible role as leader of the free world .
At a time of ever-increasing income disparity in America , is it not a serious political flaw in any presidential candidate not to know how to speak sensitively about wealth and poverty ?
And , given diminishing government transparency in the US and more and more secret law , is it not a serious issue that a presidential candidate will not address his or her mistakes and shortcomings ?
Hillary Clinton ’ s campaign badly miscalculated in 2008 , losing the Democratic Party nomination to Barack Obama .
She may well get the nomination in 2016 ; but when she faces the Republican candidate in the election , she may be in for another rude awakening .
