Is Inflation the Answer ?
CHICAGO – Recently , a number of commentators have proposed a sharp , contained bout of inflation as a way to reduce debt and reenergize growth in the United States and the rest of the industrial world .
Are they right ?
To understand this prescription , we have to comprehend the diagnosis .
As Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff argue , recoveries from crises that result from over-leveraged balance sheets are slow and typically resistant to traditional macroeconomic stimulus .
Over-levered households cannot spend , over-levered banks cannot lend , and over-levered governments cannot stimulate .
So , the prescription goes , why not generate higher inflation for a while ?
This will surprise fixed-income investors who agreed in the past to lend long term at low rates , bring down the real value of debt , and eliminate debt “ overhang , ” thereby re-starting growth .
It is an attractive solution at first glance , but a closer look suggests cause for serious concern .
Start with the question of whether central banks that have spent decades establishing and maintaining anti-inflation credibility can generate faster price growth in an environment of low interest rates .
Japan tried – and failed : banks were too willing to hold the reserves that the central bank released as it bought back bonds .
Perhaps if a central bank announced a higher inflation target , and implemented a financial-asset purchase program ( financed with unremunerated reserves ) until the target were achieved , it could have some effect .
But it is more likely that the concept of a target would lose credibility once it became changeable .
Market participants might conjecture that the program would be abandoned once it reached an alarming size – and well before the target was achieved .
Moreover , the central bank needs rapid , sizeable inflation to bring down real debt values quickly – a slow increase in inflation ( especially if well signaled by the central bank ) would have limited effect , because maturing debt would demand not only higher nominal rates , but also an inflation-risk premium to roll over claims .
Significant inflation might be hard to contain , however , especially if the central bank loses credibility : Would the public really believe that the central bank is willing to push interest rates sky high and kill growth in order to contain inflation , after it abandoned its earlier inflation target in order to foster growth ?
Consider , next , whether the inflationary cure would work as advertised .
Inflation would do little for entities with floating-rate liabilities ( including the many households that borrowed towards the peak of the boom and are most underwater ) or relatively short-term liabilities ( banks ) .
Even the US government , with debt duration of about four years , would be unlikely to benefit much from an inflation surprise , unless it were huge .
Meanwhile , the bulk of its obligations are social security and health care , which cannot be inflated away .
Even for distressed households that have borrowed long term , the effects of higher inflation are uncertain .
What would help is if their nominal disposable income rose relative to their ( fixed ) debt service .
Yet , with high levels of unemployment likely to keep nominal wage growth relatively subdued , typical troubled households could be worse off – with higher food and fuel prices cutting into disposable income .
Of course , any windfall to borrowers has to come from someone else ’ s wealth .
Inflation would clearly make creditors worse off .
Who are they ?
Some are rich people , but they also include pensioners who moved into bonds as the stock market scared them away ; banks that would have to be recapitalized ; state pension funds that are already in the red ; and insurance companies that would have to default on their claims .
In the best of all worlds , it would be foreigners with ample reserves who suffer the losses , but those investors might be needed to finance future deficits .
So central banks would have to regain anti-inflation credibility very soon after subjecting investors to a punishing inflation .
In such a world , investors would have to be far more trusting than they are in this one .
This does not mean that nothing can be done about the debt problem .
The US experienced debt crises periodically during the nineteenth century , and again during the Great Depression . Its response was to offer targeted and expedited debt relief – often by bringing in new temporary bankruptcy legislation that forced limited debt write-downs .
In this vein , a recent proposal by Eric Posner and Luigi Zingales to facilitate mortgage-debt renegotiation would give a deeply underwater homeowner the right to file a pre-packaged Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition .
This would allow her to write down the value of her mortgage by the average house-price depreciation in her postal zone since the borrowing date , in exchange for giving the lender a share of the future house-price appreciation .
A bankruptcy judge would approve the petition , provided the court was satisfied that the homeowner could make the reduced payments .
Such automatic borrower-initiated filings , if made legal by Congress , could reduce the household-debt overhang without the need for government subsidies .
To the extent that the alternative is costly foreclosure proceedings that make borrowers and lenders worse off , this proposal should attract the support of both sides .
No solution is without weaknesses , though .
One reason that banks oppose debt write-downs is that many underwater homeowners continue to repay debt rather than default , even while cutting back on other spending .
If these diligent payers are eventually expected to default , writing down their debt today makes sense .
If they are expected to muddle through , a blanket debt write-down would weaken banks and might slow economic growth .
Policymakers espousing debt write-downs to spur growth should ask whether they have the political support to recapitalize banks if needed .
Prescriptions like these – as with those for a jolt of inflation – have gained ground because the obvious solutions to economic stagnation have been tried and failed .
But , as the proposals become more innovative and exotic , we must examine them carefully to ensure that they wouldn ’ t end up making matters worse .
