Insecure Securities
MUNICH – Once upon a time , stocks were risky and collateralized securities were safe .
That time is over , as the breakdown of the American mortgage securitization market has shown .
For years , hundreds of billions of new mortgage-backed securities ( MBSs ) and collateralized debt obligations ( CDOs ) generated from them were sold to the world to compensate for the lack of savings in the United States and to finance American housing investment .
Now virtually the entire market for new issues of such securities – all but 3 % of the original market volume – has vanished .
To compensate for the disappearance of that market , and for the simultaneous disappearance of non-securitized bank lending to American homeowners , 95 % of US mortgages today are channeled through the state institutions Fannie Mae , Freddie Mac , and Ginnie Mae .
Just as there was a time when collateralized securities were safe , there was also a time when economies with so much state intervention were called socialist .
Most of these private securities were sold to oil-exporting countries and Europe , in particular Germany , Britain , the Benelux countries , Switzerland , and Ireland .
China and Japan shied away from buying such paper .
As a result , European banks have suffered from massive write-offs on toxic American securities .
According to the International Monetary Fund , more than 50 % of the pre-crisis equity capital of Western Europe ’ s national banking systems , or $ 1.6 trillion , will have been destroyed by the end of 2010 , with the lion ’ s share of losses being of US origin .
Thus , the resource transfer from Europe to the US is similar in size to what the US has spent on the Iraq war ( $ 750 billion ) and the Afghanistan war ( $ 300 billion ) together .
Americans now claim caveat emptor : Europeans should have known how risky these securities were when they bought them .
But even AAA-rated CDOs , which the US ratings agencies had called equivalent in safety to government bonds , are now only worth one-third of their nominal value .
Europeans trusted a system that was untrustworthy .
Two years ago , Ben Bernanke , chairman of the US Federal Reserve , argued that foreigners were buying US securities because they trusted America ’ s financial supervisory system and wanted to participate in the dynamism of its economy .
Now we know that this was propaganda intended to keep the foreign money flowing , so that US households could continue to finance their lifestyles .
The propaganda was successful .
Even in 2008 , the US was able to attract net capital inflows of $ 808 billion .
Preliminary statistics suggest that this figure has now fallen by half .
For years , the US had a so-called “ return privilege . ”
It earned a rate of return on its foreign assets that was nearly twice as high as the rate it paid foreigners on US assets .
One hypothesis is that this reflected better choices by US investment bankers .
Another is that US ratings agencies helped fool the world by giving triple-A ratings to their American clients , while aggressively downgrading foreign borrowers . This enabled US banks to profit by offering low rates of return to foreign lenders while forcing foreign borrowers to accept high interest rates .
Indeed , it is clear that ratings were ridiculously distorted .
While a big US rating agency gave European companies , on average , only a triple-B rating in recent years , CDOs based on MBSs easily obtained triple A-ratings .
According to the IMF , 80 % of CDOs were in this category .
And according to an NBER working paper by Efraim Benmelech and Jennifer Dlugosz , 70 % of the CDOs received a triple-A rating even though the MBSs from which they were constructed had just a B + rating , on average , which would have made them unmarketable .
The authors therefore called the process of constructing CDOs “ alchemy , ” the art of turning lead into gold .
The main problem with US mortgage-based securities is that they are non-recourse .
A CDO is a claim against a chain of claims that ends at US homeowners .
None of the financial institutions that structure CDOs is directly liable for the repayments they promise ; nor are the banks and brokers that originate the mortgages or create MBSs based on them .
Only the homeowners are liable .
However , the holder of a CDO or MBS would be unable to take these homeowners to court . And even if he succeeded , homeowners could simply return their house keys , as they , too , enjoy the protection of non-recourse .
As home prices declined and one-third of US mortgage loans went under water – that is , the property ’ s market value sank below the amount of the loan – three million US homeowners lost their homes , unable to meet their payment obligations , making the CDOs and MBSs empty shells .
The problem was exacerbated by fraudulent , or at least dubious , evaluation practices .
For example , homeowners signed cash-back contracts with builders to feign a higher home value and receive bigger loans , and brokers ’ fees were added to mortgages and the reported values of homes .
Low-income people who could not be expected ever to repay their loans were given so-called NINJA credits : “ No income , no job , no assets . ”
Such reckless and irresponsible behavior abounded .
The US will have to reinvent its system of mortgage finance in order to escape the socialist trap into which it has fallen .
A minimal reform would be to force banks to retain on their balance sheets a certain proportion of the securities that they issue .
That way , they would share the pain if the securities are not serviced – and thus gain a powerful incentive to maintain tight mortgage-lending standards .
An even better solution would be to go the European way : get rid of non-recourse loans and develop a system of finance based on covered bonds , such as the German Pfandbriefe .
If a Pfandbrief is not serviced , one can take the issuing bank to court .
If the bank goes bankrupt , the holder of the covered bond has a direct claim against the homeowner , who cannot escape payment by simply returning his house key .
And if the homeowner goes bankrupt , the home can be sold to service the debt .
Since their creation in Prussia in 1769 under Frederick the Great , not a single Pfandbrief has defaulted .
Unlike the financial junk pouring out of the US in recent years , covered bonds are a security that is worthy of the name .
