Iran Versus Saudi Arabia
BERLIN – The “ new ” Middle East is now on daily display .
Unlike the old Middle East , whose fate was determined by the dominant Western powers ( the United Kingdom and France after World War I , and the United States from the 1940s until recently ) , the new one has no external hegemon to stabilize it .
And , without a dominant regional power , a dangerous strategic vacuum has emerged .
The US , quite obviously , is no longer willing – or able – to play its old role .
Though America will not withdraw its armed forces from the region completely , direct military intervention , especially with ground troops , is not tenable , given the debacle in Iraq .
America will not be a military player so long as the region ’ s strategic balance is not called into question in a fundamental way ( which explains US airstrikes on the Islamic State in Iraq and in Syria ) . Apart from this , the US is now operating at the level of diplomacy to resolve , or at least contain , a fundamental strategic threat – the danger posed by the Iranian nuclear program .
Various state and non-state actors have been trying to fill the void created by America ’ s newfound caution , with most of the latter dependent on the support of regional powers , and two in particular : Iran and Saudi Arabia .
Indeed , the Houthi rebellion in Yemen marks a new phase in the broader regional conflict . Not only is it occurring in the south of the Arabian Peninsula , directly on Saudi Arabia ’ s borders ; the kingdom ’ s direct military intervention has brought its strategic rivalry with Iran into the open .
As always in the Middle East , religious and ethnic factors play a large role in this rivalry .
The Shia-Sunni divide within Islam is being reflected in the region ’ s geopolitics . Moreover , whereas Iran is a Shia country , the overwhelming majority of Arabs are Sunni , reinforcing the salience of Iran ’ s ethnic distinctiveness .
Geopolitical interests , religious sectarianism , and ethnicity thus form a dangerous mélange in the new Middle East . And , because history has shown that outside military intervention can neither solve nor even contain such conflicts , the regional powers will have to sort this out among themselves , which is far easier said than done .
It will entail a long phase of largely unpredictable violence , which implies a high risk of escalation , even toward global conflict ; and it will most likely result in humanitarian disasters on the order of what is happening in Syria today .
Even barring escalation beyond the Middle East , significant economic dangers are also likely , given the region ’ s energy reserves and thus its importance to the global economy .
World oil prices are de facto determined on the Arabian Peninsula and by the countries of the adjacent Gulf region , and this will not change anytime soon .
In terms of international security , a long-term fight for regional dominance will increase the threat of global terrorism , as both sides are using extremist groups that seek to legitimize their actions in religious terms .
An even greater danger is that the key players in this conflict seek to arm themselves with nuclear weapons .
A nuclear arms race in a region characterized by long-term instability would be a global nightmare .
So it is no accident that , concurrently with the regional powers ’ direct military confrontation in Yemen , the international community , led by the US , has been trying to negotiate a nuclear agreement with Iran . The framework agreement that has now resulted from these talks , which have been taking place off and on for 12 years ( and in which I participated for a time ) is intended to bring Iran ’ s nuclear program under international supervision , thereby containing the risk to regional and global stability .
America ’ s agenda is now arousing massive criticism from its close allies in the region , Israel and Saudi Arabia .
But such criticism is based on illusionary aims .
Acceding to it would merely ensure further escalation of the conflict with Iran , which will never completely abandon its nuclear technology and nuclear activities .
The only realistic option to prevent a nuclear arms race in the region is international supervision – as far-reaching and as comprehensive as possible .
But this goal , even if achieved , would satisfy neither Israel nor Saudi Arabia , both of which fear that any agreement would support Iran in its effort to establish its regional dominance . So the end result could be a de facto change of regional strategic partners by the US – a development that in fact is already becoming apparent in the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq .
Iran ’ s strategy in all of this has not been very clever : its military interventions in Syria , Lebanon , Iraq , and Yemen entail major risks .
The new Middle East needs neither a nuclear arms race nor religious hatred , and it also does not need a foreign policy based on military intervention . Rather , it requires the strength to sit down together and negotiate , and to develop systems of collective security that do serve the legitimate interests of all parties involved .
Without diplomacy and the willingness to work toward viable mutual understandings , as has just happened with the framework agreement negotiated with Iran , the new Middle East will remain the powder keg of world politics – one whose fuse has already been lit .
