Moving Pictures
CANNES – This year ’ s Cannes Film Festival was marked by a profound contrast between what unfolded along La Croisette , the palm-lined sweep of pedestrian walkway that stretches between swathes of luxury hotels and the azure Mediterranean , and the films debuting onscreen .
Outside all was glitter , excess , posturing , and brand names .
Young women in five-inch heels and revealing clothing prowled for wealthy men – or were imported by them to decorate boats and premiere parties .
Every night , the parade of stars up the red carpet , flanked by photographers , played out like a relic of a more ritualistic time .
Inside the Palais , the hulking brutalist structure where the films are screened , this year ’ s lineup was filled with tales of ordinary people , or poor people , struggling with the fallout of the global issues that increasingly unite us – or confronting painful political conflicts that official histories had laid to rest .
If in the past Cannes showcased films telling a hundred different kinds of stories , this year ’ s offerings made clear that in an increasingly flattened and wired world , there is really only one story – with a hundred different inflections .
Thai cinema ’ s gifted young director Apichatpong Weerasethakul ’ s film , Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives , won the Palme d ’ Or .
It is a Spanish-German-French-British-Thai co-production , the kind of international collaborative effort we are increasingly seeing in film – a form of cross-border collaboration that should point the way to other forms of global civil-society projects .
The film , whose production was slowed by the “ red shirt ” revolt in Thailand , deals in part with themes of past violence .
At one point , the project – which is also part of a massive art installation – refers to the history of a village : local teenagers recount that , “ Soldiers once occupied this place .
They killed and tortured villagers and forced them to flee to the jungle . ”
Poetry , by South Korean director Lee Chang-Dong , also deals with a family reconciling themselves through pain to a prior conflict .
It tells the story of an elderly woman who is forced to face her past as a torturer .
Other films address a conflict that is closer to home here in France .
Outside the Law , directed by Rachid Bouchareb , narrates the story of the massacre at Setif , Algeria , in May 1945 .
The film tracks the events surrounding three Algerian brothers over a 35-year period , and brings to light aspects of the massacre that had been considered taboo in France .
Strikingly , Outside the Law is a Franco-Algerian production , and it has already caused political controversy : it was denounced by Lionnel Luca , a French deputy who is , as one French periodical put it , “ nostalgic for a French Algeria . ”
The film actually sparked a noisy protest along La Croisette , with French veterans defensively and aggressively singing “ La Marseillaise , ” even as couples dressed in black tie and gowns swept in a parallel path to the evening 's festivities .
In response , the mayor of Cannes organized a ceremony to commemorate all victims of the French-Algerian conflict .
Still another film reawakens not-so-distant American history and casts it in a radically altered light : Doug Liman ’ s Fair Game reinterprets the Valerie Plame / Joe Wilson scandal of 2003 , and reveals that Plame was far from being a glorified secretary , as the Bush administration had portrayed her .
On the contrary , she led a team that intercepted components of nuclear weapons at their source , whisked them away to the United States , altered them slightly so that they would not work , and replaced them .
So the Bush administration ’ s leak of her identity ended not just her career , but also a sensitive program that had kept us all safe .
Other films simply tell stories of people who are not usually portrayed by film .
Los Labios , an Argentine project directed by Santiago Loza and Ivan Fund , simply follows three government-funded nurses who go to a rural area to serve the needs of the impoverished local population .
It humbly tracks their accounting of cases of malnourishment , alcoholism , diseases of poverty , and the ravages of unemployment and inadequate medical care .
Similarly , Sergei Loznitsa ’ s My Joy simply explores the life of a Ukrainian truck driver named Georgy , who gets lost and finds himself in an archetypal Russian village , where he is drawn into daily life .
This is a real cinema of humility – the directors again and again have chosen to take seriously the dramas and struggles of ordinary people and find the heroism or tragedy therein .
What does it all mean ?
The many movies that critically revise settled national narratives suggest that people are no longer willing to accept history that has been crafted by elites for their own purposes .
In most cases , the directors researched their own films by interviewing sources who were close to the action , or close to the main events at a grassroots level .
That is an exciting development , though initially it implies a messier historical narrative .
In Bouchareb ’ s film , for example , there is not a unified story of the occupation of Algeria , but many points of view that a young French teenager ( or French-Algerian teenager ) can witness and draw from .
That is surely good , especially in an open society .
So is the focus of other films on the struggles of ordinary people .
To be sure , simply championing populism for its own sake – a Stalinist or New Left reflex – makes for bad art .
But the flattening of the world has led to a flattening of the kinds of people who can be seen as heroes or seekers .
By bringing these subjects into focus , great film directors have gained a larger and more representative world of stories from which to work their magic .
