America ’ s Other 30 %
NEW HAVEN – The American consumer is but a shadow of its former almighty self .
Personal consumption in the United States expanded at only a 1.5 % annual rate in real ( inflation-adjusted ) terms in the second quarter of 2012 – and that was no aberration .
Unfortunately , it continues a pattern of weakness that has been evident since early 2008 .
Over the last 18 quarters , annualized growth in real consumer demand has averaged a mere 0.7 % , compared to a 3.6 % growth trend in the decade before the crisis erupted .
Never before has the American consumer been this weak for this long .
The cause is no secret .
Consumers made huge bets on two bubbles – housing and credit .
Reckless monetary and regulatory policies turned the humble abode into an ATM , allowing families to extract dollars from bubbles and live beyond their means .
Both bubbles have long since burst , and US households are now dealing with post-bubble financial devastation – namely , underwater assets , record-high debt , and profound shortages of savings .
At the same time , sharply elevated unemployment and subpar income growth have combined to tighten the noose on over-extended consumers .
As a result , American households have hunkered down as never before .
Consumers are diverting what little income they earn away from spending toward paying down debt and rebuilding savings .
That is both logical and rational – and thus not something that the US Federal Reserve can offset with unconventional monetary easing .
American consumers ’ unprecedented retrenchment has turned the US economy ’ s growth calculus inside out .
Consumption typically accounts for 70 % of GDP ( 71 % in the second quarter , to be precise ) .
But the 70 % is barely growing , and is unlikely to expand strongly at any point in the foreseeable future .
That puts an enormous burden on the other 30 % of the US economy to generate any sort of recovery .
In fact , the other 30 % has not done a bad job , especially considering the severe headwinds coming from consumers ’ 70 % .
The 30 % mainly consists of four components – capital spending by firms , net exports ( exports less imports ) , residential construction , and government purchases .
( Technically , the pace of inventory investment should be included , but this is a cyclical buffer between production and sales rather than a source of final demand . )
Given the 0.7 % trend in real consumption growth over the past four and a half years , the US economy ’ s anemic 2.2 % annualized recovery in the aftermath of the Great Recession is almost miraculous .
Credit that mainly to the other 30 % , especially to strong exports and a rebound in business capital spending .
By contrast , the government sector has been moving in the opposite direction , as state and local governments retrench and federal purchases top out after post-crisis deficit explosions .
The housing sector has started to recover over the past five quarters , but from such a severely depressed level that its growth has had little impact on the overall economy .
Given the strong likelihood that consumers will remain weak for years to come , America ’ s growth agenda needs to focus on getting more out of the other 30 % .
Of the four growth components that fall into this category , two have the greatest potential to make a difference – capital spending and exports .
Prospects for these two sources of growth will not only influence the vigor , or lack thereof , of any recovery ; they could well be decisive in bringing about an important shift in the US growth model .
The 70 / 30 split underscores the challenge : the US must face up to a fundamental rebalancing – weaning itself from excessive reliance on internal demand and drawing greater support from external demand .
Capital spending and exports , which together account for about 24 % of GDP , hold the key to this shift .
At just over 10 % of GDP , the share of capital spending is well below the peak of nearly 13 % in 2000 .
But capital spending must exceed that peak if US businesses are to be equipped with state-of-the-art capacity , technology , and private infrastructure that will enable them to recapture market share at home and abroad .
Only then could export growth , impressive since mid-2009 , sustain further increases .
And only then could the US stem the rising tide of import penetration by foreign producers .
The other 30 % is also emblematic of a deeper strategic issue that America faces – a profound competitive challenge .
A shift to external demand is not there for the asking . It must be earned by hard work , sheer determination , and a long overdue competitive revival .
On that front , too , America has been falling behind .
According to the World Economic Forum ’ s Global Competitiveness Index , the US slipped to fifth place in 2011-2012 , from fourth place the previous year , continuing a general downward trend evident since 2005 .
The erosion is traceable to several factors , including deficiencies in primary and secondary education as well as poor macroeconomic management .
But the US also has disturbingly low rankings in the quality of its infrastructure ( # 24 ) , technology availability and absorption ( # 18 ) , and the sophistication and breadth of its supply-chain production processes ( # 14 ) .
Improvement on all counts is vital for America ’ s competitive revival .
But meeting the challenge will require vigorous growth from America ’ s other 30 % – especially private capital spending .
With the American consumer likely to remain on ice , the same 30 % must also continue to shoulder the burden of a sluggish economic recovery .
None of this can occur in a vacuum .
The investment required for competitive revival and sustained recovery cannot be funded without a long-overdue improvement in US saving .
In an era of outsize government deficits and subpar household saving , that may be America ’ s toughest challenge of all .
