Egypt ’ s Monster in the Making
BRUSSELS – On December 15 , Egypt ’ s draft constitution is due to be put to a referendum .
A year ago , Egyptians were thrilled to know that finally their country ’ s constitution would reflect their democratic hopes and aspirations .
Yet the document that they will now vote on is more likely to dash those hopes and dim Egyptians ’ prospects for democracy .
The constitutional drafting process was rushed , without the input of liberals , non-Muslims , and women , all of whom boycotted the process , owing to the preponderance of Islamists .
The Muslim Brotherhood , and primarily President Mohamed Morsi , is banking on the assumption that the strength of Egypt ’ s Islamist vote will earn him enough support among “ regular Egyptians , ” and that the opposition will have little impact on the referendum ’ s outcome .
One political adviser for the ruling Freedom and Justice Party – the Muslim Brotherhood ’ s political wing – even boasted that the Brothers could easily mobilize 20 million supporters .
The Brothers dismiss those who have demonstrated in the streets during the past three weeks as Mubarak sympathizers .
Morsi ’ s decision on November 22 to grant himself absolute authority for the spurious purpose of defending the revolution is not new for Egypt .
A succession of dictator-presidents ruled the country under a state of emergency for more than 40 years .
While Morsi has now bowed to pressure to annul a decree granting him powers without judicial oversight , it seems only yesterday that people were prepared to put their fears aside and trust that Morsi was ready to rule in the interests of all Egyptians .
Eric Trager of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy notes that Morsi ’ s previous role in the Muslim Brotherhood ’ s Guidance Council sheds some light on the motives behind his current behavior .
In the past , Morsi advocated a platform that excluded Christians from political life and granted Islamic scholars oversight authority to ensure that all legislation complied with Sharia law .
He also worked to expunge young members of the Freedom and Justice Party that he deemed to hold dissenting views .
While the draft constitution does contain positive provisions , many are causing concern .
For example , Article 11 authorizes the state to “ safeguard ethics , public morality , and public order , and foster a high level of education and of religious and patriotic values . ” This leaves plenty of room for interpretation by the government .
In addition , the mosque of al-Azhar is promised an advisory role in Islamic legislation .
The Brothers ’ political opponents have not been silent .
On December 8 , the National Salvation Front announced that the draft “ does not represent the Egyptian people . ” Moreover , ordinary Egyptians have responded viscerally and swiftly to Morsi ’ s moves , perhaps more so than he had anticipated .
Strikes were called , newspapers halted publication , and fears of widespread insurrection remain high .
Hundreds have been injured in street clashes in Cairo .
The president ’ s supporters have declared that “ defending Morsi is defending Islam . ”
Today , Morsi seems as besieged as Syria ’ s President Bashar al-Assad .
The military has barricaded the presidential palace and , until the results of the referendum are announced , they are under orders to protect Egypt ’ s state institutions .
Outside the Middle East , the United States has scaled back its relations with Egypt since the government ’ s weak response to the attack on the US embassy in September , which signaled a rapid deterioration in bilateral relations .
America ’ s main priority now is to ensure that the peace treaty with Israel is maintained .
The European Union cannot afford to engage in wishful thinking when it comes to Morsi ’ s ambitions and the Muslim Brotherhood ’ s agenda .
The EU ’ s “ more for more ” policy has made human rights a cornerstone of its foreign policy toward states in the Union ’ s neighborhood .
And , though Morsi ’ s recent role in mediating discussions between Hamas and the Israeli government was invaluable in preventing a serious regional conflict , his government ’ s actions are undermining prospects for further cooperation with Europe .
No matter how Morsi attempts to sideline his domestic opponents , Egypt is in no shape to ignore the rest of the world .
It lacks a stable economy , relying heavily on tourism and imports to feed the country ’ s more than 80 million people .
Power cuts and public-service strikes are a regular feature of daily life .
Egypt ’ s government needs to secure consistent foreign financing to keep the country afloat , providing leverage for international opposition to Morsi ’ s efforts to impose an agenda that runs contrary to Egyptians ’ fundamental rights .
Egypt can thrive only on the basis of honest adherence to a democratic process .
The current constitutional crisis has caused many to wonder how Egypt will face future political tests .
The referendum ’ s outcome will prove an important guide regarding the direction the country is likely to take .
Will it embrace a new Islamic authoritarianism , or build the democracy that Egyptians have risked their lives to secure ?
