Is Fiscal Stimulus Pointless ?
The Harvard economist Robert Barro , writing in The Wall Street Journal , recently made an intelligent argument against America ’ s fiscal stimulus .
After wading through the drivel of ethics-free Republican hacks and knowledge-free academic hacks who claim , one way or another , that the basic principles of economics make it impossible for government spending decisions to alter the flow of economic activity , reading Barro comes as a great relief .
But I think that Barro misreads how his own evidence applies to our current situation .
Barro writes that he “ estimate [ s ] a spending multiplier of around 0.4 within the same year and about 0.6 over two years ....
[ T ] he [ tax ] multiplier is around minus 1.1 ....
[ Thus , ] GDP would be higher than otherwise by $ 120 billion in 2009 and $ 180 billion in 2010 ... , ” and by $ 60 billion in 2011 .
That means that roughly 1.3 million more people will be employed in America in 2009 , 1.9 million more in 2010 , and 0.7 million people employed in 2011 .
Suppose that what the government spent money on is worth to us two-thirds on average of what private-sector spending is worth .
In that case , we will have spent $ 600 billion and gotten $ 810 billion worth of stuff in return , for a net social profit of $ 210 billion ( and those who would otherwise be cyclically unemployed cannot be said to place a high value on their lost leisure ) .
Only if you think that there are additional large costs lurking down the road – that the stimulus has destabilized price expectations and set in motion a destructive spiral of deflation , or that the stimulus has used up America ’ s debt capacity , driving up debt-service costs to a prohibitive level – can the social profit turn negative .
Neither of those things has happened .
The long-term nominal and real Treasury rates continue to be absurdly low , so much so that I rub my eyes whenever I see them .
And the market inflation forecast – the spread between Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities and normal Treasuries – remains extremely tame .
So I really cannot understand Barro ’ s last paragraph : “ The fiscal stimulus package of 2009 was a mistake .
It follows that an additional stimulus package in 2010 would be another mistake ... ”
It is as if he has not done his own arithmetic .
The problem , I think , is that Barro tries to use the years of “ total ” war in the twentieth century – World War I , World War II , and the Korean War – to “ realistically evaluate the stimulus , ” because “ the defense-spending multiplier can be precisely estimated .... ”
But this is like looking for one ’ s lost keys under the lamppost because the light is better there .
Yes , the total war defense-spending multiplier can be relatively precisely estimated .
But we are not interested in what the multiplier is when the unemployment rate is 3 % and the government is trying to diminish consumption and boost private savings via rationing and patriotism-based bond drives .
We are interested in what the multiplier is under more normal conditions , and when the unemployment rate is 10 % .
I think Bob Hall has a better read on what is going on : & quot ; With allowance for other factors holding back GDP growth during those wars , the multiplier linking government purchases to GDP may be in the range of 0.7 to 1.0 ... but higher values are not ruled out ....
Multipliers are higher – perhaps around 1.7 – when the nominal interest rate is at its lower bound of zero , as it was during 2009 ... ” ( and is today ) .
There are other problems with Barro ’ s analysis .
He characterizes the stimulus bill as a two-year $ 600 billion increase in government purchases .
But about half of the stimulus money spent to date is on the tax and transfer side , and about a quarter is direct aid to states , which enables them not to raise taxes .
Barro should be using a weighted average of his spending multiplier of 0.6 and his tax multiplier of 1.1 to get a multiplier of 0.9 .
In that case , our social profit is not $ 210 billion but rather $ 390 billion , and we should certainly do this again .
Indeed , we should do it repeatedly , until there are signs that additional stimulus may start to threaten price or debt-management stability , or until unemployment falls far enough to make Barro ’ s multipliers overestimates .
Moreover , Barro complains that because Christina Romer , who heads President Barack Obama ’ s Council of Economic Advisers , has “ not [ carried out ] serious scientific research ... on spending multipliers ... , ” he “ cannot understand her rationale for assuming values well above one ... ” To say that policymakers should rely only on their own personal research to formulate policy seems to me simply bizarre .
Finally , Barro assumes that higher spending in 2009-2010 will have to be offset by higher taxes later , claiming that “ the timing of future taxes does not matter . ”
But it matters very much .
At the moment , the United States Treasury can borrow at a real interest rate of zero for five years – and shove the entire five-year inflation risk onto the lender .
Time preference means that the $ 600 billion addition to the debt today , which Barro sees as the cost of stimulus , is not nearly as burdensome as a demand to pay $ 600 billion now would be .
And when taxes are levied to retire the added debt induced by the stimulus , they will be levied at some time at which nominal interest rates are not stuck at zero .
The Federal Reserve will thus be able to ease monetary policy then to offset the fiscal drag .
So Barro is simply wrong when he claims that although the stimulus boosts employment now , amortizing the stimulus must inevitably reduce employment at some point in the future .
