Four More Years for Abe
TOKYO – In the December snap election initiated by Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe , the Liberal Democratic Party ( LDP ) and its junior coalition partner , the Komeito Party , won 326 of the Diet ’ s 475 seats , retaining their constitutional majority in the lower house of parliament .
It was an extraordinary achievement – one that Japan has not witnessed in decades .
Japan ’ s opposition parties offered no convincing alternative to the Abe government ’ s policies .
The Democratic Party of Japan ( DPJ ) , which led the government less than three years ago , was unable even to field enough candidates to contest every seat .
Its road back to political relevance appears long and bleak .
Of course , under the single-seat constituency system , minor parties in Japan are at a distinct disadvantage .
Indeed , a landslide victory on the scale of Abe ’ s may very well lead to some of them completely disappearing from political life .
The only opposition party that made significant gains in the recent vote was the Japanese Communist Party , which nearly tripled its seat total , from eight to 21 .
The JCP has recently sought to position itself as a “ reliable opposition ” to the LDP – though it has never proved particularly “ reliable , ” at least not in promoting realistic policies .
Given this , the JCP ’ s gains were probably fueled more by disgruntled voters ’ desire to signal their frustration to Abe .
In fact , in those districts where the election pitted JCP and LDP candidates against each other , many citizens did not take the trouble to vote .
This contributed to record-low voter turnout of 52 % – the one real blemish on the LDP ’ s victory .
The main actor in the election was undoubtedly Abe himself , whose bold macroeconomic strategy , so-called “ Abenomics , ” has attracted considerable attention since its initiation two years ago .
But three other actors also played important roles in securing Abe ’ s victory .
The first was Saudi Arabia .
At an OPEC meeting in the run-up to the election , the group ’ s dominant producer , Saudi Arabia , shelved plans to restrict oil production to counteract the rapid decline in world prices , allowing them to continue to fall .
This has brought considerable benefits to the oil-importing advanced economies – including Japan .
Had the Saudis decided to reduce output , Japan would have suffered the double blow of increased oil prices and a sudden sharp depreciation of the yen .
That would have exposed Abe ’ s government to widespread criticism , particularly in automotive industry hubs .
The second important actor in Abe ’ s campaign was China .
The appearance of more than 200 ships harvesting precious red coral around Japan ’ s Ogasawara islands in November opened the eyes of many Japanese to the risks of China ’ s growing power .
Such skepticism about China ’ s peaceful intentions has intensified criticism of the DPJ for what many consider an excessively soft approach to managing relations with the People ’ s Republic .
The third important actor was Japan ’ s labor unions .
The current problem facing Abenomics , as it aims to save Japan ’ s economy from deflation , is that wage hikes have not kept pace with the April 2014 consumption-tax increase ( from 5 % to 8 % ) or the rise in import prices associated with a weaker yen .
Organized labor ’ s representatives in wage negotiations , which are conducted every spring , usually come from unions that support the DPJ .
But Abe himself has supplanted the unions in demanding big pay rises from companies , helping him to attract significantly more votes from union members in this election than in 2011 .
These three players ’ interventions have helped Abe secure four more years in power .
After decades of rotating leadership , with eight prime ministers in just ten years , Japan finally has a stable government .
Though Japan ’ s parliamentary system distinguishes it from its neighbors , this aligns more closely with norms in the region , where presidential executives serve for six years in Russia and five years in South Korea and China .
( North Korea ’ s leader , of course , has no fixed term in office . )
Abe now has more political capital – and thus more freedom to maneuver – than perhaps any Japanese leader since the end of the Pacific War .
He must use it to follow through on the promise of Abenomics , finally enacting the structural reforms that Japan needs to reinvigorate its economy .
