Israel ’ s Lonely Prosperity
PARIS – It is difficult not to be struck by the contrast between the “ Asian ” -like energy of Israel ’ s economy and civil society and the purely defensive nature of its approach to political change , both within and outside the country .
A recent law bars Israeli citizens from supporting Western boycotts aimed at reversing the country ’ s settlement policies and at backing an independent Palestinian state .
While Israel has never been so affluent , dynamic , and confident , it also has never been so isolated internationally .
Israel could have embraced the Arab Spring as an opportunity , rather than as a profound risk .
If Arab citizens could transform their culture of humiliation into a culture of hope , perhaps they would be able to reconcile themselves with Israel ’ s existence .
But Israeli leaders reacted purely negatively to the Arab upheavals .
In their estimation , a complex regional environment has now become even more dangerous , making prudence even more urgent .
For Israel , yesterday ’ s despots , like Egypt ’ s former president , Hosni Mubarak , were much more predictable than the “ Arab masses . ”
While some of the demonstrators might be inspired by democratic ideals , let ’ s have no illusions , the Israelis seem to be saying : Islamist forces will emerge as the only winners , and they are much more hostile to Israel and the West than their predecessors were .
Of course , with the Syrian regime ’ s massacres of its own citizens , some in Israel say that the suffering of Gaza ’ s inhabitants pales in comparison , and thus fails to attract the same sympathy as it did last year .
But this should not obscure the overall diplomatic picture for Israel , which remains essentially negative .
One of the more ironic results of the region ’ s changing political configuration is that Israel now perceives a strategic convergence with Saudi Arabia .
Despite their political systems ’ deep differences , they both favor the regional status quo , and they share an obsessive suspicion of Iran .
But why not dream of a new strategic triangle comprising Israel , Saudi Arabia , and Turkey , just as Israelis once dreamed of a non-Arab triangle between Israel , Turkey , and the Shah ’ s Iran ?
The Turks ’ appalled reaction to the Syrian regime ’ s brutal behavior creates an opportunity that Israel should use to try to restore the privileged relationship with Recep Tayyip Erdoğan ’ s government that existed before the Gaza blockade .
But that would presuppose a small gesture towards the Palestinians , whom Israelis regard as being so deeply divided among themselves that no progress toward a peace settlement seems possible .
Israel ’ s leaders seem intent on gaining time both tactically , by resisting the soft pressure of US President Barack Obama ’ s administration , and strategically , by preparing the country for a new world in which emerging powers such as China play an increasingly important role .
That world , however , will be one in which Israel can no longer count on feelings of Holocaust guilt to influence major powers .
It is a world in which monotheistic rivalries will be diluted in an ocean of polytheist faiths , and in which Israel will be able to depend only on its comparative merits in the eyes of cynical , realistic actors who will judge it solely on the basis of their own national interests .
Israel may be “ of Europe , ” and its main ally may well remain the United States for many years to come , but Israeli leaders must start thinking of how their country can thrive in a post-Western world .
The most recent “ President ’ s Conference , ” held in June in Jerusalem under the patronage of Israeli President Shimon Peres , was highly symbolic of this evolution .
In the opening session , Obama ’ s special envoy , Denis Ross , was greeted with resounding silence when he conveyed to the participants his boss ’ s warm wishes .
By contrast , China ’ s culture minister was welcomed very warmly when he spoke , in typical fashion , of the growing need for global “ harmony . ”
In the minds of a few Israeli strategic thinkers , Israel must resist firmly for two or three more generations in order to become an irreversible reality in the region and a legitimate “ accomplished fact ” of the international system .
At that point , who would want to boycott a country whose technological prowess is needed all over the world ?
In this context , the idea of a peace settlement with the Palestinians seems more abstract than ever .
Indeed , it makes the current status quo seem comfortable .
The gap between Israel ’ s rich and poor nowadays may recall Brazil , but who remembers the original Zionists ’ social-democratic ideals ?
The country ’ s prosperity is simply overwhelming .
From Tel Aviv to Jerusalem , luxurious penthouses are multiplying .
Are we in Singapore , Hong Kong , or São Paulo ?
Why challenge the certainties of the present with the uncertainties of the future ?
Moreover , Israel has not only become much more prosperous ; it has also moved decisively to the right .
The second Intifada may very well have proven fatal to the Israeli left .
Triumphant capitalism , idolatry of the land , and the comforts of the status quo produce a heady cocktail .
But , high on the benefits of globalization , and waiting with a mixture of excitement and apprehension for the coming of a new post-Western world order , Israelis are dancing on the rim of a volcano .
