Money Magic
CHICAGO – Economic growth in the United States seems to be slowing again .
This might reflect temporary factors , like the Japanese tsunami , which disrupted supply chains and caused some factories to suspend operations .
Also , high oil prices have taken a toll on disposable income , impeding growth in consumption demand .
This has led to a build-up of inventory – & # 160 ; and thus to cuts in production .
Recoveries are rarely without blips , especially when they are as weak as this one .
But , regardless of whether the factors behind the latest slowdown are fleeting or enduring , there will be calls on the US Federal Reserve to do something .
Some Americans view Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke as a modern-day wizard , able to revive the economy through a swish of his monetary wand – first ultra-low interest rates , then quantitative easing , and perhaps eventually money-printing .
If inflation is low , they want the Fed to use every spell it knows to revive the economy .
Like the World War I generals who reacted to every slaughter of their men by sending even more over the top of their trenches in a vain attempt to overwhelm the enemy , “ free money ” types react with “ More ! ” if their policy does not seem to be working .
More than any other policy action , monetary policy suffers from the sense that there is a free lunch to be had .
Yet the interest rate is a price for the savings that are transferred to spenders .
To the extent that the Fed manages to push this price down ( and some economists will dispute its ability to push any meaningful interest rate down ) , it taxes the producers of savings and subsidizes the spenders of savings .
Clearly , no government considers pushing down the price of any real good an effective way to stimulate the economy – any gain to consumers is a loss to producers , and the loss typically will outweigh the gain if the market price is a fair one .
So why are savings different ?
One view is that corporate investment is held back by labor-market rigidities ( wages are stubbornly too high ) .
Moreover , significant societal benefits – for example , more cohesive families and communities – come from investment that creates jobs , so a lower interest rate will give corporations the necessary subsidy to invest .
There is , however , scant evidence that the real problem holding back investment is excessively high wages ( many corporations reduced overtime and benefit contributions , and even cut wages during the recession ) .
Moreover , with interest rates for large corporations at their lowest level in decades ( negative in real terms for the largest , so that savers are in fact paying corporations to borrow their money ) , the cost of capital is probably not the main reason why they are not investing more in the US .
A huge subsidy would certainly induce them to reconsider , but should we not ask whether there are more effective ways to fix the problems holding them back ?
A second view is that households are scared and saving too much – they need to be pushed into consuming by lowering the returns to savings .
It is hard to imagine , though , that with the US household savings rate at about 5 % , and with households severely indebted , they are saving too much .
While it might be nice to get them to spend a little more now , and save more later , it is hard to engineer this easily .
After all , the housing bubble was caused , in part , by pushing credit on households so that they would spend the US out of the recession that followed the dot-com bust .
A third channel through which easy money might work is by pushing up the value of assets like stocks , bonds , and houses , making people feel wealthier – and thus more likely to spend .
For this channel to be sustainable , though , the wealth gains must be permanent .
Otherwise , what goes up will come down , leaving households even more frightened of financial markets .
Clearly , someone is paying a price for ultra-low interest rates : the patient and uncomplaining saver .
Interestingly , if traditional spenders such as firms and young households are unwilling or unable to take advantage of low interest rates , low rates could even hurt overall spending , because savers like retirees receive lower financial incomes and curtail spending .
This is not a heretical concern .
As with any tax and subsidy , the net effect depends on whether those taxed cut back spending less than those subsidized .
Economists have sensibly advocated that China raise the interest rates that it pays on bank deposits so that Chinese households earn more and consume more .
Some Japanese now wonder whether their ultra-low interest-rate policy could be contractionary .
Equally worrisome are the distortions that easy money creates .
Evidence from the recent crisis suggests that ultra-low rates prompted a wide range of portfolio adjustments , whereby Asian and Middle East central banks and funds ended up holding the safest low-interest securities , while the US and European financial sectors went on a risk-taking binge .
History never repeats itself exactly , and those singed by fire do learn not to play with matches , but we should be aware that unnaturally low interest rates have consequences other than inflation .
Finally , what of inflation itself ?
While wage inflation in the US is contained , global monetary policy is probably excessively loose – one reason that oil prices have taken off .
The Fed blames ( rightly ) foreign central banks that are keeping interest rates too low to prevent their currencies from appreciating against the dollar ; but the Fed cannot set policy assuming others respond with a theoretical ideal .
High oil prices now curtailing growth in the US are partly an unintended consequence of current policy .
There are many things that the US needs to do to create sustainable growth , including improving the quality of its work force and infrastructure .
Easier money is not one of them .
