Is There a European Identity , Is there a Europe ?
PRAGUE - Do Europe 's peoples truly regard themselves as ‘ Europeans ' , or is this a fiction which attempts to transform geography into a ‘ state of mind ' .
This question is often posed in connection with debates concerning the amount of sovereignty that nation-states can , or should , transfer to the European Union .
Many say that if national affiliation is pushed into the background too fast in favor of an unfamiliar , perhaps chimerical , concept of European affiliation , it might not end well .
When I ask myself : ‘ To what extent do I feel European , and what links me with Europe ? " , my first thought is a mild astonishment at the fact that it is only now that I ponder this question .
Why didn 't I think of it long ago , in those times when I began to discover the world ?
Was it because I regarded my belonging to Europe as a surface matter of little significance ?
Or did I take my European linkage for granted ?
My entire background was so self-evidently European that it never occurred to me to probe my thoughts .
Not only that – I have a feeling that I would have looked ridiculous if I had written or declared that I was European and felt European ; or , in fact , if I professed explicitly a European orientation .
Such manifestations would have appeared pathetic and pompous ; I would have regarded them as a haughtier version of the kind of patriotism that I dislike from national patriots .
Such hesitation apparently holds true for most Europeans : they are so intrinsically European that they are unaware of it .
They do not call themselves Europeans .
When asked in opinion polls , they show mild surprise that , all of a sudden , they should declare their European affiliation .
Conscious Europeanism has little tradition , so I welcome the fact that European awareness is rising from the indistinct mass of the self-evident .
By inquiring about it ; thinking about it ; by trying to grasp its essence , we contribute to our own self-awareness .
This is immensely important – especially because we find ourselves in a multi-cultural , multipolar world in which recognizing one 's identity is a prerequisite for co-existence with other identities .
If Europe , until recently , paid so little attention to its own identity it was because it incorrectly saw itself as the entire world ; or , at least , considered itself to be so much superior to the rest of the globe that it felt no need to define itself in relation to others .
Inevitably , this had deleterious consequences on its practical behavior .
Reflecting on Europeanism means inquiring into the set of values , ideals and principles that characterize Europe .
It entails , by definition , a critical examination of that set of thoughts , followed by the realization that many European traditions , principles , or values may be double-edged .
Some of them – if carried too far or abused in certain ways – can lead us to hell .
In this effort of reflection , emphasis must be placed on the spiritual dimension and the underlying values of European integration .
Until now , European unification , and its meaning in the wider context of civilization , has been hidden behind technical , economic , financial and administrative issues .
When unification began after WWII , democratic Western Europe was faced with the memory of the horrors of two world wars , and with the threat of Communist totalitarian rule .
Back then , it was unnecessary to speak about the values to be defended , because these were self-evident .
It was necessary to unite the West in order to prevent the spread of dictatorship , as well as the danger of a relapse into old national conflicts .
So , in its infancy , the European Union held much the same attitude that I held toward my European background .
Europe 's moral justification was self-evident ; it did not need to be professed .
Because Western Europe was defending something equally self-evident , there was no need to describe or analyze it .
It was not until the physical threat to Europe disappeared a decade ago that Europe was prompted to engage in profound reflections upon the moral and spiritual foundations of its unification , and what should be the objectives of a united Europe .
The basic set of European values formed by the spiritual and political history of the continent is , to my mind , clear .
It consists of respect for the unique human being and humanity 's freedoms , rights and dignity ; the principle of solidarity ; the rule of law and equality before the law ; protection of minorities ; democratic institutions ; separation of legislative , executive and judicial powers ; political pluralism ; respect for private ownership and private enterprise , and a market economy ; and the furtherance of civil society .
These values mirror countless modern European experiences , including the fact that our continent is now a multi-cultural crossroads .
In defining what it means to be ‘ European ' , a crucial task is to reflect upon the double-edged nature of what we have gavin the world , to realize that Europe not only taught the world about human rights , but also introduced the Holocaust ; that we generated spiritual impulses not only for the industrial and information revolutions , but also to plunder and contaminate nature ; that we incited the advance of science and technology , but also ruthlessly ousted essential human experiences forged over several millenniums .
The worst events of the 20th century – World Wars , Fascism , and Communist totalitarianism – were mostly Europe 's doing .
During the last century , however , Europe also experienced three auspicious events , though all were not exclusively European accomplishments : the end of colonial rule ; the fall of the Iron Curtain ; the beginning of European integration .
A fourth great task lies ahead .
Through the manner of its being , a unifying Europe must demonstrate that the dangers generated by its contradictory civilization can be combated .
I would be happy if the people of my country , who are Europeans , could participate in this process of reflection , of defining a European identity , as Europeans fully recognized by Europe .
