Sorry for Nothing
NEW YORK – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe is once again stirring Asia ’ s cauldron of national rivalries and historical resentments .
This time , he has instructed a committee of historians to reexamine the official apology delivered in 1993 to World War II-era sex slaves held in Japanese military brothels .
It is clear from various recent statements that some of Abe ’ s closest advisers believe that the apology was not in order , so the committee might well conclude that Japan was never officially involved in prostitution , and that its “ sincere remorse ” should therefore be withdrawn .
What perverse reason could Abe have for pursuing such an outcome ?
Glossing over , or denying , dark chapters of national history is not unique to Japan , of course .
There is no room for Stalin ’ s mass murders in the kind of “ patriotic ” education favored by Russian President Vladimir Putin .
And the Tiananmen Square Massacre , to name but one bloody event in China ’ s recent past , has been officially forgotten .
Still , Japan is a democracy , with freedom of expression .
The official apology made in 1993 was prompted by a Japanese historian ’ s discovery of documents showing that the Imperial Japanese Army had been directly involved in setting up , though not necessarily in running , what were known as “ comfort stations . ” One of the official reasons was that widespread rape of Chinese women by Japanese soldiers was provoking too much resistance among the local population .
Various means were used to stock the brothels with young women .
But , because there was no escape , the women , once ensnared in the system , were effectively slaves .
This has been officially admitted , so why reopen the ghastly business now , at a time when rescinding the apology would make Japan ’ s already-strained relations with China and South Korea many times worse ?
If Abe and his allies were cosmopolitan in their outlook , with a deep understanding of , or concern for , other countries , the decision to revisit the 1993 apology would indeed be extraordinary .
But , as is true of many political leaders , especially on the nationalistic right , they are chauvinistic provincials whose concerns are almost entirely domestic . In their efforts to revise the historical record , they are not really thinking of Koreans or Chinese , but of political adversaries at home .
The views of the Japanese on their country ’ s wartime history are deeply divided , reflecting political battle lines drawn in the immediate aftermath of the war , when Japan was under Allied occupation .
The United States , which ran the occupation , was keen to reform Japanese society in such a way that another war would be unthinkable .
Worship of the emperor was abolished , though Hirohito remained on his throne .
Education was purged of all militaristic and “ feudal ” elements , including favorable references to the samurai spirit .
A new pacifist constitution , written by the Americans , banned the use of armed force .
And Japan ’ s wartime leaders were tried in Tokyo by Allied judges for “ crimes against peace ” and “ crimes against humanity . ”
Most Japanese , heartily sick of war and military bullying , were happy to go along with all of this .
But there was always a right-wing minority that felt humiliated and resentful of the loss of national pride and , more important , national sovereignty , for Japan ’ s security would henceforth have to depend entirely on the protection offered by the US .
One of the main leaders of this group of disgruntled nationalists was Nobusuke Kishi , Abe ’ s grandfather .
Kishi ’ s aim was to regain Japanese pride and sovereignty by revising the constitution and reviving old-fashioned patriotism , thus undoing some of the American educational reforms . He failed , because most Japanese were still allergic to anything that smacked of militarism .
Until not long ago , there was a strong left-wing current in education and some of the media that used Japan ’ s horrendous wartime record as an argument against any kind of revisionism .
But , as long as the Japanese left used history to make this political argument , the nationalists pushed back by claiming that stories of wartime atrocities had been greatly exaggerated .
Books about the infamous Nanking Massacre of 1937 , or the enslavement of “ comfort women ” in military brothels , were denounced as “ historical masochism ” or dismissed as “ the Tokyo Trial View of History . ”
The left was accused of being complicit in spreading foreign – Chinese , Korean , or American – propaganda .
This , then , is the modern Japanese version of populism : the “ liberal elites , ” by falsifying the history of Japan ’ s glorious war to “ liberate Asia , ” undermined the Japanese people ’ s moral fiber .
Because the ideological collapse of left-wing politics in Japan has been as precipitous as in much of the Western world , the so-called liberal elites have lost much of their former influence .
As a result , the voice of the nationalist right has grown louder in recent years .
That is why Abe can get away with appointing cronies to the board of NHK , the national broadcasting company , who openly claim that the military brothels were an entirely private enterprise and that the Nanking Massacre was a foreign fabrication .
Historical truth is not the point ; political mastery is .
Japan ’ s prime minister is playing a risky game .
He is upsetting allies in Asia , embarrassing the US , and making bad relations with China even worse . Like Putin , he is driving himself and his country into further isolation for entirely domestic reasons .
In a region increasingly dominated by Chinese power , he will be without Asian friends .
And that is where Abe ’ s behavior becomes truly perverse .
After all , a Japan that is isolated in Asia will be even more dependent on the US , the wartime victor , which Abe and his nationalist allies hold responsible for the postwar order that they seek to revise .
