Jailing the Messengers
WASHINGTON , DC – As China ’ s clout in global affairs grows , the world is watching more closely than ever to see what kind of great power it will become .
Next month , when jailed Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo receives the Nobel Peace Prize , attention will be drawn away from the more encouraging aspects of what China ’ s leaders like to call their country ’ s “ rise , ” and toward their persistent mistreatment of its most outspoken citizens .
Already , Chinese officials ’ ham-handed response to the award has undercut their cherished – and lavishly financed – mission to project China ’ s “ soft power ” around the globe .
Liu won the prize because his lifelong commitment to political activism makes him exceptional .
But we ought to pay equally close attention to another jailed Chinese activist , one whose plight at the hands of China ’ s justice system is just as troubling as Liu ’ s – and far more revealing of the boundaries of permissible dissent .
A Beijing court recently convicted Zhao Lianhai , a 38-year-old former advertising salesman , of “ using a popular social issue to incite a mob … to seriously disrupt social order , ” and sentenced him to two and a half years in prison .
Unlike Liu , Zhao had not called for change in China ’ s political system .
Rather , he had spent two years rallying around the almost boringly uncontroversial notion that his family and many others deserve justice from the Sanlu Dairy Group , a company that gave their children kidney stones by illegally doctoring its milk powder with the industrial chemical melamine .
Zhao did not set out to become an activist .
His three-year-old son was lucky to recover quickly after he and 300,000 other children fell ill after drinking the adulterated milk in 2008 .
But some of the children urinated blood , others have suffered long-term health problems , and at least six died . Zhao , who once worked for the government ’ s own product-safety watchdog and lived in the capital , saw an opportunity to help less well-positioned families .
He set up Web sites to help them exchange medical information , attract media attention , and file lawsuits demanding compensation .
Initially , the campaign seemed to succeed .
A massive recall of Chinese milk ensued , and the Sanlu Dairy Group collapsed .
Two of Sanlu ’ s suppliers were executed , and its chairwoman was sentenced to life in prison .
China ’ s National People ’ s Congress enacted a new food-safety law .
But , after Zhao and other parents protested that the government ’ s compensation plan was inadequate to cover the cost of their children ’ s ongoing medical care , they began to receive threats from local police .
Zhao ’ s Web sites were repeatedly shut down , and the group ’ s lawyers received phone calls from authorities urging them to drop the case .
In late 2009 , Zhao was officially arrested ; he has been in police custody ever since .
Zhao ’ s campaign had been based on the widespread belief in China that while local officials or individual businesspeople may engage in venal or criminal activities , the central government , once informed of the truth , will see to it that justice is done .
After all , the same Chinese leaders who reject Liu ’ s calls for political reform argue that what Chinese citizens really want are not “ Western-style ” rights , but basic necessities – clean water , economic opportunities , safe food – that allow their families to prosper , and which China ’ s own homegrown political system can adequately protect .
But Zhao ’ s conviction , like the mistreatment of other Chinese whistleblowers , sends the message that when faced with a perceived threat to social stability , China ’ s legal institutions are not up to the task of providing basic protections to its citizens .
A discussion thread on the case on Tianya , a popular Chinese Internet portal , was soon flooded with comments expressing bafflement and outrage at the verdict .
“ I don ’ t have children of my own , ” wrote one , “ but reading this makes my heart hurt . ”
Another wrote : “ If things go on this way , our country doesn ’ t have a future . ”
In Hong Kong , Zhao ’ s sentence has sparked popular protests outside of government offices and formal objections from local officials .
Reactions like these ought to be far more worrying to China ’ s leaders than any rebuke from a group of Norwegians .
Zhao ’ s allies are not out to “ humiliate China . ” Rather , like those around the world who believe China deserves credit for its impressive achievements – indeed , like Liu Xiaobo himself – they want their country to develop governing institutions befitting its growing economic stature .
So do China ’ s neighbors and global partners – and for reasons that have as much to do with self-interest as political values .
If China is to honor its commitments on a wide range of international issues – trade , product safety , and environmental protection , to name just a few – and command genuine trust and respect at home and abroad , it will need to embrace people like Zhao , not silence them .
