The Irrelevant German Consumer
MUNICH – With global rebalancing set to be high on the agenda at the next G-7 and G-20 meetings , Germany , with its persistent export surplus , will again come under pressure to boost domestic demand and household consumption .
But the German consumer is a sideshow .
What is needed is an investment surge in Germany and Europe , and a coordinated exit from ultra-loose monetary policies .
Massive external-account imbalances were a major factor behind the global financial and economic crisis that erupted in 2008 , as well as in the eurozone instability that followed .
Now the world economy is in the process of rebalancing – but not in a way that many people had expected .
Asia ’ s formerly huge external surpluses have declined astonishingly fast , and Japan ’ s trade balance has even slipped into deficit .
China ’ s current-account surplus has fallen to 2 % of GDP , from 10 % in 2007 . Investment is still the Chinese economy ’ s main driver , but it has led to soaring debt and a bloated shadow banking sector , which the authorities are trying to rein in .
The European Union , however , has built up a large external surplus , owing mainly to positive trade balances in the eurozone . The EU ’ s current-account surplus in 2014 , at around $ 250 billion , will be even higher than that of emerging Asia .
With oil prices still above $ 100 a barrel , the combined surplus of oil-exporting countries is of a similar magnitude .
The United States , meanwhile , continues to run a sizeable current-account deficit of around $ 350-400 billion .
The surprise here is the continued growth in the EU ’ s surplus .
The collapse in imports suffered by bailed-out countries – Greece , Ireland , Portugal , and Spain – was entirely predictable , given how sharply their economies declined .
But few economists expected that these countries ’ exports would improve as quickly as they did , especially in a subdued international environment .
While Germany ’ s current-account surplus is roughly where it was in 2007 , the combined external balance of the bailout beneficiaries plus Italy ( which has been part of the trade turnaround ) has swung from a pre-crisis deficit of more than $ 300 billion to an expected surplus of around $ 60 billion this year .
Looking ahead , the appreciating euro ( another surprise , especially to the many observers who doubted its survival less than two years ago ) will compress the eurozone ’ s current-account surplus to some extent .
An exchange rate of close to $ 1.40 poses a challenge for many European exporters , including German companies .
And the euro has revalued even more against the yen and a number of emerging-market currencies .
Nonetheless , the European surplus is too large to ignore , and Germany in particular will be asked once more to rebalance its economy toward higher domestic demand , which for many people implies the need for a fiscal boost .
But the government is not obliging : Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble has just presented a balanced budget for 2015 – the first since 1969 .
And , while some observers are calling for Germany to “ end wage restraint ” and thereby encourage higher household spending , this has actually happened already .
There is , however , a lot that the government could do about investment , which has fallen by almost four percentage points of GDP since 2000 , to just over 17 % in 2013 – low by international standards .
The government could shift more government spending toward infrastructure investment . But , even more important , it should improve conditions for corporate investment at home , rather than watch German businesses move their capital expenditures abroad .
Germany ’ s attractiveness to investors would rise with simpler and more investment-friendly taxation , improved incentives for business start-ups and R & amp ; D , less bureaucracy and red tape , and no further energy-cost increases .
Getting there will take time . But , given the favorable earnings situation and the corporate sector ’ s large cash balances , a rebalancing of the tax system could have a rapid impact .
Investment from retained earnings should be as attractive as debt financing .
And some temporary adjustments of depreciation allowances could kick-start capital spending .
The need for more investment in transport , telecoms , energy , and education certainly is not only a German issue .
Given most European governments ’ debt problems , the challenge is to attract more private capital into these areas .
Improved regulatory conditions for long-term investments and savings would help . So would expansion of financing instruments for infrastructure investment – for example , by substantially increasing the supply of project bonds supported by the European Investment Bank .
Indeed , why not create “ European Infrastructure Bonds , ” backed by revenues generated by the investments or tax income from the countries that emit EIBs ? This would not only spur jobs and long-term growth ; it would also stem the rise in Europe ’ s external surplus .
But the challenge of rebalancing the global economy is also closely connected to central banks ’ monetary policies .
With credit and asset bubbles slowly but surely reappearing , the authorities ’ goal should be to keep growth on a balanced and sustainable path – and thus to discouraging excessive risk taking .
This justifies the US Federal Reserve ’ s gradual exit from ultra-loose policies .
Somewhat surprisingly , the Fed ’ s reduction of its monthly asset purchases has been accompanied so far by dollar weakness against the euro , which is fostering external adjustment .
Looking forward , however , this may change .
If the Fed remains alone in scaling back its monetary stimulus and bond yields rise further , the dollar will almost certainly strengthen .
Clearly , a coordinated effort to limit exchange-rate variations is advisable .
If all countries try to keep their currencies weak , monetary expansion on a global scale will be over-extended .
The fact that inflationary pressure is still low is not a reason to postpone planning an exit from ultra-loose policy ; on the contrary , the time for such discussions is when inflation is low and markets are calm .
Twenty years ago , markets panicked and bond rates soared as central banks hiked interest rates in the face of rising inflation .
They should not repeat that mistake by waiting for inflationary pressures – fueled by rising oil and commodity prices and economic recovery – to return .
