An Accidental Currency War ?
LAGUNA BEACH – Six and a half years after the global financial crisis , central banks in emerging and developed economies alike are continuing to pursue unprecedentedly activist – and unpredictable – monetary policy . How much road remains in this extraordinary journey ?
In the last month alone , Australia , India , Mexico , and others have cut interest rates .
China has reduced reserve requirements on banks .
Denmark has taken its official deposit rate into negative territory .
Even the most stability-obsessed countries have made unexpected moves .
Beyond cutting interest rates , Switzerland suddenly abandoned its policy of partly pegging the franc 's value to that of the euro .
A few days later , Singapore unexpectedly altered its exchange-rate regime , too .
More consequential , the European Central Bank has committed to a large and relatively open-ended program of large-scale asset purchases .
The ECB acted despite a growing chorus of warnings that monetary stimulus is not sufficient to promote durable growth , and that it encourages excessive risk-taking in financial markets , which could ultimately threaten economic stability and prosperity ( as it did in 2008 ) .
Even the US Federal Reserve , which is presiding over an economy that is performing far better than its developed-world counterparts , has reiterated the need for " patience " when it comes to raising interest rates .
This stance will be difficult to maintain , if continued robust job creation is accompanied by much-needed wage growth .
This new round of central-bank activism reflects persistent concerns about economic growth .
Despite a once-unthinkable amount of monetary stimulus , global output remains well below potential , with the potential itself at risk of being suppressed .
Making matters worse , weak demand and debt overhangs are fueling concerns about deflation in the eurozone and Japan .
Anticipating falling prices , households could postpone their consumption decisions , and companies could defer investment , pushing the economy into a downward spiral from which it would be very difficult to escape .
If weak demand and high debt were the only factors in play , the latest round of monetary stimulus would be analytically straightforward .
But they are not .
Key barriers to economic growth remain largely unaddressed – and central banks cannot tackle them alone .
For starters , central banks cannot deliver the structural components – for example , infrastructure investments , better-functioning labor markets , and pro-growth budget reforms – needed to drive robust and sustained recovery .
Nor can they resolve the aggregate-demand imbalance – that is , the disparity between the ability and the willingness of households , companies , and governments to spend .
And they cannot eliminate pockets of excessive indebtedness that inhibit new investment and growth .
It is little wonder , then , that monetary-policy instruments have become increasingly unreliable in generating economic growth , steady inflation , and financial stability .
Central banks have been forced onto a policy path that is far from ideal – not least because they increasingly risk inciting some of the zero-sum elements of an undeclared currency war .
With the notable exception of the Fed , central banks fear the impact of an appreciating currency on domestic companies ' competitiveness too much not to intervene ; indeed , an increasing number of them are working actively to weaken their currencies .
The " divergence " of economic performance and monetary policy among three of the world 's most systemically important economies – the eurozone , Japan , and the United States – has added another layer of confusion for the rest of the world , with particularly significant implications for small , open economies .
Indeed , the surprising actions taken by Singapore and Switzerland were a direct response to this divergence , as was Denmark 's decision to halt all sales of government securities , in order to push interest rates lower and counter upward pressure on the krone .
Of course , not all currencies can depreciate against one another at the same time .
But the current wave of efforts , despite being far from optimal , can persist for a while , so long as at least two conditions are met .
The first condition is America 's continued willingness to tolerate a sharp appreciation of the dollar 's exchange rate .
Given warnings from US companies about the impact of a stronger dollar on their earnings – not to mention signs of declining inward tourism and a deteriorating trade balance – this is not guaranteed .
Still , as long as the US maintains its pace of overall growth and job creation – a feasible outcome , given the relatively small contribution of foreign economic activity to the country 's GDP – these developments are unlikely to trigger a political response for quite a while .
Indeed , America 's intricate trade relations with the rest of the world – which place households and companies on both sides of the production and consumption equation – make it particularly difficult to stimulate significant political support for protectionism there .
The second condition for broad-based currency depreciation is financial markets ' willingness to assume and maintain risk postures that are not yet validated by the economy 's fundamentals .
With central banks – the de facto best friend of financial markets these days – pushing for increasingly large financial risk-taking ( as a means of stimulating productive economic risk-taking ) , this is no easy feat . But , given the danger that this poses , one hopes that they succeed .
In any case , central banks will have to back off eventually .
The question is how hard the global economy 's addiction to partial monetary-policy fixes will be to break – and whether a slide into a currency war could accelerate the timetable .
