Rebooting China
MILAN – Despite China ’ s widely discussed economic slowdown , annual GDP growth remains above 7 % , implying little cause for alarm – at least for now .
The question is whether the government ’ s efforts to implement structural reforms and transform the economy ’ s growth model are working – that is , whether internal imbalances continue to threaten long-term economic performance .
Given that China remains the global economy ’ s most important growth engine , the answer matters to everyone .
Assessing China ’ s economic stability requires considering the conflicts and tensions affecting the country – none of which advances the cause of growth .
For starters , China ’ s territorial disputes with many of its neighbors , including Japan , Vietnam , and the Philippines , are undermining regional peace , not to mention economic integration .
Moreover , China ’ s relationship with the United States is deteriorating , owing to conflict over America ’ s foreign-policy “ pivot ” toward Asia and disputes over cyber security .
China has already restricted access to its market for some US-based technology firms , and more such actions may follow .
Meanwhile , China ’ s domestic political system is being shaken up by President Xi Jinping ’ s anti-corruption campaign – an effort that is essential to boosting the government ’ s accountability and legitimacy as it pursues deep systemic reforms .
But , at a time of rising international tension , there is a risk that Xi ’ s campaign could mutate into a broader assault on political dissent attributed to “ corrupt ” foreign influences .
Since China launched its process of “ reform and opening up ” more than three decades ago , it has benefited from its willingness to consider – if not adapt – foreign ideas .
In many areas – economic policy in a market economy , business management , technology , energy , the environment , and health care , to name a few – selective learning has accelerated China ’ s development ( and benefited the countries that have learned from Chinese experience ) .
Lumping outside influences together with a legitimate anti-corruption campaign would undermine this positive dynamic , with potentially serious consequences for China ’ s quest to transform its growth model and achieve high-income status .
The good news is that the data – while incomplete – show progress in China ’ s economic transformation .
Weak growth in China ’ s major export markets ( particularly in Europe , North America , and Japan ) , together with rapidly rising domestic wages and incomes , is driving the tradable part of the economy toward higher-value components in global supply chains .
Meanwhile , inflation , rising wages , and the renminbi ’ s nominal appreciation have driven up the real effective exchange rate , though this trend has been tempered , to some extent , by the euro ’ s persistently high value .
How businesses handle this transition – which is already contributing to China ’ s growth slowdown – will determine the transformation ’ s progress .
China has no choice but to change its growth model .
Its share in global markets is now so large that the economy could be demand-constrained for the first time in four decades .
The only way to avoid this outcome is by pursuing a balanced program comprising high-return investment , high-value government services , and a higher level of household consumption .
Public and private investment – which has served as a key driver of China ’ s growth over the last four decades – can play a central role in expanding domestic demand , but only if returns are high . While low-return investments generate aggregate demand , they do not increase future income or productive potential , and thus do not foster sustainable growth .
Given this , China ’ s leaders must use a combination of financial-sector reforms and improved public-sector incentives to increase access to capital in sectors with high potential rates of return .
In fact , this process is underway with the licensing of new private banks and the development of China ’ s shadow banking system .
Given the limited capacity of investment demand to drive growth , high-value government services and increased household consumption are also needed .
As it stands , private consumption accounts for an unusually small share of China ’ s GDP .
But rising wages – partly the result of mandated minimum-wage increases in some regions – are boosting household incomes , and there is already some evidence that the downward trend in consumption ’ s share of GDP has reversed .
Consider the telecommunications-equipment industry , which has been growing at more than 15 % annually in the past couple of years .
Gross merchandise volume in online retail sales is approaching CN ¥ 2 trillion ( $ 316 billion ) , and growing at a rate of 40-60 % annually .
Many other industry segments serving domestic demand are also growing at double-digit rates , suggesting that domestic consumption is already making a more significant contribution to China ’ s GDP growth .
But there remains the question of whether consumption share growth is sustainable – that is , whether it is the result of income share growth or rising leverage .
If it is supported by excessive leverage , effectively shifting future consumption to the present , China could face a significant slowdown – or even a major crisis .
Leverage has undoubtedly increased at unsustainable rates in recent years .
But , given that debt growth began from a low base , it will not necessarily lead to a crisis – as long as appropriate risk management is in place .
Most important , shadow banks ’ activities must be regulated in a way that enhances transparency and deters excessive risk-taking , while allowing the sector to continue to contribute to financial-sector development by providing savings options to households and credit to small and medium-size firms .
As for the official banking sector , liberalization of interest rates on deposits , scheduled for 2016 , will reduce financial repression and implicit investment subsidies .
That , in turn , should help to rebalance the demand side of the growth pattern .
Such complex structural changes cannot be perfectly synchronized and thus are likely to be accompanied by a dip in growth rates .
The government has expressed a willingness to accept somewhat slower growth in pursuit of a more stable , sustainable economy .
But whether a slowdown is the start of a trend or a temporary part of a complex transition , will not be apparent from the start .
Ensuring that it is the latter will require the patience and discipline – in both domestic and foreign policy – befitting the major transformation now underway .
