Japan ’ s Options
TOKYO – The current tensions between China and Japan have revived talk about how far Japan has fallen since its glory years of the 1980 ’ s .
To the extent that this sense of decline is grounded in reality , can Japan recover ?
Japan ’ s economy has suffered two decades of slow growth because of the poor policy decisions that followed the collapse of the country ’ s massive asset-price bubble in the early 1990 ’ s .
In 2010 , China ’ s economy surpassed Japan ’ s in total size , though it is only one-sixth the size in per capita terms .
In 1988 , eight of the top ten companies in the world by market capitalization were Japanese ; today , none is .
But , despite its recent poor performance , Japan retains impressive power resources .
It possesses the world ’ s third largest national economy , sophisticated industries , and the best-equipped conventional military forces among Asian countries .
Only two decades ago , many Americans feared being overtaken after Japanese per capita income surpassed that of the United States .
Books predicted a Japanese-led Pacific bloc that would exclude the US , and even an eventual war between the two countries .
Futurologist Herman Kahn forecast that Japan would become a nuclear superpower , and that the transition in Japan ’ s role would be like “ the change brought about in European and world affairs in the 1870 ’ s by the rise of Prussia . ”
These views extrapolated an impressive Japanese record .
Today , however , they serve as a useful reminder about the danger of linear projections based on rapidly rising power resources .
On the eve of World War II , Japan accounted for 5 % of the world ’ s industrial production .
Devastated by the war , it did not regain that level until 1964 .
From 1950 to 1974 , Japan averaged a remarkable 10 % annual growth rate , and by the 1980 ’ s was the world ’ s second largest national economy , accounting for 15 % of global output .
Japan also became the world ’ s largest creditor and largest donor of foreign aid .
Its technology was roughly equal to that of the US – and even slightly ahead in some manufacturing branches .
Japan armed itself only lightly ( restricting military expenditures to about 1 % of GNP ) , and focused on economic growth .
This was not the first time that Japan had impressively reinvented itself .
A century and a half ago , Japan became the first non-Western country to adapt successfully to modern globalization .
After centuries of isolation , Japan ’ s Meiji restoration chose selectively from the rest of the world , and within 50 years the country had become strong enough to defeat a European great power , in the Russo-Japanese War .
Can Japan reinvent itself again ?
In 2000 , a prime minister ’ s commission on Japan ’ s goals in the twenty-first century called for just that .
Little has happened .
Given economic stagnation , the political system ’ s weaknesses , the aging of the population , and resistance to immigration , fundamental change will not be easy .
But Japan retains a high standard of living , a highly skilled labor force , a stable society , and areas of technological and manufacturing leadership .
Moreover , its culture ( both traditional and popular ) , overseas development assistance , and support of international institutions provide resources for soft , or attractive , power .
But it seems unlikely that a revived Japan , a decade or two hence , could become a global challenger economically or militarily , as was predicted two decades ago .
Roughly the size of California , Japan will never have the geographical or demographic scale of China or the US .
And its soft power is undercut by ethnocentric attitudes and policies .
Some Japanese politicians talk about revising Article 9 of the constitution , which restricts Japan ’ s forces to self defense , and a few have spoken of nuclear armament .
Both seem unwise and unlikely now .
Alternatively , if Japan were to ally with China , the two countries ’ combined resources would make for a potent coalition .
In 2006 , China became Japan ’ s largest trade partner , and the new government formed by the Democratic Party of Japan in 2009 sought improved bilateral relations .
But an alliance also seems unlikely .
Not only have the wounds of the 1930 ’ s failed to heal , but China and Japan have conflicting visions of Japan ’ s proper place in Asia and the world .
For example , China has blocked Japan ’ s efforts to become a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council .
More recently , after Japanese maritime officials arrested a Chinese fishing-boat captain near the disputed Senkaku islands , China responded harshly with arrests of Japanese businessmen , cancelation of student visits , and suspension of exports of rare-earth minerals upon which key Japanese industries depend .
China ’ s actions shocked many Japanese and undercut its soft power in Japan .
As one Japanese professor put it , in football terms , China scored an “ own goal . ”
In the highly unlikely prospect that the US were to withdraw from the East Asian region , Japan might join a Chinese bandwagon , but Japan is more likely to maintain its American alliance to preserve its independence from China .
The main danger for Japan today is a tendency to turn inward , rather than becoming a global civilian power that realizes its great potential to produce global public goods .
For example , Japan ’ s aid budget has declined , and only half as many Japanese students study overseas as did two decades ago .
An inward-looking Japan would be a loss for the entire world .
