Catching Up at Different Speeds
PARIS – With weak demand in advanced countries now impeding growth in emerging economies , including major players in Asia and Latin America , many are arguing that the era of income convergence has come to an end .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
As I have argued before , convergence of emerging countries ’ real average incomes , in the aggregate , with advanced countries ’ incomes is likely to continue into the 2020 ’ s .
That process started in the late 1980 ’ s , and continued unabated , except in the years around the Asian financial crisis in 1997-1998 . The pace of convergence accelerated further during , and just after , the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 : the aggregate average differential in per capita income growth increased to more than four percentage points in the 2008-2012 period , from a little more than two percentage points in the two decades before .
As the advanced economies recover , however weakly , the growth differential is likely to narrow again , perhaps to about two percentage points , which still implies steady convergence at a decent pace .
In that sense , it is not “ the end of the party ” for emerging markets , as some claimed early last summer , when US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke ’ s suggestion of a possible “ taper ” of the Fed ’ s policy of quantitative easing triggered a “ mini-crisis ” in several of the more vulnerable emerging markets .
These economies have since recovered a significant part of the lost ground in terms of exchange rates and asset prices .
A major part of the economic-convergence process that has been taking place since the late 1980 ’ s has been due to “ catch-up ” growth .
The emerging markets developed the institutions and the skills base needed to import and adapt technology , which is easier than generating new technology from scratch . The pace of catch-up growth declines only gradually over time , as the less advanced economies slowly move closer to the technological frontier .
The catch-up process also takes place within countries , as labor moves from low-productivity rural activities to higher-productivity urban activities , and as low-productivity firms in all sectors emulate their more advanced domestic counterparts .
Moreover , the transfer and diffusion of technology has been facilitated greatly over the last few decades by increased foreign direct investment , the information revolution , which has facilitated access to knowledge , increased trade , and the globalization of financial markets .
These factors apply to emerging countries generally .
Why , then , do Latin American economists seem to share a cautious – even pessimistic – mood about future growth and convergence in the region , whereas most Asian economists , while conceding that further structural reforms are needed , believe strongly that Asia will continue to converge rather rapidly ?
Beyond global factors that apply to all , rapid catch-up growth requires sufficient investment in both physical and human capital .
New manufacturing techniques and new products or product improvements are usually embodied in new machines and skills .
China has invested about 43 % of its GDP , on average , during the 2000-2013 period .
Emerging Asia , excluding China but including India , has invested about 28 % of GDP over the same period , while the investment share for Latin America has been just 21 % .
That alone probably explains much of the difference among China , in a category of its own , emerging Asia , and Latin America .
The quality of skills and education cannot be measured as easily by a single figure , but there is ample evidence that Latin America has also lagged behind most of Asia when it comes to skills accumulation .
Many other factors , of course , influence growth and convergence : macroeconomic stability , the efficiency and robustness of the financial sector , the terms of trade , the quality of public administration , demographic factors , and political factors .
There also is variation within regions , including among provinces of China .
( Likewise , Africa ’ s growth performance has improved spectacularly since the turn of the century , but variance within the continent is even larger than elsewhere . ) Nonetheless , in terms of the likely strength of the convergence process that globalization has facilitated , it is important to distinguish between Latin America and Asia , and , within Asia , to distinguish China from the rest of the continent .
China ’ s economy will most likely continue to converge rapidly , though its annual growth rate may fall from 9 % to 7 % .
The rest of emerging Asia will also converge reasonably quickly , though not as quickly as China .
Latin America , however , will likely converge only very slowly in the absence of major structural reforms that increase its ability to invest and improve the quality of education .
There will surely be exceptions to this general trend , but there are some stable regional characteristics .
Overall , however , basic economics , which has always stressed the need to save and invest in order to grow , still explains a lot .
Latin America and Asia operate in the same global economy , with access to similar technology and markets .
If Latin America invests around 20 % of its national income in a sustained manner , while emerging Asia invests close to 30 % – including investments in education – emerging Asia will converge significantly more rapidly .
