KGB Petroleum
MOSCOW – There is one key thing to keep in mind when talking about Russia : despite what you see on the surface , it never really changes .
Buildings , fashions , and even regimes ( at least in name ) may change , but the country ’ s core , its secret-police-state legacy , is never far from the surface .
Today , the contemporary version of the KGB , the Federal Security Bureau ( FSB ) , runs Russia ’ s energy businesses in much the same top-down way that the KGB once ran the Soviet Union , with business always subordinate to the regime ’ s political needs .
Since current Prime Minister Vladimir Putin became Russia ’ s president in 2000 , the country ’ s vast energy wealth has become increasingly concentrated in state hands .
And the actual hands at the controls of the world ’ s premier natural-gas economy are those of the FSB .
Indeed , today the KGB / FSB is Russia ’ s primary business school .
Think of the graduates as holding a master ’ s degree in brutal ( and brutally inefficient ) administration .
Former spies now sit atop the commanding heights of Russia ’ s energy-centric economy , but their role is not all that different from what it was in Soviet days .
Back then , the USSR promoted its interests through satellite states and military power .
Today , Russia flexes its might through its energy companies .
No company exemplifies this more than Gazprom , the state-run energy behemoth , which has gobbled up oil assets , media , banking interests , and farms within Russia , and seeks to do the same with downstream energy assets outside Russia , particularly in Europe .
So it should be no surprise that Gazprom ’ s former chairman is now Russia ’ s president , Dmitry Medvedev , who was replaced by a former KGB general , Valery Golubyev .
Among the company ’ s other senior leaders are more ex-KGB men , including Sergei Ushakov and Konstantin Chuichenko .
And what Gazprom is to natural gas , Rosneft ( almost ) is to oil .
In 2003 , Rosneft became an oil giant by grabbing most of Yukos , after that oil firm ’ s head and chief shareholder , Mikhail Khodorkovsky , was arbitrarily prosecuted and imprisoned for embezzlement and tax evasion .
Rosneft ’ s chairman , Igor Sechin , a former KGB agent in Angola , is also the main ideologue of Russia ’ s FSB-managed economy .
When not overseeing Rosneft , Sechin just happens to be Vladimir Putin ’ s first deputy prime minister .
Sechin ’ s closest aide , Andrei Patrushev , comes from a similar background .
He is a graduate of the FSB academy and is the son of the former FSB director , Nikolai Patrushev .
The list goes on and on .
About 30 % of the Kremlin elite used to work with the secret services or still do , and an astounding 80 % are associated with either the Russian or Soviet-era military-industrial complex .
Whereas the KGB once shaped Kremlin decisions to move troops into Hungary or Czechoslovakia , today the same calculating minds determine how Gazprom is to be deployed in the service of Russia ’ s foreign policy .
Through its control of natural gas pipelines , Gazprom is by far Russia ’ s chief tool for maintaining influence in the former Soviet former republics of Central Asia , the Caucasus , Belarus , Ukraine , and even in the Baltic states ( now EU members ) .
Gazprom is also Russia ’ s main lever of influence in the EU as a whole , because the company supplies 30 % of the Union ’ s natural gas needs .
But the global economic crisis has weakened Russia ’ s oil economy , shattering the KGB ’ s dreams of a return to superpower status .
While energy prices remain high by historical standards , Gazprom now operates at a loss .
Its investment plans are overextended outside of Russia – part of the imperial policy – while domestic exploration for new sources is declining , as foreign companies have been forced to surrender stakes in projects such as the huge gas development on Sakhalin Island .
In addition , Gazprom is now overpaying its suppliers , because its long-term contracts are for prices that are now far above market prices .
The Sechin-led Rosneft is in the same incompetently managed boat .
So the “ resource curse ” has hit Russia with a vengeance .
Corruption on every level of the state bureaucracy is evident , while the state has consumed the economy ’ s oil revenue with little to show for it in terms of investment or improved services .
As in the 1980 ’ s , when Mikhail Gorbachev came to power with no choice but to introduce his polices of
After all , the Soviet Union collapsed not because of Ronald Reagan ’ s military build-up in the 1980 ’ s , with which communism was unable to compete , but because the Soviet command economy had already become obsolete in the 1970 ’ s .
Similarly , while the world today searches for ways to confront dependence on fossil fuels and seeks other , cleaner energy sources , Russia continues to live off its oil and gas , which only encourages it to delay the economic and political restructuring that it will need to succeed in the long term .
