Mexico ’ s Breakout Moment ?
MEXICO CITY – Less than two years into Enrique Peña Nieto ’ s presidency , Mexico is implementing an ambitious structural-reform package designed to lift its economy out of a multi-decade low-growth trap and create new opportunities for its citizens .
The reforms involve restructuring economic sectors once deemed politically untouchable , and are backed by constitutional amendments and a bold legislative agenda .
Indeed , thanks to the “ Pact for Mexico , ” much of this agenda has the support not only of Peña Nieto ’ s government , but also of the two main opposition parties .
This unique arrangement soon will be tested as the reforms begin to bite , and the outcome could have important and lasting consequences for efforts to implement structural reforms elsewhere around the world .
Such reforms are never easy to initiate and are usually difficult to complete .
Politicians advocate them when they are in opposition , but rarely embrace and sustain them when in government .
The reason is simple : front-loaded costs and back-loaded benefits make structural reforms politically perilous .
Governments that do embark on structural reform often find it frustrating to wait for that often-elusive “ critical mass ” of revitalized sectors to materialize ; and economists find it very difficult to predict the timing and magnitude of the growth liftoff that should follow .
Complicating matters further , the inevitability of unanticipated developments , whether homegrown or external in origin , means that course corrections often are needed .
As a result , there are only a few good historical examples – including China , Poland , and South Korea – of successful structural reforms .
And many dismiss countries that succeed as “ special ” or “ unique ” – and thus of little value as a model for other countries to emulate .
Against this background , it is fascinating to observe what is happening in Mexico .
The “ why , ” “ how , ” and “ what ” of the country ’ s ambitious structural-reform efforts could – and should – have important signaling effects around the world .
Mexican officials are the first to point out their country ’ s relatively poor economic performance over the last 33 years .
Average annual growth , at only 2.4 % , is well below what is needed and possible for a country with such enormous human and natural endowments , a prime location on the United States ’ doorstep , and considerable catch-up potential .
Moreover , Mexico ’ s growth record is far inferior to that of some other countries that started with a lot less and yet leap-frogged it ( and other Latin American economies ) .
Policymakers could easily dodge responsibility for Mexico ’ s middling performance by hiding behind the various emerging-market crises , Latin America ’ s “ lost decade , ” and the impact of the 2008 global financial crisis and the subsequent Great Recession .
But Mexico ’ s officials are not looking for excuses .
Instead , they point to domestic indicators showing poor productivity and competitiveness , both over time and relative to other countries .
They also note that Mexico ’ s impressive accomplishments in terms of macroeconomic stabilization , while necessary , have not proved sufficient to unleash the country ’ s growth potential .
Yes , Mexico has built strong domestic and foreign financial buffers , put its fiscal house in order , opened up its economy to the outside world , and concluded many free-trade arrangements , led by the North American Free Trade Agreement .
But now the time has come to build on this progress by simultaneously reforming five large and influential sectors : education , energy , finance , telecommunications , and the labor market .
And Peña Nieto ’ s government has worked hard – and successfully – in recent months to adopt the necessary constitutional amendments and enact initial legislation .
At least three of these areas – education , energy , and the labor market – were long deemed untouchable or nearly so .
Indeed , I remember my own experience in Mexico in the late 1980s and early 1990s , when I was part of the International Monetary Fund ’ s team working with officials there to assist with the country ’ s recovery from the Latin American debt crisis .
Any mention of energy reforms was met with immediate resistance , including references to national sovereignty and constitutional protections .
Today , Mexico is seeking long-term foreign investors to support ambitious and comprehensive reform efforts , with foreign participation particularly important for infrastructure investments in telecom networks , toll roads , gas pipelines , and , down the road , the oil sector .
All of this is anchored by a clear political mandate , as well as by Peña Nieto ’ s stated personal commitment to overcome three decades of inadequate growth and productivity deficits .
Given the possibility of a domestic political backlash , the inherent complexities of implementing a multi-dimensional reform package , and the cyclical headwinds implied by still-sluggish growth in the US ( which accounts for roughly 80 % of exports ) , Mexico may need both anchors if it is to sustain reform momentum .
Fortunately , the government has room for countercyclical policy , and has already responded with more accommodating fiscal and monetary policies .
Mexico has a good chance to realize its impressive structural-reform agenda .
Doing so would give the rest of the world an important example of how such programs can be designed and implemented for the long term , thereby enabling a critical mass of strong sectors – and thus faster growth and greater prosperity – to be achieved and citizens ’ legitimate aspirations to be met .
