Football Versus Freedom
NEW YORK – Last year , Brazilian authorities were taken by surprise when a wave of protests erupted during the Confederations Cup soccer tournament , a sort of warm-up to this year ’ s main event , the World Cup , which will be staged in 12 cities across the country beginning in June .
The protesters , complaining that the $ 11 billion spent on new stadiums and other World Cup-related infrastructure would be better invested in improving Brazil ’ s poor public services , were met with official violence .
And yet the protests have continued throughout the year .
Not surprisingly , soccer ’ s international governing body , FIFA , and the World Cup ’ s corporate sponsors are worried – so worried that they and Brazilian government officials are planning carefully for protests during the month-long tournament .
Worse , a raft of proposed security legislation would almost certainly restrict freedom of assembly .
The trouble with this backlash is that the World Cup is merely a focal point for a diffuse set of popular grievances concerning issues ranging from education to police corruption and abuse of power .
Last June , a million people took to the streets across the country .
In Brasilia , 45,000 protesters simply walked into the capital ’ s legislative district and stood quietly .
Recent demonstrations have followed on the heels of the government ’ s forced relocation of low-income Brazilians from their favelas overlooking Rio de Janeiro into newly built housing far away – an effort aimed at preventing the World Cup from being marred by scenes of poverty and unrest .
Last week , protests erupted in the city ’ s Copacabana district after a dancer died .
Locals say he was shot by the police , who have now been joined by the military to maintain order .
The use of soldiers in civil policing is of course the hallmark of an authoritarian regime , not a democracy .
And the proposed security legislation includes use of the bogeyman of “ terrorism , ” which is pretty much nonexistent in Brazil ( but always useful to police states ) , to stifle dissent .
A bill proposed in February would make it a crime to protest a sporting event .
In an atmosphere in which violent anarchists are not holding civil society hostage , the government has intervened to do so .
I was in Brasilia two weeks ago , when the entire country was commemorating the 50th anniversary of the military coup with cultural events and public activities .
Indeed , it was the theme of the Second Biennial Book Fair , sponsored by the Ministry of Culture .
Exhibits at the fair drew attention to what life was like under the military regime and promoted reading and writing as a central component of a free civil society .
It was moving to witness this homage to freedom and be reminded of what tyranny looks and feels like .
One of the exhibits at the event featured a display of cartoons published during the dictatorship in Pasquim , an alternative magazine similar to the British satirical weekly magazine Private Eye .
As so often happens with satire and allegory , Paquim ’ s cartoonists were able to sneak into print quite radical critiques of the military regime – its brutality , arbitrary arrests , and censorship – in graphic form , right under the nose of the state ’ s humorless generals .
But eventually the generals caught on .
When Paquim was one of the last relatively unmuzzled press voices in Brazil , its cartoonists were arrested , and a live bomb was found in the magazine ’ s offices .
According to Ricky Goodwin , a former Paquim journalist and the exhibit ’ s curator , at one point , when the magazine ’ s main cartoonists and writers were in prison , a mass of ordinary Brazilians surrounded its offices , insisting that publication continue .
Other journalists volunteered , at great risk to themselves , to get the magazine out .
FIFA and the government ’ s response to Brazil ’ s recent protests are putting at risk what the Paquim exhibit commemorates : the rebirth of freedom and democracy .
The problem for the government of President Dilma Rousseff , who was herself imprisoned and tortured under the military regime , is that Brazilians know exactly what is at stake .
When pundits weigh in on emerging powers like Brazil and India , they typically point to the rise of the middle class and booms in education and connectivity .
But they rarely appreciate the texture of their democracy and civil society – the relative newness of hard-won freedoms and the intimate understanding of what tyranny , whether a homegrown dictatorship or a colonial administration , means to individual liberty .
( Still less do they notice the role that women ’ s empowerment and feminism have played in development . )
The role of FIFA , in particular , in pressuring Brazil ’ s government to enact anti-democratic legislation is a dangerous precedent .
This extra-national effort on behalf of the World Cup ’ s sponsors underscores the threat to newly empowered civil societies from global corporate entities , many of which are increasingly chafing at the constraints imposed on them by strong democracies .
Who is supposed to pass Brazil ’ s laws , the people of Brazil or Coca-Cola ?
When Coca-Cola , backed by the military , sets national policy in what is supposed to be a free society , a new and darker page in the fight for freedom has been turned .
