Japan ’ s War Guilt Revisited
“ It is our obligation as Japan ’ s most influential newspaper to tell our readers who was responsible for starting the Sino-Japanese War and the Pacific War . ” So writes Tsuneo Watanabe , Editor-in-Chief of Japan ’ s ( and the world ’ s ) most widely circulated newspaper , Yomiuri Shimbun , in the introduction to the book From Marco Polo Bridge to Pearl Ha rbor : Who Was Responsible .
Watanabe , who is now in his eighties and served in the Imperial Japanese Army during WWII , was bothered by the way unfinished business concerning the war continued to hinder Japan ’ s progress .
As a remedy , he set up a War Responsibility Re-Examination Committee at his newspaper to undertake a 14-month investigation into the causes of Japan ’ s Pacific War .
Watanabe tells us that the Committee concluded that , “ not only high-ranking government leaders , general , and admirals should shoulder the blame . ” According to the Committee , “ field officers were often more influential than even the Emperor , war ministers , and chiefs-of-staffs in making decisions to go to and escalate the wars , and were responsible for many atrocities . ”
It has never been easy for a nation to face up honestly to the bitter fact of having committed war crimes , genocide , unjustified foreign aggression , or having mistreated and killed its own people .
Japan is no exception .
Although there have been numerous initiatives to investigate its war guilt , especially its occupation of China , there has not yet been an official effort comparable to what the Germans undertook to take collective responsibility for their war crimes .
While Yomiuri ’ s unique public effort is not a government initiative , it comes as close as Japan will probably ever get to conducting an acceptable “ official ” inquiry and offering an adequate apology .
Its style is almost scientific – factual , staccato-like , and unemotional – and it goes a long way toward meeting China ’ s demand for a convincing investigation and act of contrition that might allow the bitter and still poisonous past to be overcome .
Watanabe laments the fact that after Japanese war criminals were tried by the Tokyo Tribunal of 1951 , “ No efforts were made in the name of Japan or the Japanese people to look into where responsibility for the war rested . ” As a result , “ there can be no genuinely honest and friendly dialogue with those countries that suffered considerable damage and casualties in the wars with Japan . ”
China ’ s leaders seem to have taken note of this moment of Japanese remorse .
This implies a ray of hope for a bilateral relationship – the most important in Asia – that over the past two decades has been battered by Japan ’ s reluctance to face its past , which has become a lightning rod for over-heated nationalist sentiment on both sides .
But does the Yomiuri study go far enough ?
While it assigns responsibility to Japan for WWII , and even unflinchingly names the political and military leaders who bear responsibility , one can still detect a whiff of reluctance in its failure to fully describe some of Japan ’ s war-time actions .
For example , the horrors of the Nanjing Massacre in 1937 , when Japanese soldiers killed 45,000-250,000 Chinese – many of whom were civilians – are given little more than a brief mention .
But it would be a pity if China ’ s leaders did not endorse this acknowledgement of Japanese guilt as a manifestation of Japan ’ s willingness to repent .
The damaged bilateral relationship has only made China ’ s desire for a “ peaceful rise ” more uncertain .
At the same time , it has left Japan ’ s long sought transcendence of its war guilt and quasi-pariah status incomplete .
Watanabe and Yomiuri Shimbun have provided a rare opportunity that should be seized for the greater good of China and Japan and the world .
Of course , it is always easier to export blame than to shoulder it .
And , true , no Japanese prime minister has yet fallen to his knees in Nanjing the way Chancellor Willy Brandt did on the site of the Warsaw Ghetto , where he apologized for the crimes of Germany by saying , “ No people can escape from their history . ”
But that was in 1970 , when memories of the war ’ s ravages were fresh . Now , over half-a-century has elapsed .
“ If things are left as they are , ” writes Watanabe , “ a skewed perception of history – without knowledge of the horrors of the war – will be handed down to future generations . ” It would be an immensely encouraging sign of China ’ s growing maturity if its leaders used this moment to look beyond the bitter past toward a new future with Japan .
