Is Cold War II Underway ?
TOKYO – President Hu Jintao ’ s visit to Washington is coming at an increasingly tense moment in Sino / American relations .
Indeed , mesmerized by China ’ s vast military buildup , a new constellation of strategic partnerships among its neighbors , and America ’ s revitalized commitment to Asian security , many shrewd observers suggest that 2010 saw the first sparks of a new Cold War in Asia . But is “ Cold War II ” really inevitable ?
Although appeasing China ’ s drive for hegemony in Asia is unthinkable , every realistic effort must be made to avoid militarization of the region ’ s diplomacy .
After all , there was nothing very cold about the Cold War in Asia .
First in the Chinese civil war , and then in Korea , Indonesia , Malaysia , and Indochina – particularly Vietnam – the Cold War raged not as an ideological / propaganda battle between rival superpowers , but in dogged , often fratricidal combat that cost millions of lives and retarded economic development and political democratization .
It is this grim history that makes China ’ s current disregard for Deng Xiaoping ’ s maxim that China “ disguise its ambition and hide its claws ” so worrying for Asian leaders from New Delhi to Seoul and from Tokyo to Jakarta .
From its refusal to condemn North Korea ’ s unprovoked sinking of the South Korean warship Cheonan and shelling of South Korean islands , to its claims of sovereignty over various Japanese , Vietnamese , Malay , and Filipino archipelagos and newly conjured claims on India ’ s province of Arunachal Pradesh , China has revealed a neo-imperial swagger .
So it should surprise no one that “ containment ” is coming to dominate Asian diplomatic discourse .
But it is wrong – at least for now – to think that a formal structure of alliances to contain China is needed in the way that one was required to contain the Soviet Union .
Containment , it should be recalled , was organized against a Soviet totalitarian regime that was not only ideologically aggressive and in the process of consolidating its colonization of Eastern Europe ( as well as Japan ’ s Northern Territories ) , but also deliberately sealed off from the wider world economy .
Today ’ s China is vastly different .
Overt military imperialism of the Soviet sort has , at least historically , rarely been the Chinese way .
Sun Tzu , the great Chinese theorist of warfare , focused on the weakening of an adversary psychologically , not in battle .
Until recently , much of China ’ s bid for regional hegemony reflected Sun ’ s concepts .
More importantly , China abandoned economic autarky three decades ago . Today , its economic links in Asia are deep , and – it is to be hoped – permanent .
China ’ s export machine sucks in vast quantities of parts and components for final assembly from across Asia – Thailand , Malaysia , the Philippines , and Indonesia , as well as richer Singapore , Taiwan , South Korea , and Japan .
Membership of the World Trade Organization has helped to bind China to highly sophisticated pan-Asian production networks .
Everybody has benefited from these ties .
Throughout China ’ s three-decade rise from poverty to economic juggernaut , trade within East Asia has grown even faster than the region ’ s trade with the rest of the world , suggesting deeper specialization and integration .
Indeed , China ’ s rise has profoundly altered the course of Asia ’ s trade flows .
Japan no longer focuses on exporting finished goods to Europe and North America , but on exporting parts and components for assembly in China .
In turn , Japan now imports from China finished goods ( such as office machines and computers ) that once came from America and Europe .
Given that as many as half of China ’ s 1.3 billion people remain mired in abject poverty , it is in China ’ s interest to ensure that these economic relationships continue to flourish .
In the past , China has recognized the vital need for good neighborly relations .
During the Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998 , Chinese officials did not engage in competitive devaluation of the renminbi .
Unfortunately , such clear-sighted and responsible policymaking is a far cry from what we are seeing today .
China ’ s dizzying increase in its military capacity is another obvious source of concern in Asia .
But , even according to the highest estimates , China ’ s military budget is only now about equal to that of Japan and , of course , much less than the combined military budgets of Japan , India , and Russia , all of which border China – not to mention Indonesia , South Korea , and a militarily modernizing Taiwan .
Moreover , Russia and India possess nuclear weapons , and Japan has the technological wherewithal to reconfigure its defense posture to meet any regional nuclear threat .
So the challenge that China poses today remains predominantly political and economic , not military .
The test of China ’ s intentions is whether its growing economic and , yes , military capacities will be used to seek to establish Asian hegemony by working to exclude America from the region and preventing regional partnerships from flourishing .
The alternative is a China that becomes part of a cooperative effort to bind Asia in a rules-based system similar to that which has underpinned long-term peace in Europe .
In this sense , Asia ’ s rise is also a test of US competitiveness and commitment in Asia .
America ’ s historical opposition to hegemony in Asia – included as a joint aim with China in the Shanghai Communiqué of 1972 – remains valid .
It will have to be pursued , however , primarily by political and economic means , albeit backed by US power .
Before 2010 , most Asian countries would have preferred not to choose between China and the US .
But China ’ s assertiveness has provided enormous incentives to embrace an Asian multilateral system backed by America , rather than accept the exclusionary system that China seeks to lead .
In 2011 we may begin to see whether those incentives lead China ’ s rulers to re-appraise their diplomatic conduct , which has left them with only the corrupt , basket case economies of Burma and North Korea as reliable friends in Asia .
