Learning from Mexico
On July 2 , Mexico held a presidential election that triggered what has become a bitter political firefight .
After conservative candidate Felipe Calderon was declared the winner by less than 1 % of the vote , his populist rival , Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador , quickly claimed fraud .
For the past two months , thousands of Lopez Obrador ’ s most fervent supporters have transformed the Zocalo , Mexico City ’ s central square , into a virtual sea of tents – the center of gravity of opposition to the official result .
On September 1 , dozens of opposition lawmakers created a primetime spectacle inside Mexico ’ s parliament by occupying the speaker ’ s podium , thereby denying outgoing President Vicente Fox the chance to deliver his final state of the nation address in person .
Four days later , Mexico highest electoral court ruled that Fox had improperly interfered in the election but unanimously reaffirmed Calderon ’ s victory .
Lopez Obrador has vowed to obstruct Calderon ’ s presidency from the moment he takes office on December 1 .
You learn a lot about a country ’ s underlying stability by how it responds to a crisis .
Similar electoral conflicts unfolded in the United States in 2000 and in Ukraine in 2004 .
In the wake of fiercely contested presidential elections , large numbers of voters in each country questioned the legitimacy of the outcome .
The nation ’ s highest courts were compelled to rule on demands for a ballot recount .
But US political and economic stability was never in doubt in 2000 , because public confidence in the country ’ s governing institutions allowed them to resolve the conflict peacefully .
These institutions proved far more powerful than the political personalities involved .
In Ukraine , on the other hand , public outrage , buttressed by international pressure , brought the government to a halt .
In a second vote , the election ’ s loser was crowned the winner .
But the initial euphoria that accompanied the so-called “ Orange Revolution ” quickly faded , and Ukraine is still dealing with the political and economic fallout .
What , then , should we make of Mexico and its disputed election ?
Here , too , a large segment of the electorate told pollsters that they doubted the legitimacy of the official result .
The judiciary rejected calls for a full recount , though they did examine roughly 9 % of the ballots before ruling that the review indicated no challenge to the election ’ s outcome .
Like Ukraine ’ s Viktor Yushchenko , who lost the initial vote in Ukraine , Lopez Obrador demanded that the result be overturned .
Unlike Yushchenko , he was denied .
But the good news for Mexicans is that their country ’ s political institutions have proven far more stable than did Ukraine ’ s .
Despite Lopez Obrador ’ s best efforts to create chaos in the streets with public demonstrations involving hundreds of thousands of protesters , domestic and international confidence remains strong .
The peso has barely budged since the election — a clear indication that investors have not lost faith in the country .
Their resilience is important , because market fears of instability often become a self-fulfilling prophecy .
The point is not that public confidence ( or lack thereof ) in an election outcome doesn ’ t matter .
It does .
But the broader picture – whether , as in Mexico , a country is able to continue to go about its business as its political institutions sort out the mess – matters far more .
Unlike in Ukraine , investors have shrugged off the noisy demonstrations in Mexico City ’ s streets and remained focused on interest rates and fluctuations in the global economy .
This suggests that governing principles and sturdy political institutions , not powerful individuals , have become the bedrock of Mexican governance .
Indeed , while Lopez Obrador continues to denounce the outcome and has threatened to make Mexico ungovernable , Mexico ’ s growing middle class has taken the political conflict in stride .
Many who supported Lopez Obrador ’ s candidacy do not support the post-election protests in his name .
A recent poll in the newspaper Reforma found that Calderon would now defeat him by 19 percentage points .
Voters may prefer Lopez Obrador , but they value Mexico ’ s stability above all .
Moreover , during the political standoff , Calderon has worked behind the scenes to form an administration and to settle on a governing strategy .
Aware that he must establish a greater sense of political legitimacy , his cabinet is likely to include representatives of other political parties .
He will probably introduce measures to tackle poverty and create jobs .
Calderon ’ s task will not be easy .
Lopez Obrador and his supporters can be expected to work relentlessly to thwart his plans .
But they are unlikely to derail his government .
The underlying stability highlighted by Mexico ’ s post-election crisis is also evident elsewhere in Latin America .
Whatever the potential for a leftward shift this year in some Latin American countries , others , including Mexico , Chile , and Brazil , are clearly less vulnerable to the type of populist rule we ’ ve seen in Venezuela and Bolivia .
Elected leaders in these countries face institutional constraints – parliaments that check the powers of the executive and courts that check the powers of both – on their ability to shape policy .
To be sure , political and market volatility in a broad range of emerging-market economies will continue .
But some of them appear to have “ graduated ” toward a stability rooted in sustainable governance .
Beyond Latin America , several Eastern European countries offer ready examples .
In these states , regulatory and taxation issues now affect confidence more deeply and consistently than does political tension .
Many in the media may not comprehend that yet .
But markets do .
Though Mexico ’ s election saga may continue to make headlines , its true significance is that it reveals just how politically sturdy a place Mexico has become .
