Iran ’ s Pre-Emptive Strike
Iran ’ s quarreling and competing leaders have decided , by their acts , to reject the offer by Europe and the United States of a nuclear reactor , aircraft spare parts , economic cooperation , and more in exchange for giving up uranium enrichment .
Many people hoped that Iran ’ s leaders , despite their extremism , would accept the offer if only to avoid sanctions – which are sure to come even if China and Russia refuse to support them in the United Nations Security Council .
The US and Europe are united this time , and can effectively cut off Iran from world banking , bar Iranian leaders from traveling to the West , and stop exports to Iran of everything but food and medicine .
Instead of waiting passively for sanctions , Iran ’ s leaders decided to start a Middle East crisis by organizing attacks against Israel .
Their aim is to discourage the US and the Europeans from starting another crisis – financial markets and everyday politics in Europe can tolerate only so much conflict .
They may also hope to shatter the unified EU / US position that now exists .
Moreover , Iran ’ s claim to leadership in the Muslim world is being undermined by the conflict in Iraq , where Iran supports the Shia militias that are killing Sunnis .
Every bloody day of bombings and executions in Iraq reminds Arabs that the Iranians are neither Arab nor Sunni .
But attacking Israel unites Muslims , and gains Arab gratitude .
Iran ’ s move was prepared in a series of meetings with both Hamas and Hezbollah in Lebanon .
Khaled Mashal , Hamas ’ s overall leader , who lives under Syrian protection in Damascus , traveled to Tehran , where he received some $ 50 million in badly needed cash .
Although an offshoot of the Sunni Muslim Brotherhood , whose Arab financial supporters loathe the Ayatollahs , Hamas decided to cooperate in Iran ’ s scheme because it was diplomatically isolated and cut off from Western funding due to its refusal to recognize Israel .
Hamas acted by increasing rocket attacks on nearby Israeli territory , and by launching a raid into Israel itself , killing two soldiers and capturing another .
That provoked Israeli retaliation , starting the Gaza end of the crisis that Iran wanted .
As for the impact on lives in Gaza , Hamas – like Yasir Arafat – has again shown itself to be more devoted to the idea of Palestine than to the welfare of Palestinians .
It was far more costly to get Hezbollah to serve Iran ’ s strategy .
While it retains a heavily armed , salaried , and uniformed guerilla / terrorist force of some 5,000 , its leader , Hassan Nasrallah , has been striving for years to build Hezbollah into a legitimate political party and the main representative of Lebanon ’ s Shia .
This effort was so successful that Hezbollah now has two ministers in the government .
But to be accepted by other Lebanese , and to some extent even to retain the support of fellow Shia , Hezbollah had to agree to join the Lebanese consensus on the priority of reconstruction and economic recovery after years of civil war .
That meant avoiding a war with Israel .
Hezbollah is under order by the UN Security Council to disarm and disband its militia , but it claimed that even after Israel ’ s full withdrawal from Lebanon in 2000 , it needed its weapons to continue to liberate “ Lebanese territory . ”
That refers to a tiny fragment of land , the so-called Sheba farms , declared by UN inspectors to be in Israel , but which Hezbollah claims as part of Lebanon .
Other Lebanese political parties agreed that Hezbollah could keep its weapons to fight there – but only on condition that it keep the peace on the rest of the border .
That is the condition Nasrallah violated by ordering an attack on an Israeli patrol nowhere near the Sheba farms and launching rockets into Israeli territory .
With that , Hezbollah threw away its political position in Lebanon .
For the Israeli coalition government headed by Prime Minister Ehud Olmert , matters are relatively simple .
It ordered the withdrawal from Gaza in order to stop the cycle of violence there , on the presumption that Israeli territory proper would not be attacked .
But the possibility of attack was of course anticipated , and military planners determined that the only possible response was to counterattack as heavily and for as long as might be needed , until Palestinian attacks would stop , whether from exhaustion or agreement .
Hamas ’ s control of the Palestinian Authority does not diminish or increase the need for Israeli military action , but it does increase its political benefits , because the fighting and destruction tells Gaza ’ s population that their rulers are endangering their physical survival .
As for Hezbollah , the Israeli military response is by no means confined to retaliation .
Over the years , Hezbollah has received and stored several thousand rockets and some one hundred longer-range missiles from Iran .
Recently , and very revealingly , two Iranian leaders threatened Israel with bombardment by Hezbollah ’ s rockets if Israel attacked Iran ’ s nuclear installations .
Thus , Israel is using the opportunity brought by the current fighting to search out and destroy Hezbollah ’ s underground and other hidden sites where it keeps its rockets and missiles .
Israel ’ s political aim is to destroy Hezbollah ’ s position as a legitimate Lebanese political party by exposing it as the paid agent of Iran , which serves foreign interests at grievous cost to Lebanon .
So Israel is blocking Lebanon ’ s ports from the sea , has breached the runways of all three jet-capable airfields , including Beirut ’ s international airport , and remains ready to destroy generating plants and other high-value targets , if necessary , to generate sufficient political pressure on Hezbollah .
If Lebanon ’ s political forces and Nasrallah ’ s followers cannot get him to revert to a truce , Israel will bomb more targets , including Nasrallah ’ s offices in south Beirut .
If more missiles are launched , Israel will cross the border deep into Lebanese territory .
Of course , in both Gaza and southern Lebanon , the outcome is pre-determined by the one-sided military balance .
The only open question in both places is how much damage Israel will need to inflict to obtain new cease-fires .
