Brexit , Voice , and Loyalty
PRINCETON – Albert Hirschman , who died at the end of last year , was a great economist with a gift for producing striking insights by focusing on an element of observable behavior as a way to transform our view of a whole range of particular problems .
One of his most far-ranging insights was his framework of “ exit , voice , and loyalty . ”
Originally formulated after an experience with poor trains in West Africa , Hirschman realized that if a complex social system allowed people to leave ( exit ) , its efficiency might deteriorate ; a better solution would be to retain people ( loyalty ) , which would give them incentives to articulate demands ( voice ) that would improve the system ’ s performance .
It is easy to see how this theory can be applied to personal relations .
Marriages break down if divorce ( exit ) is too easy ; but also become unbearable if there is no sense of mutuality and discussion ( voice ) .
Voice may also decrease if new possibilities emerge : a new potential partner means that there is no longer any pressure to discuss and improve relations within the existing arrangement .
The schema might also be applied to political relations : Hirschman wrote a memorable article showing how the ability to exit East Germany in 1989 produced a sudden breakdown of loyalty .
Europeans might rethink some of their current dilemmas in the light of Hirschman ’ s theory .
The marriage analogy has become a rather over-used metaphor for Europe ’ s efforts to integrate .
But it is clear that both voice and loyalty have become a problem for the European Union .
Many citizens and governments believe that they lack influence , or voice , which tends to reduce loyalty .
Now a more radical possibility has been raised .
British Prime Minister David Cameron has raised the possibility of a “ Brexit , ” a British exit from the European Union .
The polemics that preceded and followed Cameron ’ s recent speech on Europe showed that both British Euro-skeptics and Europe ’ s truest Europhiles – including such iconic figures as former European Commission President Jacques Delors – welcomed the British initiative .
Can the British exit threat shake Europe to its senses and make the United Kingdom ’ s effort to reform institutions more likely to succeed , or to make Europe a more stable polity ?
Hirschman ’ s framework , which is instructive in helping us to think about how loyalty and affection can be generated , suggests that it cannot .
Countries do not like to feel isolated .
They want to see their institutions and values mirrored and replicated in their neighbors – a dynamic that builds loyalty .
As a result , the EU is constantly expanding , while the US likes to urge the world to democratize .
Democratic states are not alone in seeking to expand their influence .
The Soviet Union also wanted to surround itself with a protective buffer of like-minded states , and Italy ’ s Benito Mussolini was proud that for a time fascism was a competitive export .
The recognition of an exit possibility reverses that basic process of forging bonds of loyalty .
Some other attraction may appear .
One of the factors driving the UK ’ s sense of unease in its relations with an increasingly bureaucratized Europe is the belief that its values and institutions are closer to those of the US , or of other English-speaking former colonies .
By the 1990 ’ s , British Euro-skeptics coined the term “ Anglosphere ” to describe a model that was more successful and more expansionary than that of the EU .
The US has been the “ other woman ” undermining Britain ’ s loyalty to the EU as an attractive permanent partner .
As a result , Britain has lost much of its ability to make an effective contribution to European reform .
Indeed , the last time Britain had a strong European voice was more than two decades ago .
In the mid-1980 ’ s , then-Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher successfully pushed the idea of an integrated internal market .
The liberalization of trade and investment implied by the Single European Act was greatly inspired by a British deregulatory vision .
At the time , Delors presented the introduction of a single currency as a way to complement or complete the Single Market .
Since then , however , both the American financial model ( with powerful financial institutions thriving in lightly regulated markets ) and the American model of engagement ( in Iraq and Afghanistan ) for some time appeared more dynamic and more in accordance with the demands of a globalizing world .
Both elements of the American dream have now lost something of their appeal .
The Iraq engagement proved to be built on deception .
The financial house of cards collapsed .
But Britain remains attracted to something else , and so unwilling to engage in “ voice . ”
The US is appalled by the consequences of Britain ’ s flirtation .
It wants to remain engaged with the entire world , not just some islands off the European coast .
It is easier for the US to deal with Europe as a whole , especially when some European answers to common social dilemmas look as if they might provide solutions for America as well .
The outcome resembles a Shakespeare comedy of confused identity .
Europe and Britain are married , but Britain wants to deepen its relationship with America , while America cares more about Europe .
Loyalty-enhancing mechanisms are not easy to establish .
The best ones are positive , like rapid economic growth and rising prosperity , which underpinned the European dream in the past .
Restoring them is unlikely , at least for now .
There can also be negative incentives to loyalty that induce everyone to keep up appropriate standards of behavior .
The risk is that the comedy of misguided affection is resolved by punishing both the tempter and the tempted .
What is the modern equivalent of branding with a scarlet “ A , ” which was the penalty for adultery in colonial New England ?
