Falling for Germany
PRINCETON – Germany ’ s general election in September and the prolonged formation of a new government since then have highlighted a peculiar development .
Not only does Germany now seem to be running Europe , but the rest of Europe seems to be falling in love with Germany – not least because , in a time of political confusion and economic instability , Germans are the only Europeans who seem to know what they want .
Germany ’ s exceptionalism is obvious .
Whereas electorates across the European Union have punished their governments for the Great Recession and the euro crisis , Germans reelected Chancellor Angela Merkel and displayed strong support for her party , the Christian Democratic Union ( CDU ) , in the recent election .
Indeed , as with postwar Germany ’ s first leader , Konrad Adenauer , there are jokes about Merkel being Chancellor for life ( Germany has no term limits ) .
Elsewhere , populist anti-European parties of the right have been gaining ground with campaigns directed against immigrants and minorities , especially Muslims .
This has fueled concern that the populist bloc will be the largest in the European Parliament after next year ’ s EU-wide election .
Germany , by contrast , has no anti-European party with any serious support .
Even the newly formed Alternative for Germany – which did unexpectedly well in the recent election , finishing just short of the 5 % threshold needed to enter the Bundestag – insists that its anti-euro agenda is not anti-Europe .
They want to end the common currency , because , in their view , it is undermining the European ideal .
Against this background , Germany ’ s neighbors have been showing their love – or at least admiration .
At the end of 2011 , Polish Foreign Minister Radosław Sikorski called upon Germany to take a stronger leadership role in Europe .
This year , confronted with a revival of nationalist sentiment , former Polish President Lech Wałęsa – the leader of the anti-communist Solidarity movement – suggested that his country should enter into political union with Germany .
Likewise , as France slides into a governance crisis and its leaders ’ credibility rapidly erodes , the leading French intellectual Alain Minc has published Vive l ’ Allemagne ( “ Long Live Germany ” ) , in which he argues that Germany is Europe ’ s healthiest and most democratic country .
In Italy , the bourgeoisie of Milan and Rome have made a point of spending winter days dressed in characteristically German Loden overcoats .
When Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben recently appealed for a Latin empire to assert itself against Germany , his call was widely rejected , with several of his contemporaries asserting that , on the contrary , Germany should serve as a model for Italy as it seeks to overcome its current malaise .
Even in the habitually Euro-skeptical United Kingdom , Prime Minister David Cameron has sought to boost his international credibility by highlighting his close ties with Merkel , rather than by emphasizing the UK ’ s “ special relationship ” with the United States .
Revealingly , the writer Miranda Seymour ’ s recently published book Noble Endeavours reminds Britain of the centuries-old love affair between Germany and England .
Maybe the royal family will go back to styling itself the House of Hanover ?
While this admiration stems partly from Germany ’ s current economic success , the sentiment runs deeper – and extends beyond Europe .
China , for example , considers Germany to be much more than a model of export-led growth ; for many Chinese , that success highlights the way Germany ’ s historical trajectory has been shaped by its struggle with the authoritarian spirit of the past .
Germany ’ s constitution – first adopted in West Germany in 1949 – lays out a striking vision , stating the country ’ s “ resolve to preserve its national and political unity and to serve the peace of the World as an equal partner in a united Europe . ” With the division of Germany considered a microcosm of the broader European split during the Cold War , German reunification seemed possible only in the context of an integrated Europe – a point that Chancellor Helmut Kohl emphasized in the debates of 1990 , as reunification beckoned .
The Germany that emerged from this process is uniquely suited to act as a model for Europe , owing to its federal character , which is reflected in strong constitutional guarantees of states ’ rights .
Germany ’ s deeply embedded commitment to Europe and insistence on constitutionalism reflect its profound effort to understand what went wrong during the interwar period , the consequences of racism and extreme nationalism , and the legacy of Nazi crimes .
Few countries – if any – have so effectively internalized the lessons of their history .
When Merkel ’ s new government is in place , Germany will assume an even more important role in the pursuit of greater European integration – a process that will demand additional sacrifices , including the ceding of national sovereignty .
In a sense , this will be a continuation of Germany ’ s long history of self-abolition .
Roughly every hundred years since the Lutheran Reformation , the number of independent German political units has fallen by a factor of ten .
The 1648 Peace of Westphalia reduced the number of independent units in the Holy Roman Empire from 3,000-4,000 to 300-400 .
In the aftermath of the Napoleonic wars , the number of German states fell to 39 . By 1866 , only 34 members of the German confederation remained .
Another round of wars and peace treaties produced the kleindeutsch German Empire of 1871 , and there were only three primarily German-speaking states left in Europe – the German Empire , Austria-Hungary ( a dynastic unit , otherwise known as the Habsburg Empire ) , and the Swiss Confederation – none of which was a conventional nation-state .
While Germany ’ s 1949 split into the Federal Republic and the Democratic Republic raised the number to four ( along with Austria and Switzerland ) , the overall trajectory has been clear .
If Germany ’ s new government leads the charge toward a stronger , more federal Europe , a century from now , there may well be no sovereign German political unit at all .
Germany and its lovers die in the end , only to live happily ever after .
