Indonesia ’ s Moderate Muslims
Islam in Indonesia , whose 200 million people constitute the world ’ s largest community of Muslims , is increasingly viewed as very different from the Islam practiced in the older Muslim communities of the Middle East .
Indeed , one distinguished scholar , Bassam Tibi of Gottingen University , has described Indonesia as “ a model for religiously and ethno-culturally different communities to live together in peace and mutual respect . ”
Some historians argue that Indonesia ’ s moderate form of Islam reflects the way in which foreign traders introduced it , as early as the fourteenth century .
Then , the coastal culture already incorporated egalitarianism , dynamism , and inter-dependence , which affected the ideology and practice of Islam .
In addition , Indonesian Islam had strong Sufi influences , which emphasize the spiritual rather than the legal elements of the faith .
Similarly , Giora Eliraz of Hebrew University argues that the Islamic ideas that arrived in Indonesia from the Middle East changed , becoming more inclusive and pluralist in character , owing to the influence of the great nineteenth-century Egyptian reformer Muhammad Abduh .
In Egypt , Abduh ’ s progressive ideas gained support from only a tiny group of reformers .
In Indonesia , however , Abduh ’ s vision of Islamic modernity sparked the creation of the country ’ s largest modernist Muslim organization , Muhammadiyah , which represents mainstream moderate Islam in Indonesia .
This history of moderation continued unabated through the twentieth century , embraced by both traditionalists and modernists .
The traditonalist organization Nahdlatul Ulama
( NU ) , for example , had issued a fatwa ( religious decree ) in the 1930 ’ s declaring Dutch colonial rule to be legitimate .
The early leaders of Muhammadiyah focused more on the spiritual improvement of individual Muslims , rather than public enforcement of Islamic law .
Most importantly , this orientation toward moderation has consistently drawn support from Indonesia ’ s leading intellectuals .
A remarkably creative and dedicated group of young religious and social thinkers and activists chose in the 1960 ’ s and 1970 ’ s – during the early days of Suharto ’ s secular New Order regime – to reject the idea of an Islamic state .
At the height of the New Order ’ s political repression of Islam during the late 1970 ’ s and early 1980 ’ s , a new pattern of thinking emerged among younger intellectuals .
Their “ reform movement ” ( gerakan pembaruan ) , is perhaps best summed up in Nurcholish Madjid ’ s 1972 ’ s dictum : “ Islam yes , Islamic party no . ”
By the late 1980 ’ s , Suharto ’ s own stance towards Islam was changing .
Government concessions to religious sentiment included the promulgation of Islamic family law in 1989 , the establishment of the Indonesian Muslim Intellectual Association in 1990 , lifting the ban on schoolgirls ’ wearing the jilbab ( head cover ) in 1991 , the founding of an Islamic bank ( Bank Muamalat ) in 1992 , and abolition of the state lottery .
These measures persuaded Indonesia ’ s Muslims that they could live in accord with Islamic teaching without Indonesia becoming an Islamic state .
The state established a wide network of educational institutions that support this moderate tendency .
There are now 27 branches of the State Islamic University , which integrate Islamic and general studies for undergraduate and graduate students .
There are also roughly 100 Institutes of Islamic Studies , for undergraduates who want to focus on Islamic studies only .
Indonesian students and scholars actively seek to engage new ways of understanding Islam and exploring its relevance for Indonesia .
For the past two decades , increasing numbers of Indonesian students have been drawn to study in the West .
As a result , they have come to see Islam as a dynamic process of understanding the world , rather than a static faith that cannot change .
Those who studied in the West appear well equipped to present an “ Islam ” more adaptable and amenable to social change .
Indeed , many Western-educated students now occupy the highest academic and political positions in Indonesia .
They work actively to develop a different image of Islam – an Islam compatible with modern human achievements , including democracy , human rights , and vibrant civil societies .
Not confined by any fixed orthodoxy , Indonesian Muslims have taken the historic step of welcoming dissident Muslim thinkers like the Pakistani Fazlur Rahman , the Palestinian Ismail al-Faruqi , and the Iranian Seyyed Hossein Nasr , even when their ideas were unwelcome in their native lands .
It is neither exaggeration nor overly optimistic to say that Indonesia ’ s experience could pave the way for the emergence of what might be called a “ moderate Islamic network , ” one that forges strong links with the West .
