Israel ’ s Terrorist Aid
NEW YORK – The decision by Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu ’ s government to demolish the family home of Abdelrahman al-Shaludi , a Palestinian who rammed his car into a group of pedestrians , killing two ( including a three-month-old baby ) , was both callous and counterproductive .
By punishing people whose only known offense was being related to a criminal , Israel inadvertently shifted the focus from the attack , the perpetrator of which was killed immediately after his crime , to Israel ’ s apparent embrace of a policy of collective punishment .
If Israel ’ s principal concern is deterring terrorist attacks , it should be doing everything in its power to ensure that such acts are universally condemned .
This includes making sure that people who carry out attacks , and those who aid and abet their crimes , are lawfully punished .
Punishing terrorists ’ families and neighbors , or those who share their ethnic and religious identity , has the opposite effect , intensifying hostility toward Israel and dissipating the moral outrage that should be mobilized against the actual perpetrators of terrorism .
As observers increasingly equate the two sides , regarding both as victims and victimizers alike , international support and sympathy for Israel wanes .
This is not the first time that Israel has been accused of collective punishment .
Israel ’ s government regularly destroyed the family homes of alleged terrorists for years before acknowledging that the policy was damaging its image – without deterring terrorist acts . The latest house demolition seems to confirm that Israel ’ s government is resuming the practice of collective punishment that it abandoned a decade ago .
Why would Netanyahu ’ s government resume a failed policy ?
The most likely explanation is that Netanyahu wants to reassure the Israeli public that no act of terrorism will be tolerated – even if that means a vindictive and cruel response .
In fact , such domestic political considerations were probably also a major driver of the killing and destruction that took place in Gaza over the summer .
Of course , Israel has the right to defend itself against indiscriminate rocket barrages like that launched from Gaza into its territory , and to punish lawfully those responsible .
But Israel did more than defend itself .
It mounted a demonstrably disproportionate response , killing a large number of noncombatants , including hundreds of children , and destroying thousands of homes and commercial enterprises .
While the initiative may have appeased Israeli public outrage over the rockets , it damaged Israel ’ s standing in many other countries considerably .
More problematic , Israel ’ s actions in Gaza probably increased its vulnerability to terrorist attacks , not only by fueling animosity toward Israel , but also by suggesting that Netanyahu ’ s government will most likely discredit itself with its response .
That propensity to act against its own interests to appease an enraged and emotional public was underscored by the recent destruction of al-Shaludi ’ s family home .
To be sure , Israel is not alone in responding irrationally to terrorist provocations .
Some aspects of the United States ’ response to the terrorist attacks of September 11 , 2001 , reflect the same tendency – but on a significantly larger scale and with more far-reaching consequences .
While the attacks were immensely costly in terms of lives lost and material damage , the US-led war in Iraq that followed was beyond disproportionate ; it was truly devastating . And its consequences continue to unfold , as the brutal predations of the Islamic State attest .
It is time for governments in Israel , the US , and elsewhere to recognize that by allowing their citizens ’ outrage to drive their responses to terrorist attacks , they are offering themselves as the terrorists ’ best weapon .
Only by adopting a pragmatic and legal approach can they galvanize support against their enemies and reduce their citizens ’ vulnerability to attack .
That , rather than slaking the public ’ s thirst for vengeance , should be their primary objective .
