Is the EU Paralyzing Itself ?
European integration has been compared to a bicycle that must be moved forward , because otherwise it falls to the ground .
According to this analogy ( which does not imply that Europe is a Tour de France ) integration is an ever-moving process that always demands new stimuli , otherwise the forces of stagnation and disintegration will gain the upper hand .
The introduction of Euro coins and notes , as well as the looming enlargement of the EU eastward , should provide the needed stimulus , and add to the economic dynamics of the EU .
But when the EU expands to include 27 members , its decision-making process will risk becoming deadlocked .
The economic heterogeneity of such a large number of members , when paired with the unanimity required for core decisions to be taken on issues such as taxation , the budget , fundamental rules and other areas , means that the common denominator for decisions in the EU will become smaller and smaller .
National interest and the status quo will become even more dominant , deepening the chance of paralysis .
The arrival of these problems was foreseen long ago , but the Treaty of Nice failed to improve the means for intergovernmental decision-making within the European Council .
On the contrary : the threshold for a qualified majority has been raised from 71.26 % ( 68 of 87 votes ) to 74.79 % ( 258 out of 345 votes ) .
With increased membership , the enlarged EU will move towards greater unanimity , which makes decision-making even more difficult , and increases the likelihood of blocking coalitions of members .
But correcting this will become harder after new members have joined .
So , as enlargement approaches , the EU faces a cross roads .
To avoid a " Stagno-Europe , " the EU must focus on the essentials in the common institutional framework and allow more variety in an enlarged union , or it must develop institutional arrangements that shift additional portions of national sovereignty to the Union level .
Certainly , political union and a common market require a uniform frame of reference to prevent major distortions in competition .
But increased heterogeneity in a Union of 27 requires a more flexible institutional framework .
Only what is essential should be harmonized within this institutional framework .
Here , the rule should be : deem something essential only if the EU 's four freedoms - free movement of goods , services , people and capital - will be seriously impaired without such a designation .
Whatever is necessary in order for markets to function efficiently should be considered essential .
Following this approach , the EU 's Structural and Regional Funds must be changed before Eastward enlargement takes place because , after it does , the new East European members will be able to forge a blocking minority .
Agricultural policy should be shifted from price subsidies to income transfers , with these transfers turned into a national obligation , not a Union one .
Moreover , a social union - that is , a common European framework of social insurance systems for health , unemployment and retirement as well as social welfare - is not feasible and so should not be treated as essential to the Union .
Labor market deregulation must also be treated as a national obligation .
The alternative to focussing on the essentials is to cede more national sovereignty to the Union level .
Europe 's autonomous nation states have already passed important elements of their sovereignty to supranational decision-making through the Treaty of Europe .
If more national sovereignty is to be ceded , the EU 's " democratic deficit " must be closed , with the European Parliament gaining a bigger say over policy .
For any of that to happen , a constitution-like arrangement will need to be developed in which decisions are assigned to different layers within Europe : the European , the national , and the regional level .
According to the subsidiarity principle , economic competencies should be transferred to the lowest possible government body .
Only when a transfer of competencies to the supranational level leads to efficiency gains that exceed the welfare losses due to centralization should national and regional responsibility be replaced by the supranational .
This implies that public goods of a limited dimension in space should be provided on the local or regional level , those of a larger size should be supplied on the national level and that Europe-wide public goods be dealt with on the European level .
The route to a constitution-like arrangement will be severe and complex .
It requires considerations similar to those written about in the " Federalist Papers , " which appeared when the US was creating itself .
In Europe 's case , a constitutional framework will require an even more federalist structure than that established in America .
Such a route presupposes that " the people " are sovereign .
But a European people does not ( or does not yet ) exist .
Neither does European " public opinion . "
Thus , the role of a European parliament must be limited . Consequently , surrenders of national sovereignty must be limited as well .
At the core of this debate , as it was over two hundred years ago in America , is taxation .
Ceding national sovereignty implies shifting the power to tax , the power to spend and the power of the budget to the European level .
This means that a European institution such as the European parliament would be authorized to decide the type of tax , the tax base and the tax rate for the individual tax payer ; it would also be able to decide that a tax collected in one country can be spent in another country .
But preparedness to surrender national sovereignty to the Union varies between EU member countries .
It is hard to imagine how the process of ceding national sovereignty will look in the next twenty years .
Yet it is certainly one way to overcome the institutional blockade that now looms .
