Abenomics for Asia
TOKYO – Once again , Japan is Asia ’ s odd country out .
For two decades , as one Asian economy after another boomed , Japan ’ s economy remained virtually stagnant .
Now , with GDP growth in Asia ’ s two giants , China and India , slowing precipitously – a decline that appears to be contributing to diminishing economic performance in much of the rest of Asia – Japan is recording its strongest growth since its 1980 ’ s boom .
But , just as Japan ’ s post-war economic model became the template for the Asian economic miracles of recent decades , the reforms currently being implemented by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe ( “ Abenomics ” ) may offer Asian economies a path back to strong growth .
If the fallout from China ’ s slowdown is not to hit the entire region and jeopardize the economic integration that has already taken place , Asia ’ s governments – beginning with China – will need to embrace similar reforms .
How did Asia ’ s boom fade so quickly ?
Economics is supposedly a cold-blooded subject .
Yet successful economies are prone to one of the most dangerous emotions of all : self-satisfaction , that excessive pride that Confucius condemned , which makes governments wary of reforming what has been a winning model , even when stresses begin to appear .
Japan has paid a high price for this attitude .
Even after its property bubble burst 24 years ago , the authorities continued to believe that the country ’ s growth model needed no adjustment .
The result was two lost decades of deflation and introspection before Japan finally embraced the reforms needed to kick-start a new , more open – and hence more vibrant – economic model .
China and India , it seems , have also succumbed to economic hubris .
Three decades of success in China , and a decade in which India supposedly overcame the old , slow , “ Hindu rate of growth , ” are ending with both economies slowing precipitously . And both are slowing for the same reason : stalled reform , which is a direct result of governments being so satisfied with today ’ s conditions that they fail to address tomorrow ’ s rising dangers .
China ’ s government continues to turn a blind eye toward banks that lend to the politically well connected , or that tolerate companies – mostly state-owned – with poor financial discipline . Indeed , total public- and private-sector debt in China is now around 200 % of GDP , up by more than one-third in five years .
Reckless lending is undermining efficient allocation of capital and preventing China from drawing a line under the investment- and export-led growth model of the past three decades and basing future growth more on domestic consumption .
Likewise , India ’ s government , having embraced economic liberalization , has essentially pulled back from it in recent years .
Plans to allow foreign investment in retailing and other key economic sectors have been put on hold .
In critical industries – mobile communications and mining are perhaps the two most important examples – privatization has been corrupted by cronyism .
Moreover , India remains an inward-looking economy that attracts relatively little foreign investment and plays a much smaller role in world trade than it should .
Notwithstanding its renowned software industry , India plays little part in the production chains that underpin Asia ’ s regional trade patterns . The result – as visible as it was predictable – has been a sharp slowdown in economic growth .
To be fair , there is a growing recognition in some countries of the need for change . The need to restore economic dynamism was the focus of South Korea ’ s presidential election in 2012 , which brought the country ’ s first-ever female president , Park Geun-hye , to power .
Today , the country is gripped by an important debate about how to reform the chaebol , the mammoth industrial conglomerates that did so much to lift the country out of poverty and into the front ranks of the world ’ s economies .
Park ’ s status as the daughter of former President Park Chung-hee , who put the chaebol at the center of South Korea ’ s economy , could give her the credibility needed to recast their economic role .
Elsewhere in Asia , including in China , the debate is only beginning .
But progress on reform , particularly in finance , must come quickly , because in most countries – India is the main exception – the demographic window of a growing working-age population is closing , if not already shut .
It is not necessarily bad for Asia ’ s traditionally high savings rates to fall ; after all , consumption typically rises with an aging population .
But savings will need to be allocated far more efficiently than in the past .
Japan ’ s lost decades provide a grim lesson of the economic cost of neglecting such reform .
Moreover , borrowing in US dollars to finance current investment spending – as many emerging economies have done in recent years , as the US Federal Reserve ’ s policy of quantitative easing flooded emerging markets with cheap funds – is no substitute .
Indonesia , Thailand , and others are now finding it difficult to service these loans as their exchange rates fall against the dollar in the wake of the Fed ’ s plans to “ taper ” its policy .
Indeed , the debt build-up is so large that markets now fear a repeat of Asia ’ s financial crisis .
The Japanese precedent matters all the more , given that , 16 years after the Asian financial crisis nearly wiped out decades of hard-earned growth , Asia ’ s banks and capital markets remain inefficient .
Asia ’ s economies need deep , well-regulated capital markets , so that savings can be allocated to where they yield the highest returns .
Instead , today ’ s poorly regulated financial sectors – China is the biggest culprit – misprice capital . Moreover , banks are too dominant : Asia ( including Japan ) accounts for more than half of the world ’ s population but barely a quarter of global capital-market capitalization .
Sixteen years ago , the Asian financial crisis erupted , following the Thai government ’ s decision to float the baht in the face of speculative attacks .
The response of governments to that crisis has shaped much of the region ’ s economic policymaking ever since .
If Asia is to avoid another crisis on a similar scale , or lost decades of growth , its governments will need to embrace the type of all-encompassing reforms that Japan is undertaking .
