Northern Europe ’ s Drag on the World Economy
MADRID – In recent years , China ’ s current-account surpluses – which have averaged almost $ 220 billion annually since 2000 – have attracted much criticism from the rest of the world .
But Germany ’ s similar-size surpluses – which have averaged about $ 170 billion since the euro ’ s introduction in 1999 – have , until recently , largely escaped scrutiny .
The difference , it was argued , was monetary union .
So long as the eurozone as a whole was relatively balanced , Germany ’ s surpluses were considered irrelevant – just as , say , Texas ’ s surpluses have never been considered an issue in the United States .
Chinese surpluses , by contrast , were seen as a cause of global imbalances .
This argument is correct in the sense that it is the current-account surplus or deficit of a monetary union as a whole that can be expected to have exchange-rate implications .
And , unlike China , Germany no longer has a “ national ” exchange rate that can adjust in response to its current-account surplus .
These factors – together with the lack of trade data for regions within countries – have led economists only rarely to consider countries ’ internal surpluses or deficits .
But , in net terms , a region within a country – or , like Germany , a country or sub-region within a monetary union – still “ subtracts ” from national and global aggregate demand if it exports more than it imports .
Witness how expenditure cuts by US state governments – many of which are constitutionally required to balance their budgets – frustrated , to some degree , America ’ s massive federal-government stimulus in 2010-2011 .
For this reason , it is relevant to ask whether a country as large as Germany – or even a large state like California or Texas – augments or depletes global aggregate demand .
( In fact , as sovereign countries , California and Texas would have been the world ’ s 12th and 14th largest economies , respectively , in 2012 – ahead of the Netherlands , Mexico , and South Korea . )
That question is all the more important , because the Netherlands and Austria , two of Germany ’ s Northern European eurozone neighbors , continue to run current-account surpluses , while the Southern European crisis countries have reversed their previously large deficits , as austerity has squeezed domestic demand and made room for an increase in exports .
As a result , the eurozone as a whole will produce a surplus close to $ 260 billion this year , which represents a new global imbalance that is more directly comparable to China ’ s in the past decade .
Europe ’ s non-eurozone surplus countries – Sweden , Denmark , Switzerland , and Norway ( all of which tie their exchange rates to the euro to some degree ) – magnify this global imbalance .
Northern Europe – including these four countries and Germany , the Netherlands , and Austria – is running a massive current-account surplus of about $ 550 billion .
Meanwhile , China ’ s surplus is unlikely to exceed $ 150 billion this year .
In fact , the highest level that China ’ s annual surplus has ever reached was around $ 400 billion in 2007-2008 – when the US was poised to introduce trade sanctions against the country , because it viewed this imbalance as a threat to the stability of the US and the world economy .
What is most problematic about the eurozone ’ s situation is that unemployment in some of the crisis countries – Spain and Greece – remains above 20 % .
These countries are trying to achieve a difficult “ internal devaluation ” – that is , a reduction in their domestic unit labor costs relative to the eurozone ’ s stronger economies – while the overall eurozone surplus caused by Northern Europe puts upward pressure on the exchange rate , undermining their competitiveness outside the monetary union .
Spain and Greece have managed to achieve an internal devaluation of about 5 % this year vis-à-vis Germany , but their competitiveness vis-à-vis the US and dollar-linked countries has not improved , because the euro has appreciated by more than 5 % against the dollar .
And , indeed , the euro should appreciate , because the eurozone as a whole is now running a large current-account surplus .
One can only pity the Southern European countries .
They should almost thank the French for their inability to impose effective austerity measures and thereby still run a small current-account deficit , which has prevented the eurozone surplus from becoming even larger .
But an abundance of pity alone will not help .
Northern European countries , which have ample room to increase wages and implement expansionary policies , must do so .
This would directly benefit Northern European citizens themselves , while helping to keep the euro down and stimulate growth and adjustment in Southern Europe and the global economy as a whole .
