Merkel ’ s Next Crisis
BERLIN – With Europe bogged down by the financial crisis and its national governments failing or being voted out of office across the continent , Germany has looked like an island of prosperity and stability .
Chancellor Angela Merkel has appeared to be the embodiment of the new strength of old Europe ’ s problem child , a country admired by some and hated by others .
But that was last month . Since then , the country ’ s president , Christian Wulff , who was elected with Merkel ’ s support , has been forced to resign , owing to mistakes he made as Minister President of Lower Saxony .
Befittingly , his fall came at the high point of German carnival : while Catholics in Germany ’ s West and South celebrated , East German Protestants in Berlin consolidated their hold on power .
This is hardly an issue for ordinary Germans , because religion plays almost no role in German public life ( so long as the religion in queston is not Islam ) .
But it is a huge issue for the main governing party in Germany , the Christian Democratic Union ( CDU ) , and even more so for its Bavarian sister party , the Christian Social Union ( CSU ) .
Both parties are successors to the Catholic German Center Party , which fought against Protestant predominance in Prussia and Bismarck ’ s Reich .
With the backing of Catholic majorities in western and southern Germany , the CDU and the CSU have been the traditional governing parties in the post-war German Federal Republic since the days of Konrad Adenauer . Loud grumbling over the protestant ascendancy can be expected within both parties .
The real danger of the current presidential crisis and its solution for Merkel lies elsewhere , namely in the political calculations that made Joachim Gauck , the new German president , a candidate in the first place .
As a rule , German presidential elections are highly charged events , because they can be an early indicator of emerging new political majorities . Moreover , the chancellor is not directly elected , and can be removed only by a constructive motion of no confidence , meaning that a parliamentary majority selects a new chancellor .
This makes all majorities against a governing chancellor highly dramatic , because they reflect his or her declining power .
This is particularly true if such a majority is assembled against the chancellor on a central personnel issue , as the selection of the president certainly is .
That is what happened in Gauck ’ s election .
Until last weekend , Merkel seemed to be standing on rock-solid political ground .
She is highly respected internationally , at the height of her popularity at home , and has no rivals to fend off within her own party .
True , popular support for her coalition partners , the Free Democrats ( FDP ) , has plummeted to 2 % ; but the CDU / CSU are still clearly leading the Social Democrats ( SPD , the largest opposition party ) , and the left is fragmented into four parties , two of which are not government material .
So , even if Merkel ’ s coalition should fail at , or even before , the next federal election , it was always assumed that no one could seriously challenge her chancellorship , and certainly not within a renewed “ grand coalition ” with the SPD . There simply seemed to be no majority against Merkel .
This gross miscalculation overlooked the growing angst of her ailing coalition partners , the FDP , about their chances of survival .
In the short time since the decision to elevate Gauck to the presidency , the granite beneath Merkel ’ s feet has become political quicksand .
What happened ?
Quite simply , the FDP ditched her and changed sides on a critical issue , aligning itself with the main opposition parties in supporting Gauck .
Suddenly , the prospect of a new majority beckoned , and Merkel was faced with the choice of giving in or ending the coalition . She grit her teeth and gave in .
But the rupture within her coalition can no longer be papered over .
Gauck ’ s candidacy was forced through by an SPD / Green / FDP majority , which emerged from intersecting political interests .
But this only makes the matter more dangerous for Merkel , because such episodes are what the beginning of the end for German chancellors usually look like .
The trust between the governing parties is gone . State elections this spring will show whether the FDP & nbsp ; maneuver lifts the party above the 5 % electoral threshold needed to remain in parliament , or whether fear of certain death led them to political suicide .
If the FDPsurvives and a center-right coalition cannot gain a majority ( which is likely ) , the party will seek an alliance with the SPD and the Greens , costing Merkel the chancellorship in 2013 .
This means that the CDU / CSUwill no longer show any consideration for the FDP .
If Merkel wants to protect her chancellorship , her only option after the 2013 general election is a grand coalition with the SPD , and , to emerge on top in such an arrangement , she needs every vote within the center-right camp that she can get .
For Merkel , the situation will be very serious from now on .
She may have kept Europe ’ s crisis from Germany ’ s door , but that does not mean that Germany will not soon enter a crisis of its own .
