Justice for Some
NEW YORK – The mortgage debacle in the United States has raised deep questions about “ the rule of law , ” the universally accepted hallmark of an advanced , civilized society .
The rule of law is supposed to protect the weak against the strong , and ensure that everyone is treated fairly .
In America in the wake of the sub-prime mortgage crisis , it has done neither .
Part of the rule of law is security of property rights – if you owe money on your house , for example , the bank can ’ t simply take it away without following the prescribed legal process .
But in recent weeks and months , Americans have seen several instances in which individuals have been dispossessed of their houses even when they have no debts .
To some banks , this is just collateral damage : millions of Americans – in addition to the estimated four million in 2008 and 2009 – still have to be thrown out of their homes .
Indeed , the pace of foreclosures would be set to increase – were it not for government intervention .
The procedural shortcuts , incomplete documentation , and rampant fraud that accompanied banks ’ rush to generate millions of bad loans during the housing bubble has , however , complicated the process of cleaning up the ensuing mess .
To many bankers , these are just details to be overlooked .
Most people evicted from their homes have not been paying their mortgages , and , in most cases , those who are throwing them out have rightful claims .
But Americans are not supposed to believe in justice on average .
We don ’ t say that most people imprisoned for life committed a crime worthy of that sentence .
The US justice system demands more , and we have imposed procedural safeguards to meet these demands .
But banks want to short-circuit these procedural safeguards .
They should not be allowed to do so .
To some , all of this is reminiscent of what happened in Russia , where the rule of law – bankruptcy legislation in particular – was used as a legal mechanism to replace one group of owners with another .
Courts were bought , documents forged , and the process went smoothly .
In America , the venality is at a higher level .
It is not particular judges that are bought , but the laws themselves , through campaign contributions and lobbying , in what has come to be called “ corruption , American-style . ”
It was widely known that banks and mortgage companies were engaged in predatory lending practices , taking advantage of the least educated and most financially uninformed to make loans that maximized fees and imposed enormous risks on the borrowers .
( To be fair , the banks tried to take advantage of the more financially sophisticated as well , as with securities created by Goldman Sachs that were designed to fail . )
But banks used all their political muscle to stop states from enacting laws to curtail predatory lending .
When it became clear that people could not pay back what was owed , the rules of the game changed .
Bankruptcy laws were amended to introduce a system of “ partial indentured servitude . ”
An individual with , say , debts equal to 100 % of his income could be forced to hand over to the bank 25 % of his gross , pre-tax income for the rest of his life , because , the bank could add on , say , 30 % interest each year to what a person owed .
In the end , a mortgage holder would owe far more than the bank ever received , even though the debtor had worked , in effect , one-quarter time for the bank .
When this new bankruptcy law was passed , no one complained that it interfered with the sanctity of contracts : at the time borrowers incurred their debt , a more humane – and economically rational – bankruptcy law gave them a chance for a fresh start if the burden of debt repayment became too onerous .
That knowledge should have given lenders incentives to make loans only to those who could repay .
But lenders perhaps knew that , with the Republicans in control of government , they could make bad loans and then change the law to ensure that they could squeeze the poor .
With one out of four mortgages in the US under water – more owed than the house is worth – there is a growing consensus that the only way to deal with the mess is to write down the value of the principal ( what is owed ) .
America has a special procedure for corporate bankruptcy , called Chapter 11 , which allows a speedy restructuring by writing down debt , and converting some of it to equity .
It is important to keep enterprises alive as going concerns , in order to preserve jobs and growth .
But it is also important to keep families and communities intact .
So America needs a “ homeowners ’ Chapter 11 . ”
Lenders complain that such a law would violate their property rights .
But almost all changes in laws and regulations benefit some at the expense of others .
When the 2005 bankruptcy law was passed , lenders were the beneficiaries ; they didn ’ t worry about how the law affected the rights of debtors .
Growing inequality , combined with a flawed system of campaign finance , risks turning America ’ s legal system into a travesty of justice .
Some may still call it the “ rule of law , ” but it would not be a rule of law that protects the weak against the powerful .
Rather , it would enable the powerful to exploit the weak .
In today ’ s America , the proud claim of “ justice for all ” is being replaced by the more modest claim of “ justice for those who can afford it . ”
And the number of people who can afford it is rapidly diminishing .
