Is Ukraine Next ?
LONDON – The war in Georgia has clearly exposed the security vacuum in the surrounding region , as well as a lot of raw nerves .
Russia ’ s hasty decision to recognize the “ independence ” of South Ossetia and Abkhazia was a shot across the bow for every former Soviet country , and has intensified speculation about who might be “ next ” – and how to prevent Russia from multiplying the supposed Kosovo “ precedent ” in other ex-Soviet countries .
Having established itself as the main broker in the conflict , the European Union has many urgent priorities in Georgia itself .
But it should also be thinking ahead about how it can demonstrate a stronger commitment to security , democracy , and prosperity in the European “ neighborhood . ”
The most effective way of dealing with a newly assertive Russia will be for Europe to issue a collective refusal to accept a bipolar Europe of distinct Russian and EU spheres of influence .
The place to start is Ukraine .
Fortunately , the EU-Ukraine summit on September 9 in Evian , France , provides the perfect opportunity .
Many Ukrainians now hear domestic echoes of the lead-up to war in Georgia .
Ukraine has its own potentially separatist region in Crimea , and the country ’ s Russian minority numbers some 8.3 million ( the largest minority in Europe ) .
Half of Ukraine ’ s population is Russian-speaking in various degrees .
Although the Ukrainian constitution bans dual citizenship , the government has had to launch an inquiry into alleged covert Russian passport-holding in the Crimean city of Sevastopol .
Ukrainians note that Russia justified its invasion of Georgia , as the Nazis justified their dismemberment of Czechoslovakia , as being necessary to “ protect ” a minority to whom they had just given citizenship .
Russia has begun a war of words over Ukraine ’ s supply of arms to Georgia .
And the conflict itself has shown that the Russian Black Sea Fleet , based in Sevastopol , can operate with impunity , whether Ukraine likes it or not .
Based on its analysis of Ukraine ’ s “ Orange Revolution ” as a foreign-backed “ NGO revolution , ” Russia has also been quietly building its own network of Russia-friendly NGOs in Ukraine since 2004 .
Ukrainians also talk of an otkat ekonomiya ( “ kickback economy ” ) , in which Russian money percolates throughout the Ukrainian elite .
The European Neighborhood Policy is worthy enough , but it does not address the pressing concerns about maintaining and securing Ukraine ’ s independence .
Many member states will worry about leaping straight to the contentious issue of ultimate membership for Ukraine , but the EU already recognizes Ukraine ’ s theoretical right to join once it has met the Copenhagen criteria ; and it cannot be beyond EU leaders ’ verbal dexterity to play up the prospect .
What Ukraine would value most is a real sense that it is being treated distinctly in its own right .
The key words are “ association ” and “ partnership , ” in whatever order or combination .
The EU has more scope for short-term measures , and should develop a multi-dimensional solidarity strategy as a signal to both Ukraine and Russia .
For example , the EU ’ s foreign ministers should invite their Ukrainian counterpart to give a briefing on Ukraine-Russia relations at their next meeting .
Ukraine should be offered a road map for visa-free travel .
The new EU-Ukraine agreement should include a beefed-up solidarity clause , building on the 1994 Budapest Memorandum , whereby the EU would consult and assist Ukraine in case of challenges to its territorial integrity and sovereignty .
And the EU should back Ukraine if it insists that the Russian Black Sea Fleet leaves on schedule in 2017 .
The EU should also launch a comprehensive study of all aspects of Europe ’ s reliance on Russian energy supplies , including transit , energy security and conservation , supply diversification , and the impact of “ bypass ” pipelines like Nord Stream and South Stream .
It should consider linking the opening of the Nord Stream pipeline , which would allow Russia to cut off gas to Poland and Ukraine while maintaining deliveries to Germany , to the opening of the proposed “ White Stream ” pipeline to bring gas from Azerbaijan directly to Ukraine via Georgia , bypassing Russia .
The EU could even play a part in keeping the 2012 European Championship football finals on track .
The decision to appoint Ukraine and Poland as co-hosts was a powerful symbol of European unity across the current EU border ( Poland is a member , Ukraine is not ) .
UEFA is unhappy with Ukraine ’ s progress in building the necessary infrastructure , but Ukraine should be given time to get its act together .
Where appropriate , the EU should extend these measures to Moldova , which is now calling Ukraine a “ strategic shelter . ”
Ukraine faces a crucial presidential election in 2009 or 2010 ( and Moldova will hold elections in March 2009 ) .
After getting its fingers badly burned at the last election in 2004 , Russia is clearly tempted to intervene again .
The “ Russian factor ” will strongly influence the campaign .
Greater Western engagement is needed to ensure that the “ Europe factor ” is equally prominent .
