America ’ s Unhinged “ Pivot ”
NEW DELHI – President Barack Obama ’ s first foreign trip since winning a second term highlights Asia ’ s new centrality to America ’ s economy and security .
But Obama ’ s Asian tour also underscores the main question about American policy in the region : Will the United States ’ “ pivot ” to Asia acquire concrete strategic content , or will it remain largely a rhetorical repackaging of old policies ?
The United States , quick to capitalize on regional concerns triggered by China ’ s increasingly muscular self-assertion , has strengthened its military ties with its existing Asian allies and forged security relationships with new friends .
But the heady glow of America ’ s return to center stage in Asia has obscured key challenges in remaining the region ’ s principal security anchor in the face of China ’ s strategic ambitions .
One challenge is the need to arrest the erosion of America ’ s relative power , which in turn requires comprehensive domestic renewal , including fiscal consolidation .
But the need for spending cuts also raises the prospect that the US might be unable to finance a military shift toward the Asia-Pacific region – or , worse , that it will be forced to retrench there .
The US under Obama has increasingly ceded ground to China , a trend that admittedly began when the Bush administration became preoccupied with the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq .
This has spurred doubts about America ’ s ability to provide strategic heft to its “ pivot ” by sustaining a higher level of commitment in the Asia-Pacific region , where it already maintains 320,000 troops .
The proposed deployment of an additional 2,500 Marines in Australia is largely symbolic .
In fact , after raising Asians ’ expectations of a more robust US response to China ’ s growing assertiveness , the Obama administration has started to tamp down the military aspects of its “ pivot , ” emphasizing instead greater US economic engagement .
That change has come as a relief to those in the region who fear being forced to choose between the US and China .
But , for the countries bearing the brunt of China ’ s recalcitrant approach to territorial and maritime disputes , this emphasis raises new doubts about America ’ s commitment .
In fact , the economic reorientation of the US “ pivot ” corrects a policy that had overemphasized the military component and put the US on a path toward conflict with China .
It was Secretary of State Hillary Clinton who signaled a more hawkish US stance on China with her tough talk at the 2010 Association of Southeast Asian Nations ( ASEAN ) Regional Forum in Hanoi ; now she is moderating that position by promoting trade and investment during her visits to Asian countries .
Obama , too , is highlighting the economic aspects of the US “ pivot , ” portraying his Asia tour as an effort to generate more domestic manufacturing jobs through higher exports to “ the most rapidly growing and dynamic region in the world . ”
Even his historic visit to Myanmar – the first ever by a US president – is as much about trade as it is about weaning a strategically located , resource-rich country from Chinese influence .
The refocus on trade and economic issues has also prompted Washington to promote the Trans-Pacific Partnership , which aims to create a new Asia-Pacific free-trade group that excludes China .
Moreover , the US is emphasizing the importance of the East Asia Summit and ASEAN , whose summit overlaps with the EAS meeting in Phnom Penh that Obama will be attending .
The US course correction is being dictated by another consideration as well : America has nothing to gain from taking sides in China ’ s disputes with its neighbors – unless , of course , US interests are directly at stake , as in the South China Sea , where Chinese maritime claims threaten freedom of navigation in some of the world ’ s most heavily trafficked shipping lanes .
Concern for its own national interest explains why America has charted a course of tacit neutrality regarding the revival of Sino-Indian territorial disputes , including China ’ s sudden resurrection of a claim to the large Himalayan Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh .
Similarly , the US has urged both China and Japan to resolve peacefully their dispute over the Japanese-controlled Senkaku Islands .
America ’ s main goal is to prevent the standoff from escalating to the point that it would be forced – against its own interests – & # 160 ; to take Japan ’ s side .
When US Defense Secretary Leon Panetta met Chinese leader Xi Jinping in China in September , he got “ an earful ” that the US should stay out of the Sino-Japanese dispute .
Indeed , amid the orchestrated anti-Japanese protests in China in September , Panetta – instead of advising China to rein in the often-violent demonstrations – & # 160 ; publicly reiterated America ’ s neutrality in the struggle over control of the islands .
The correction in US policy actually extends even to terminology .
American diplomats have now abandoned the term “ pivot ” altogether , owing to its military connotation , in favor of “ rebalancing . ”
Whatever one calls it , the new policy approach is all about China , with America bolstering alliances and friendships with countries around China ’ s periphery , including India , Japan , the Philippines , Vietnam , Indonesia , and South Korea .
Yet the Obama administration continues to deny that China is at the center of its strategy .
In fact , it is reluctant to say or do anything publicly that might raise China ’ s hackles .
The Asia-Pacific region will loom larger in Obama ’ s second-term agenda , especially as the ongoing US troop withdrawal ends the Afghanistan war by 2014 .
But Obama will have to define a clearer US policy , addressing China ’ s rapid rise under an authoritarian regime that aggressively pursues border claims and whips up nationalism at home .
The US and the rest of Asia must not merely adjust to China ; they must seek to shape a China that plays by the rules .
