Israel ’ s Egyptian Dilemma
JERUSALEM – The Arab revolt against inertia , despair , and decline has rightly inspired the admiration of civilized people everywhere – everywhere , that is , except in Israel .
The fall of corrupt Arab dictatorships is being met in Israel with profound skepticism , even hostility .
For years , the Israeli discourse has been that a true peace with the Arab world would be possible only when the region embraced democracy .
But the prospect of Arab democracy has now become a nightmare for Israeli leaders .
They are used to dealing with autocrats in Cairo , Damascus , and Amman , and now fear the consequences of an Arab foreign policy that genuinely responds to the voice of the people .
Egypt , where Hosni Mubarak ’ s regime was Israel ’ s closest ally in the war against Hamas in Gaza and in curtailing Iran ’ s drive for regional hegemony , is of special concern .
Mubarak ’ s ineffectiveness as broker of an Israel-Palestinian peace was not truly inconvenient for some of Israel ’ s leaders .
All this is now bound to change .
It is inconceivable , for example , that an Egyptian democracy , in which the Muslim Brotherhood would be a legitimate political force , would persist in Mubarak ’ s complicity with Israel ’ s siege of Hamas-controlled Gaza .
Egypt ’ s policies concerning two of Israel ’ s other key rivals in the region , Turkey and Iran , also might shift .
The US had two requirements of Mubarak : that he undertake domestic political reform , and that he be a peace broker in the region .
Mubarak conveniently focused on the “ peace process , ” which explains his jealousy at Turkey 's recent attempts to usurp the role of regional broker .
Egypt ’ s regional power reflects its objective strategic weight , and this is not expected to change .
But Egypt ’ s attitude to Turkey and Iran would not be as confrontational as Israel would like it to be .
Indeed , one of the first decisions taken by Egypt ’ s interim government was to allow an Iranian vessel to cross into the Mediterranean through the Suez Canal for the first time in three decades .
Moreover , after 30 years of tension , preparations are under way for the exchange of ambassadors between Egypt and Iran . “ Egypt does not view Iran as an enemy , ” proclaimed Egyptian Foreign Minister Nabil el-Arabi .
The voice of a democratic Egypt in defense of the cause of Palestine or in putting pressure on Israel to join the Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) would be far more credible than that of Mubarak ’ s regime , which sometimes looked as if it were simply going through the motions on policy issues like these .
Nor is Egypt ’ s political discourse likely to be especially palatable to Israelis .
Already , the new Egyptian finance minister , Samir Radwan , has made it clear that he does not favor investments from “ the enemy ” – that is , Israel – which might lead to a takeover of the Egyptian economy .
All of this does not mean that Egypt ’ s commitment to the two countries ’ peace treaty is in imminent danger .
Egypt , whose new paradigm in foreign affairs increasingly looks like an imitation of Turkey ’ s strategy of “ zero problems with its neighbors , ” needs the treaty at least as much as Israel does .
Any Egyptian democracy that was truly accountable to its popular base would have to address the country ’ s colossal domestic problems , and a state of war with Israel would hardly advance that goal .
The real threat to Egypt ’ s security today is on its southern and eastern borders , not in Israel .
The secession of South Sudan is a real concern in Egypt , for it might eventually lead to the disintegration of the entire Sudanese state into fiefdoms of instability and Islamic radicalism .
Egypt is now also rightly concerned about neighboring Libya possibly splitting into its tribal components .
Conservatism in revolutionary times is an inadequate option .
Israel ’ s tragedy lies in its obsession with taking ( or avoiding ) decisions only on the basis of worst-case scenarios .
This is blatantly obvious in its failure to respond creatively to the Arab world ’ s democratic upsurge .
The Netanyahu government ’ s political paralysis – its wait-and-see philosophy in the face of massive change all around it – will end up leaving the initiative in others ’ hands , to the detriment of Israel ’ s national interest .
No convincing peace initiatives or major policy responses are expected from Israel at a time when the United Nations General Assembly is poised to recognize overwhelmingly the creation of a Palestinian state – a move that would further isolate the country .
Moreover , an emerging democratic Egypt that is reconciling with Israel ’ s sworn enemies , and that is bound to be more proactive in its defense of the Palestinian cause , is not viewed in Israel as a legitimate intermediary .
Inertia was not always Israel ’ s way .
Netanyahu does not have to look very far for examples of bold and visionary Israeli leaders to follow . Some reached peace agreements with the country ’ s neighbors ; others came very close – and at least succeeded in conveying to the Arab world Israel ’ s commitment to reaching out to the region ’ s peoples .
The focus of Israel ’ s regional policy should be building bridges to those peoples , the true masters of the current “ Arab awakening . ”
A generous solution to the plight of the Palestinians is more vital to that task than ever before .
