Iran ’ s Nuclear Zealot
With negotiations over Iran ’ s nuclear program looming once again , understanding Iran ’ s new president , Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , is critically important .
Perhaps the best place to start is the moment the world first gained a glimpse of Ahmadinejad ’ s character and hardline program .
When President Ahmadinejad addressed the United Nations in New York last September , he suddenly felt himself surrounded by light .
It wasn ’ t the stage lighting , he said .
It was light from heaven .
Ahmadinejad related his otherworldly experience in a videotaped meeting with a prominent Ayatollah in Tehran .
A transcript of his comments and sections of the video-tape wound up on a hard-line , pro-regime website , baztab.com.
According to the transcript , Ahmadinejad said that a member of his entourage at the UN meeting first told him of the light . “ When you began with the words ‘ In the name of God ’ … I saw a light coming , surrounding you and protecting you to the end [ of the speech ] . ”
Ahmadinejad confirmed sensing a similar presence . “ I felt it myself , too , that suddenly the atmosphere changed and for 27-28 minutes the leaders could not blink .... They had their eyes and ears open for the message from the Islamic Republic , ” he told Ayatollah Javadi-Amoli .
Ahmadinejad ’ s “ vision ” at the UN could be dismissed as political posturing if it weren ’ t for a string of similar statements and actions that suggest he believes that he is destined to bring about the “ End Times ” – the end of the world – by paving the way for the return of the Shia Muslim messiah .
Given that Iran continues to pursue suspect nuclear programs , which could bring the Islamic Republic dangerously close to weapons capability , a leader with messianic visions is worrying .
After all , this is the same man who recently pledged to use Iran ’ s newfound powers to “ wipe Israel off the map ” and to “ destroy America . ”
In a November 16 speech in Tehran to senior clerics who had come from all over Iran to hear him , the new president said that the main mission of his government was to “ pave the path for the glorious reappearance of Imam Mahdi ( May God Hasten His Reappearance ) . ”
The mystical 12th Imam of Shia Islam disappeared as a child in 941 CE , and Shia Muslims have awaited his reappearance ever since , believing that when he returns , he will reign on earth for seven years , before bringing about the Last Judgment and the end of the world .
In order to prepare for the Mahdi , Ahmadinejad said , “ Iran should turn into a mighty , advanced , and model Islamic society . ” Iranians should “ refrain from leaning toward any Western school of thought ” and abstain from “ luxurious lives ” and other excesses .
Three months into Ahmadinejad ’ s presidency , his views of the 12th Imam are being widely discussed in Tehran .
According to one rumor , as mayor of Tehran , Ahmadinejad drew up a new city plan for the Imam 's return .
In recent weeks , Ahmadinejad ’ s aides have denied another rumor that he ordered his cabinet to write a pact of loyalty with the 12th Imam and throw it down a well near the holy city of Qom , where some believe the Imam is hiding .
Those who give credence to the rumor point to an early decision of his cabinet to allocate $ 17 million to renovate the Jamkaran mosque , where devotees of the 12th Imam have prayed for centuries .
Similarly , reports in government media outlets in Tehran have quoted Ahmadinejad as having told regime officials that the Hidden Imam will reappear in two years .
This proved too much for one Iranian legislator , Akbar Alami , who publicly questioned Ahmadinejad ’ s judgment , saying that even Islam ’ s holiest figures have never made such claims .
While many Shia Muslims worship the 12th Imam , a previously secret society of powerful clerics , now openly advising the new president , are transforming these messianic beliefs into government policies .
Led by Ayatollah Mesbah Yazdi , who frequently appears with the Ahmadinejad , the Hojatieh society is considered by many Shia as the lunatic fringe .
During the early years of the Islamic Revolution , even Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini found their beliefs too extreme and sent them scurrying underground .
As devotees of the 12th Imam , the Hojatieh believe that only great tribulation will warrant his coming .
Akin in some ways to Lenin ’ s doctrine that worsening social conditions would hasten revolution , the Hojatieh believe that only increased violence , conflict , and oppression will bring the Mahdi ’ s return .
Since taking office last August , Ahmadinejad has installed Hojatieh devotees in his cabinet and throughout the bureaucracy .
The Ministry of Information and Security ( MOIS ) , largely sidelined by former President Mohammed Khatami , has re-emerged as a powerful repressive force , using plain-clothes agents , allied with the paramilitary Bassij and non-government vigilantes , to crack down on potential opponents of the regime .
As the world prepares to confront an Iranian regime that continues to defy the International Atomic Energy Agency on its nuclear programs , we must listen to what Iran ’ s leaders say as we watch what they do .
A religious zealot with nuclear weapons is a dangerous combination the world cannot afford to tolerate .
