La Nausée Russe
MOSCOW – The history of successive authoritarian regimes in Russia reveals a recurring pattern : they do not die from external blows or domestic insurgencies .
The illness resembles a political version of Jean-Paul Sartre ’ s existential nausea , and led to both the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 and the Soviet Union ’ s demise with Mikhail Gorbachev ’ s Perestroika .
Today , Prime Minister Vladimir Putin ’ s regime is afflicted with the same terminal disease , despite – or because of – the seemingly impermeable political wall that it spent years constructing around itself .
Putin ’ s simulacrum of a large ideological regime simply couldn ’ t avoid this fate .
The leader ’ s “ heroic image ” and “ glorious deeds ” are now blasphemed daily .
And these verbal assaults are no longer limited to marginal opposition voices ; they are now entering the mainstream media .
Two events have sharply accelerated the collapse of confidence in Putin ’ s regime , both among the “ elite ” and ordinary Russians .
First , in September , at the congress of Putin ’ s political party , United Russia , Putin and “ President ” Dmitri Medvedev formalized what everyone anticipated , with Putin announcing his intention to return to the presidency in March – and thus virtually declaring himself Russia ’ s dictator for life .
His quest for eternal rule is driven not so much by a thirst for power as by a fear that he will one day be held accountable for his actions .
The second lethal blow to Putin ’ s prestige came with the unprecedented scale of fraud perpetrated in December ’ s parliamentary elections .
According to reliable observers , such as the election-monitoring NGOs Golos ( The Voice ) and Citizens ’ Watch , vote-rigging in favor of United Russia resulted in an estimated 15-20 % advantage for what is now commonly called the party of “ crooks and thieves . ”
And the trickery began long before voting day , with nine opposition parties prevented from even appearing on the ballot .
These two events have rendered Putin ’ s regime not only illegitimate , but also ridiculous .
Even if the regime formally “ wins ” the presidential election on March 4 , the die has already been cast .
What is happening in Russia today is part of a global phenomenon .
Despite Putin ’ s best efforts to isolate Russia and its post-Soviet near abroad , anti-authoritarian trends in nearby regions ( like the Middle East ) are infiltrating .
Russian voters , the establishment , and intellectuals sense that Putinism has already lost .
It is now only a matter of time before events make that defeat a political reality .
And , after Putin falls , the leaders of other authoritarian post-Soviet regimes – from Belarus ’ s Alexander Lukashenko and Kazakhstan ’ sNursultan Nazarbayev to Ukraine ’ s would-be Putin , Viktor Yanukovych – will not survive in power for long .
In fact , authoritarianism was already on the way out in the former Soviet Union , but the global economic crisis halted the process .
Georgia was the first to oust its communist apparatchiks .
Ukraine followed , but , owing to internal discord , Kremlin pressure , and the European Union ’ s indifference , the Orange Revolution was unable to deliver on the promise of democracy .
Now Yanukovych is trying to reverse the country ’ s democratic gains , but he is finding it difficult , despite imprisoning many opposition leaders .
In Moldova , a real transition to democracy has been underway for some time .
In Kazakhstan , too , rumblings against Nazarbayev ’ s presidency for life are growing louder .
Even the people of tiny South Ossetia , which the Kremlin annexed following its war with Georgia in 2008 , are resisting the Putin regime ’ s local puppets .
Back at home , mass disapproval of Putin ’ s corrupt administration is rapidly turning into open contempt .
What began just a few months ago as an attitude of protest has quickly become a social norm .
To stop the protests now is virtually impossible .
If Putin unleashes his well-developed apparatus of coercion , he will have played his last remaining card .
Any resort to brute force to suppress demonstrations would finalize the regime ’ s loss of legitimacy .
“ We all understand , ” one of the leading Kremlin ideologues recently confided to me , “ but we can ’ t get out .
They will come for us at once .
So we have to keep running like a squirrel in a cage .
For how long ?
For as long as there is strength … ”
Those who warn that the current government ’ s collapse will be a risky leap into the unknown are correct .
But they are mistaken to believe that preserving this government is safer .
Russia must rid itself , once and for all , of Putinism ’ s systemic corruption , lest the country be consumed by it .
