Biomedicine in Reverse
LA JOLLA , CALIFORNIA – Pundits have long predicted that biology would dominate the twenty-first century , just as physics dominated the twentieth century .
But biomedical research has yet to achieve the kind of productivity increases that accompanied the industrialization of combustion , electricity , and electronics .
Will the “ century of biology ” turn out to be little more than a fantasy ?
The problem largely comes down to a decrease in biomedical research-and-development expenditure .
As it stands , roughly $ 270 billion is invested in the field each year , producing an impressive half-million research publications , but only 20-30 new medicines .
The discrepancy between spending and output adheres to what has come to be known as “ Eroom ’ s law ” – Moore ’ s law in reverse .
Moore ’ s law observes the increase in computer processing power over time – specifically , that the number of transistors that can be placed cheaply on an integrated circuit doubles every 18-24 months .
By contrast , Eroom ’ s law charts the regress in new drug approvals , noting that the costs of developing a new medicine double roughly every nine years .
This phenomenon is rooted in high rates of drug failure and lengthening technology cycles .
The probability that a drug entering clinical trials will gain approval from the US Food and Drug Administration has dropped from 23.9 % in 1997 to 10.4 % today .
While the first recombinant insulin in the 1980 ’ s took less than a decade from testing to approval , monoclonal antibodies and gene therapy took more than 20 years to reach the same milestone .
So far , pharmaceutical and biomedical research firms have responded to Eroom ’ s law by cutting R & D or moving it to less expensive sites in Asia , shifting their focus to less prevalent diseases , and sourcing innovation externally .
As a result , growth in biomedical R & D spending has declined from more than 9 % annually in the early 2000 ’ s to less than 3 % today .
But , while this strategy will moderate the impact of Eroom ’ s law , it will ultimately prove inadequate to sustain the industry .
The industry ’ s ability to support R & D budgets has already led to the closure of more than 30 major research sites .
The United States bore the brunt of these closures , with biomedical R & D expenditure declining by more than $ 12 billion from 2007 to 2012 .
And Asia – where biomedical R & D is growing rapidly , but from a small base – is unlikely to pick up the slack .
Asian countries have tended to be reluctant to shoulder the cost of developing new medicines , with reimbursements falling far short of US levels , and their R & D productivity will not match that of the US and Europe for several more years .
Moreover , biomedical research firms are abandoning certain diseases in order to avoid the large-scale trials that they require , focusing instead on “ orphan diseases ” like cystic fibrosis , which demand smaller clinical trials that have a higher probability of success , leading to drugs that can cost more than $ 100,000 annually per patient .
But , with insurers and payers worldwide becoming increasingly vigilant about controlling costs , this business model ’ s long-term prospects are unclear .
Finally , while drugs are increasingly produced by small companies that larger pharmaceutical firms then acquire , funding for these start-ups is drying up .
Likewise , universities – the main source of biomedical innovation – are facing dwindling budgets .
This year , funding for the US National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) – one of the world ’ s leading medical research centers – is a billion dollars lower than in 2012 .
Restoring funding for basic biomedical research appears to have lost favor with policymakers , because it does not offer immediate self-sustaining economic returns .
And funding for basic research remains a low priority in emerging economies like China , where it accounts for less than 15 cents for every research dollar spent ( compared to 35 cents in the US ) .
With no panacea in sight , several other solutions are gaining traction .
To maximize investment , the public and private sectors are increasingly pooling resources .
For example , under the Accelerating Medicines Partnership , the NIH and ten biopharmaceutical companies will fund a five-year effort to validate promising targets in three disease areas .
Other initiatives include efforts in Alzheimer ’ s research to test competing drugs against one shared “ placebo arm ” in clinical trials , and in cancer research to test multiple therapies in a single trial and identify the most responsive patients .
These pooled resources will be directed to a few high-priority diseases , identified through an evaluation of the marginal benefit of additional R & D. Japan ’ s focused strategy to champion stem-cell R & D should serve as a model for other countries .
At the same time , governments will have to implement policies aimed at guiding investment toward specific diseases .
For example , increased NIH funding , extended market exclusivity , and relaxed regulatory hurdles in the US resulted in a renaissance in antibiotic drug development .
Society will also have to share the cost of drug development .
Regulatory agencies worldwide may follow the United Kingdom ’ s lead in embracing adaptive licensing .
Under this approach , drugs are conditionally approved and marketed , with the revenue generated following the conditional approval covering the costly trial for proving efficacy .
Such a scheme facilitates lower drug pricing , while overcoming the effect of Eroom ’ s law on investment in treatments for many diseases .
Whether these efforts will succeed in putting biomedical research on a more sustainable footing remains an open question .
This could still turn out to be biology ’ s century .
