The Uses of Nuclear Ambitions
MADRID – The agreement reached in Geneva in the wee hours of November 24 between Iran and the P5 + 1 ( the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council , plus Germany ) on Iran ’ s nuclear program proves a crucially important point : the sanctions regime worked .
The interim deal is Iran ’ s first compromise on its nuclear program in more than a decade , and a diplomatic victory in a field long overshadowed by the looming cloud of military intervention .
Yet the euphoric reaction seen in some quarters is misplaced .
Beyond the ambiguities and limitations of the six-month agreement , the negotiations have clearly exposed Iran ’ s nuclear-weapons program and , more broadly , its understanding that nuclear weapons remain a geostrategic status symbol .
This points to the difficulty of achieving a comprehensive agreement and the possibility that the international effort could result only in a series of small deals aimed at delaying Iran ’ s acquisition of a nuclear weapon rather than removing the threat of it altogether .
Beneath the headlines of the historic deal lies a limited and ambiguous agreement .
The joint statement released by European Union High Representative Catherine Ashton and Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif referred to the agreement as “ a joint plan of action ” that “ sets out an approach toward reaching a long-term comprehensive solution . ” While it includes a first step that “ creates the time and environment needed for a comprehensive solution , ” the interim accord is really about confidence-building measures .
Indeed , the obligations that it lists are referred to as “ voluntary measures . ”
At best , the agreement maintains the current status quo , and in some respects even allows for further development of Iran ’ s nuclear program .
In this sense , perhaps the most troubling aspect of the interim deal concerns Iran ’ s yet-to-be-opened Arak plant , which would offer a path to domestic plutonium production and weaponization .
Though the agreement reached in Geneva includes Iran ’ s pledge not to transfer fuel or heavy water or commission its Arak reactor , there does not appear to be any overarching moratorium on construction at the site .
According to the International Atomic Energy Agency , the Arak plant still lacks several major reactor components , such as control-room equipment and cooling pumps . So , Iran , it seems , will be able to advance its plutonium program during the six-month confidence-building period .
That loophole is all the more troubling in light of French press reports this week concerning Western intelligence on the construction of facilities in Shiraz that may be used to separate plutonium in order to create the fissile material needed for nuclear weapons .
That Iran ’ s push to acquire the capacity to produce nuclear weapons is partly motivated by security concerns cannot be denied .
Nationalism , however , is a more important factor .
It is not just that all the great powers have nuclear weapons ; the problem , from Iran ’ s perspective , is that lesser powers – particularly neighboring states such as Pakistan and Israel – have them . The Iranians regard themselves as the heirs to a great and ancient civilization , and their ambition of achieving regional preeminence reflects this .
At the same time , they perceive their country to be marginalized , discriminated against , and the target of aggressive international condemnation .
Nearly 70 years after the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , the view persists globally that gaining a seat at the grownup table of geopolitics requires nuclear weapons .
Germany is an exception , though hardly a geostrategic heavyweight ; and though Japan knows the horror of nuclear war , important domestic voices there are calling for a change of its non-nuclear status .
This view of nuclear weapons as a shorthand for national greatness is reinforced by the architecture of the non-proliferation regime , which firmly divides states into two camps : nuclear haves and have-nots .
As long as possessing nuclear weapons remains a state ’ s clearest way to demonstrate its bona fides as a great power , maintaining the potential to develop such weapons will be too tempting for countries like Iran to forswear .
What is needed is a global shift away from the equation of nuclear weapons with geopolitical greatness . Progress on various efforts to sever this link have not been very encouraging , as was recently demonstrated by the Kremlin ’ s negative reaction to US President Barack Obama ’ s proposal that both sides cut their nuclear stockpiles .
Meanwhile , non-P5 nuclear-weapons states continue to expand their arsenals , with Pakistan and India estimated to have nearly tripled their stockpiles during the past decade .
The interim agreement with Iran marks an important juncture .
Above all , it shows that international sanctions can bear fruit , and that a diplomatic way forward – even if proves to be a narrow one – is possible .
We can remain both ambitious and realistic .
But a comprehensive deal with Iran – and the need to preempt future epigones – requires a broader change : a world that not only excludes the offensive use of nuclear weapons but also acknowledges the ultimate unsustainability of their deterrent power .
