Learning from Crises
PRINCETON – Crises , especially very severe ones , are often learning opportunities .
Unfortunately , so far the world seems to have learned very little from the recent financial crisis .
In fact , the situation today is just as dangerous as it was in 2007 , with the United States now worried by its anemic economic recovery , Europe paralyzed by fears for the survival of its currency union , and emerging markets wrestling with asset-price bubbles .
Learning from crises is partly an exercise in analyzing what went wrong .
But it is also about finding solutions .
Collectively , we have done well on the former , and very poorly on the latter .
Most explanations of the causes of the post-2007 financial crisis point to five sources of instability .
First , the crisis was precipitated by the peculiarities of the US real-estate market , by government incentives for increased homeownership , and in imprudent lending by financial institutions .
Second , perverse incentives led financial institutions to assume excessive risks .
Internally , bankers had enormous potential to benefit from risky moves , but were insulated from the costs of failure .
For individual institutions , this was not seen as a problem , because they were protected by the logic of being “ too big to fail . ”
When the crisis erupted – owing to a downturn in the US housing market that was clearly foreseeable but willfully unforeseen – the public sector had to absorb the contingent liabilities built up in the financial system .
Third , global imbalances led to cheap money .
Long-term current-account surpluses in some countries ( China , other rapidly growing Asian economies , and Gulf oil producers ) permitted the long-term financing of deficits in others ( the United Kingdom , Australia , Spain , Ireland , and , above all , the US ) .
Fourth , central banks , especially in the US , mistakenly maintained loose monetary policy .
With dollar financing by the Federal Reserve available to large institutions , the Fed became the equivalent of a world central bank .
Finally , once the crisis erupted , the fiscal consequences of bailing out too-big-to-fail financial institutions contributed to rapid public-debt unsustainability , which threatens to boomerang on the banking sector .
None of these issues , with the possible exception of the first , has been resolved .
Of course , some discussion of financial-sector reform is taking place in a variety of forums , with a gradual consensus building around sliding or incremental capital-adequacy rules .
But many systemically important banks became bigger rather than smaller as a result of the crisis .
Moreover , while global imbalances were immediately reduced in the course of the initial crisis , with the US adjusting its deficit relatively rapidly , they are now re-emerging .
The world ’ s major industrial economies , meanwhile , are maintaining very low interest rates .
Before 2007 , such a policy was seen as a mistake at worst ; now it is interpreted as a malign strategy .
There is a widespread suspicion that the US is deliberately pursuing dollar depreciation ( or “ currency wars , ” in the words of Brazil ’ s finance minister ) .
We do not know how to handle the fiscal issues posed by the financial crisis .
Doubts about the sustainability of government debt produce sudden surges in interest rates , as risk premia rise dramatically with perceptions of the likelihood of default .
Such surges are , by definition , abrupt – and thus highly disruptive .
For countries on the brink , a merciless logic follows .
Government debt service has in general become easier , owing to low interest rates .
But hints of new fiscal imprudence or of backsliding on long-term debt consolidation and reduction can drive up borrowing costs dramatically .
In these circumstances , the additional costs of debt service easily outweigh any gains that might come from some measure of fiscal relaxation .
As a result , fiscal uncertainty is affecting all major industrial countries , and producing political paralysis .
So , while we understand very well what may have produced the financial crisis , we find ourselves helpless to draw usable lessons from it .
In a longer historical perspective , this policy paralysis may not be surprising .
It took a good deal of time to learn what we all now take to be the lessons of the interwar Great Depression .
It was only 30 years later , in the 1960 ’ s , that Keynesian fiscal policy was widely accepted .
It was also only in the 1960 ’ s that Milton Friedman clearly formulated the Great Depression ’ s monetary lessons .
It was only in trade policy that the lesson was learned more quickly .
During the Great Depression , a spiral of protectionist trade quotas and tariff restrictions was used to combat monetary deflation , as popular demand for political action met legislative “ log-rolling ” by representatives of groups with very different – and often very locally oriented – policy priorities .
The political scientist E.E. Schattschneider ’ s analysis of the process was influential in transferring responsibility for trade measures from the US Congress to the President .
The modern equivalent of that learning about trade policy would be to think about mechanisms to ensure long-term improvement in fiscal policymaking .
In particular , it would be helpful to devise a way to identify potential risks to fiscal stability ( such as those implied by an over-extended banking and financial system ) .
Moreover , there is a need to limit legislative pressure for additional spending on locally important projects that fuel overall fiscal dysfunction .
The constructive ( and relatively quick ) trade-policy response in the aftermath of the Great Depression did not pay off immediately .
But , in the long run , it produced a much better policymaking environment .
Now is the moment to launch an analogous effort to reform and rationalize the political process that produces fiscal policy .
