Measuring the Revolutionary Wave
NEW YORK – A prediction three months ago that popular protests would soon topple a dictatorship in Tunisia , sweep Hosni Mubarak from power in Egypt , provoke civil war in Muammar el-Qaddafi ’ s Libya , and rattle regimes from Morocco to Yemen would have drawn serious skepticism .
We knew that the tinder was dry , but we could never know how or when , exactly , it would combust .
Now that it has , how far can the flames spread ?
Some commentators have taken to calling this moment the “ Arab Spring , ” an awakening that might permanently cripple autocracy in the Middle East .
The contagion effect seems clear .
Countries across the region have large numbers of young people and too few jobs .
Food prices are rising .
Corruption fuels anger .
In Egypt , young people , inspired by satellite television images and empowered by modern communications , lit and fed the fire .
Given the easy availability of these technologies , their ability to catalyze protest might transcend borders once thought impregnable .
But , with their survival at stake , authoritarian regimes are good at spotting threats in the neighborhood and adapting to meet them .
Though satellite television , mobile phones , and online social networking can force some authoritarians to become more responsive to popular demands , governments can also use these technologies to identify and isolate threats , monitor communications among activists , and transmit messages of their own .
Or , when necessary , they can simply turn them off .
More to the point , the protests now roiling the Arab world have little to do with the “ Prague Spring ” of 1968 or the revolutions that swept through Eastern Europe in 1989 .
Unlike Cold War-era East Germans , Czechs , and Poles , protesters in today ’ s Middle East are not unified by opposition to foreign control .
To be sure , many Arab young people blame America for bolstering the local dictator , but their resentment doesn ’ t begin to compare with anti-Soviet attitudes in the Warsaw Pact .
Arab youth have no Soviet Union to cast off – and no Europe to join .
Instead , today ’ s Middle East is most usefully compared to the increasingly restive former Soviet republics of a few years ago .
In 2003 , a “ Rose Revolution ” in Georgia elevated a younger generation led by a president without ties to Soviet communism .
Mikhail Saakashvili remains in power , though a brutal four-day war with Russia in 2008 sharply limited Georgia ’ s ability to influence events beyond its borders .
In Ukraine , the “ Orange Revolution ” in 2004 overturned the results of a rigged election , sidelining Viktor Yanukovych in favor of Viktor Yushchenko .
But in 2010 , with Yushchenko ’ s popularity at an all-time low , Yanukovych won a vote that international observers pronounced free and fair .
In Kyrgyzstan in 2005 , the “ Tulip Revolution ” forced the ouster of Askar Akayev .
Hastily held elections lifted Kurmanbek Bakiyev to the presidency .
Yet , in 2010 , a new round of protests forced Bakiyev from power .
As in the Middle East , each of these upheavals reflected the willingness of many people to risk their lives and livelihoods to topple a corrupt government that could or would not generate opportunity and prosperity for them .
All three arrived like bolts from the blue .
So far , their main lasting effect has been to frighten neighboring autocrats into action .
Governments in Armenia , Azerbaijan , Belarus , and Uzbekistan have infiltrated and undermined civil-society organizations , kicked out Western observers and aid workers , and leaned on local courts to guarantee favorable election-related rulings .
Uzbekistan , in particular , has proven its willingness to brutalize protesters .
The wealthiest of the post-Soviet states , Russia and Kazakhstan , took similar preemptive steps against instability that never came .
As in Georgia and Ukraine , Tunisia and Egypt will have new governments to grapple with old problems .
Other Arab regimes are now spending their way back to stability with money that most former Soviet states didn ’ t have .
Some have enough cash for new subsidies and direct handouts , as well as to pay their military and security forces more and reinforce their tools and methods of crowd control .
Threats to the wealthier Persian Gulf states , in particular , are exaggerated .
Bahrain , the world ’ s only Shia-majority country governed by a Sunni monarch , remains on edge .
But King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa can continue to count on help from his deep-pocketed friends in Saudi Arabia , who are determined to prevent Bahrain ’ s unrest from spilling over into their country ’ s oil-rich Eastern Province , where most Saudi Shia live .
In the end , Bahrain ’ s Shia majority will likely gain more rights and political representation , as well as cash payments and jobs , but Khalifa will remain in charge .
There is even less risk in Saudi Arabia itself , where King Abdullah recently promised more than $ 130 billion in stimulus spending .
The few Saudi demonstrations appear populated almost entirely by minority Shia , who find little sympathy among majority Sunnis , and by foreign construction workers petitioning for higher wages and better working conditions .
Syria ’ s President Bashar al-Assad has more domestic support than recent media accounts of unrest in the country ’ s south suggest .
Nor does Iran ’ s government appear to face real danger .
The brutal crackdown on post-election protests in 2009 demonstrated the regime ’ s determination to maintain order by any means necessary .
For the moment , most of Iran ’ s opposition will continue to try to change the country from within the limits of the current system .
In the Middle East , only in Yemen is unrest likely to bring about another regime change .
Outside of Libya , where violent stalemate could continue for some time , embattled North African regimes also will muddle through .
Protests in Morocco have not cut into King Mohammad ’ s broad popular support , and promises of economic and political reform will probably satisfy opposition parties for the time being .
In Algeria , demonstrations have lost momentum , and President Abdelaziz Bouteflika can rely on his military to keep diehard activists in check .
The Arab Spring has upended assumptions about popular patience in the region .
A new chapter has begun .
But we must never overestimate the ability of new governments to solve old problems – or underestimate the ingenuity and brutality of the old regimes .
