Grow Your Own Silicon Valley
SAN FRANCISCO : The dot.com boom may have gone bust for the moment , but that is not stopping governments from wanting to encourage their own high-tech industries .
Many countries , indeed , are envious of Silicon Valley outside of San Francisco , the world 's center of the computer , software , and Internet industries .
Microsoft 's huge investments in Cambridge , England , and the $ 200 million Bill Gates gave its ancient university for scholarships for technology students from around the world , helped Cambridge become a powerful center of technological innovation .
Cities and university towns everywhere now want to get into the act .
Indeed , across Europe and in Asia other nations have either started , or are considering offering state subsidies to encourage the growth of their own high tech clusters .
After observing Silicon Valley during my many years at the Hoover Institution of Stanford University , however , I am convinced that dynamic industrial clusters require a flexible economic environment , not government industrial policy .
Silicon Valley started in the 1950 's with a modest plan by Frederick Terman , a farsighted dean of Stanford 's Engineering School , to create an Industrial Park on unused Stanford land .
A few companies took up Stanford 's offer , but the area was still sleepy and unimpressive when I first visited Stanford in the early 1960 's .
The region took off in the 1970 's with Apple 's development of the personal computer , and it has exploded since then following the creation of the Internet and the enormous demand for software .
Silicon Valley now employs over 1 million persons , almost 40 % have at least a bachelor 's degree , and more than one third are foreign born .
They are attracted by the good jobs with excellent prospects , and by the early access to frontier developments in the high tech field .
Silicon Valley is loaded with startup companies , and with former startups like Intel and Cisco Systems that grew very big , very fast .
Venture capitalists invested over $ 6 billion in 1999 in new or young Valley companies , and 77 companies had IPOs , mainly related to the Internet .
The most prestigious individuals in this Valley are those who can claim they work in " startups " .
Faculty and graduates from the strong science and engineering departments of two nearby major universities , Stanford and the University of California at Berkeley , have been leaders in forming dynamic startups .
Although good universities may be necessary to develop these industrial clusters , they are not sufficient .
Other regions with strong science and engineering universities , such as the University of Illinois at Urbana , do not have many high tech companies .
Whatever got Silicon Valley going , its advantages in attracting quality labor and venture capital multiplied as the region grew .
A large pool of engineers , scientists , and software experts are available to both new and old companies .
Talented individuals flock to the region not only because of generous options and decent pay , but also because they know they can find other good jobs if their employers fail .
So while job changes are common in the Valley , unemployment rates are extremely low .
Innovations and other new developments spread rapidly in Silicon Valley , partly carried by the employees who change jobs .
As Alfred Marshall , a great British economist of the late 19th century recognized , when companies in related industries locate near each other , Athe mysteries of the trade become no mysteries ; but are as it were in the air " .
This makes it difficult to keep secrets , but at the same time companies have early access to innovations by neighbors .
Silicon Valley 's labor market flexibility indicates that nations that want to encourage high tech clusters should make it easy to hire and lay off workers rather than mandate substantial severance pay , or legislate limits on working hours .
Companies have stronger incentives to hire added workers when they are formed or expand if they can reduce employment when demand turns down .
The US has relatively few obstacles to starting new companies , raising private capital , or going public .
It also allows key employees to be hired with potentially valuable stock options that economize on out of pocket expenses .
Although several countries have begun to reduce the red tape that hampers the formation and financing of new companies , most have a long way to go in appreciating and encouraging entrepreneurial activities .
For example , reducing artificial obstacles to starting a company is far different from the generous subsidy programs started recently by Germany and other countries desperate for more dynamic economies .
Subsidies generate " safe " startups that appeal to bureaucrats rather than to market demand .
The tremendous spontaneity found in Silicon Valley could never be reproduced through bureaucratic greenhouse support .
Silicon Valley clearly grew over time with little help from government .
Indeed , the major attempt to help actually hurt the region .
For the U.S.-Japan Semiconductor Agreement of 1986 that imposed " antidumping " restrictions on imports of semiconductors from Japan slowed the shift of Silicon Valley toward software and other higher valued added products and services .
It is unlikely that industrial policies toward the high tech sector by other nations will be any wiser than America 's failed policy of that time .
Where dynamic industrial clusters locate is partly due to luck and accident .
But Silicon Valley 's history indicates that top universities , flexible labor and capital markets , and limited regulatory obstacles to entrepreneurship all help attract high tech companies .
