India ’ s Illiterate Revolution
The United States has long been divided over what it calls “ affirmative action , ” a system of racial preferences intended to overcome the lingering consequences of slavery and discrimination against black Americans .
India is now becoming divided in much the same way , and for much the same reason – the emerging system of “ reserved places ” aimed at redressing centuries of caste discrimination .
But India ’ s good intentions , like America ’ s affirmative action policies , are misguided .
The underlying question is whether merit as a criterion for advancement is doomed when legacies of racial and caste discrimination exist .
Are those who agitate for affirmative action fighting for something that is more a quack remedy than a real solution ?
In fact , India ’ s “ reserved places ” scheme operates as a deliberate smokescreen , for it allows the government cleverly to mask the real issue , which is access to primary education for India ’ s disadvantaged .
Were adequate primary education available to India ’ s poor – or , for that matter , to America ’ s poor urban blacks – there would be no need for reserved places in higher education and elsewhere .
Indeed , any Indian able to read this article should consider himself lucky , because India ’ s politicians have succeeded in keeping a majority of the country ’ s population thoroughly illiterate ( as well as poor and unhealthy ) .
Instead of providing quality elementary education for all , our policymakers are more concerned with enacting caste-based measures aimed at short-term political gains .
Since India gained independence 58 years ago , billions of rupees have been doled out in numerous educational policies , but general primary education remains abysmal .
According to a report released by the National Institute for Educational Planning Administration ( NIEPA ) in 2005 , 8.1 % of primary schools in India have no classrooms , while 17.5 % have only one teacher .
In addition , 76.2 % of schools do not have clean drinking water , while 14.6 % lack electricity .
Less than 4 % of all primary schools have computers .
Likewise , the Mumbai-based NGO Pratham ’ s Annual Status of Education Report 2005 , which was prepared after a survey in 28 states and union territories , reveals that 35 % of children in the 7-14 age group are unable to read simple paragraphs , while 41 % failed to solve a simple two-digit subtraction problem or a division problem .
Instead of preparing a pool of educated workers for the future , the government ’ s policies have given rise to an illiterate and innumerate population .
These findings raise damning suspicions about the literacy levels that successive Indian governments have claimed to achieve .
If the state of primary education is this bad , will the disadvantaged classes ever stand a chance ?
Moreover , according to Vinod Raina , a member of the Central Advisory Board on Education ( CABE ) , 80 million of India ’ s 200 million children between 6-14 years of age are not in school at all .
Of the remaining 120 million , only 20 million are expected to reach the tenth year of school , with the rest dropping out along the way .
Indeed , Prime Minister Manmohan Singh recently expressed dismay over the fact that “ only 47 out of 100 children enrolled in class I reach class VIII . ”
The government has pledged in its National Common Minimum Program to raise public expenditure on education to 6 % of GDP .
However , recent years have witnessed a steady decline in educational spending , from 4 % of GDP in 2001-02 to 3.8 % in 2002-04 and 3.5 % in 2004-05 .
Quality education is the single greatest asset that a nation can give to its people .
It also happens to be the least expensive and most cost-effective support that government can provide .
But Indian politicians ’ interests appear to lie elsewhere .
After all , with the rate of functional literacy at only 37.5 % , they can easily manipulate the votes of uneducated people with alcohol , pop slogans , and intimidation .
So the protests by highly educated Indians against “ reserved places ” is not only wrongheaded , but dangerous as well .
Unless India ’ s highly educated stand up for better schools for all , protests against caste preferences will only succeed in heightening tensions and selling newspapers , rather than improving the lives of India ’ s destitute .
The government is probably happy with these protests , for they divert attention from the real issue – the authorities ’ utter failure to address the fundamental problem .
As in America , the issue is not racial and class reservations and preferences , but ensuring high-quality primary education for all , rich and poor alike .
As India ’ s educated revolt against preferences , they should not do so in a way that reinforces illiteracy .
