The Negative Way to Growth ?
NEW YORK – Monetary policy has become increasingly unconventional in the last six years , with central banks implementing zero-interest-rate policies , quantitative easing , credit easing , forward guidance , and unlimited exchange-rate intervention .
But now we have come to the most unconventional policy tool of them all : negative nominal interest rates .
Such rates currently prevail in the eurozone , Switzerland , Denmark , and Sweden .
And it is not just short-term policy rates that are now negative in nominal terms : about $ 3 trillion of assets in Europe and Japan , at maturities as long as ten years ( in the case of Swiss government bonds ) , now have negative interest rates .
At first blush , this seems absurd : Why would anyone want to lend money for a negative nominal return when they could simply hold on to the cash and at least not lose in nominal terms ?
In fact , investors have long accepted real ( inflation-adjusted ) negative returns .
When you hold a checking or current account in your bank at a zero interest rate – as most people do in advanced economies – the real return is negative ( the nominal zero return minus inflation ) : a year from now , your cash balances buy you less goods than they do today .
And if you consider the fees that many banks impose on these accounts , the effective nominal return was already negative even before central banks went for negative nominal rates .
In other words , negative nominal rates merely make your return more negative than it already was .
Investors accept negative returns for the convenience of holding cash balances , so , in a sense , there is nothing new about negative nominal interest rates .
Moreover , if deflation were to become entrenched in the eurozone and other parts of the world , a negative nominal return could be associated with a positive real return .
That has been the story for the last 20 years in Japan , owing to persistent deflation and near-zero interest rates on many assets .
One still might think that it makes sense to hold cash directly , rather than holding an asset with a negative return .
But holding cash can be risky , as Greek savers , worried about the safety of their bank deposits , learned after stuffing it into their mattresses and walls : the number of armed home robberies rose sharply , and some cash was devoured by rodents .
So , if you include the costs of holding cash safely – and include the benefits of check writing – it makes sense to accept a negative return .
Beyond retail savers , banks that are holding cash in excess of required reserves have no choice but to accept the negative interest rates that central banks impose ; indeed , they could not hold , manage , and transfer those excess reserves if they were held as cash , rather than in a negative-yielding account with the central bank .
Of course , this is true only so long as the nominal interest rate is not too negative ; otherwise , switching to cash – despite the storage and safety costs – starts to make more sense .
But why would investors accept a negative nominal return for three , five , or even ten years ?
In Switzerland and Denmark , investors want exposure to a currency that is expected to appreciate in nominal terms .
If you were holding Swiss franc assets at a negative nominal return right before its central bank abandoned its euro peg in mid-January , you could have made a 20 % return overnight ; a negative nominal return is a small price to pay for a large capital gain .
And yet negative bonds yields are also occurring in countries and regions where the currency is depreciating and likely to depreciate further , including Germany , other parts of the eurozone core , and Japan .
So , why are investors holding such assets ?
Many long-term investors , like insurance companies and pension funds , have no alternative , as they are required to hold safer bonds .
Of course , negative returns make their balance sheets shakier : a defined-benefit pension plan needs positive returns to break even , and when most of its assets yield a negative nominal return , such results become increasingly difficult to achieve .
But , given such investors ' long-term liabilities ( claims and benefits ) , their mandate is to invest mostly in bonds , which are less risky than stocks or other volatile assets .
Even if their nominal returns are negative , they must defer to safety .
Moreover , in a “ risk-off " environment , when investors are risk-averse or when equities and other risky assets are subject to market and / or credit uncertainty , it may be better to hold negative-yielding bonds than riskier and more volatile assets .
Over time , of course , negative nominal and real returns may lead savers to save less and spend more .
And that is precisely the goal of negative interest rates : In a world where supply outstrips demand and too much saving chases too few productive investments , the equilibrium interest rate is low , if not negative .
Indeed , if the advanced economies were to suffer from secular stagnation , a world with negative interest rates on both short- and long-term bonds could become the new normal .
To avoid that , central banks and fiscal authorities need to pursue policies to jump-start growth and induce positive inflation .
Paradoxically , that implies a period of negative interest rates to induce savers to save less and spend more .
But it also requires fiscal stimulus , especially public investment in productive infrastructure projects , which yield higher returns than the bonds used to finance them .
The longer such policies are postponed , the longer we may inhabit the inverted world of negative nominal interest rates .
