Inflationary Angst
PRINCETON – Can central banks contain inflation ?
We once thought they could .
Over the past 20 years , central banks around the world , including the United States Federal Reserve , pursued price stability with remarkable success .
But now , in the wake of the financial crisis , a tide of distrust is sweeping the world – including a new and widespread fear that central banks are incapable of controlling inflation .
In the US , the Tea Party has made a return to the gold standard a part of its platform , and Utah is debating making gold and silver coins legal tender .
German inflation worries have pushed the government into a much harsher stance on debt relief in Europe .
In China , fear of inflation is unleashing large-scale discontent .
Inflation fear was already present before the new challenges of 2011 raised questions about long-term energy prices .
As pro-democracy protests shake Arab authoritarian regimes , the prospect of sustained conflict threatens a global economy still dependent on oil , while the aftermath of the Japanese earthquake and nuclear accident raises doubts about the security of nuclear energy .
The main anchor of central banks ’ monetary policy over the past 20 years was an inflation-targeting framework that developed from academic interpretation of the problems involved in targeting monetary aggregates .
After successful experiments in smaller economies , New Zealand in 1990 and then Canada in 1991 , and later in Sweden and the United Kingdom , the conviction developed that the new approach represented a superior way of dealing with the problem of inflationary expectations .
The really large currencies – the dollar , the euro , and the yen – were never managed explicitly or solely on this principle .
But central banks in both Europe and the US thought that a 2 % annual inflation rate would be a desirable target ( for the Europeans a desirable maximum ) .
There was always a problem in this approach , namely that the general price level is an abstraction .
It is a useful in a context of overall stability ; but , especially during crises or in the aftermath of large shocks , there are sharp movements of relative prices .
At these moments , it is easiest to accommodate the movements by letting all prices rise , but to differing extents .
Some econometric attempts have been made to identify long-term cycles in both inflation and monetary growth .
The economist Luca Benati has identified such surges of underlying inflation in the last decades before World War I , the late 1930 ’ s , the late 1960 ’ s , and the 1970 ’ s .
He also has found evidence of a pick-up in long-term underlying inflation in the UK and the US since the early 2000 ’ s .
The debate in the 1970 ’ s – the period of the last general inflationary surge – has become relevant again .
At that time , it was often argued that price spikes for petroleum or other commodities were somehow “ extraneous ” to the system , and not a reflection of the real basis of monetary policy in the industrial countries .
Consequently , analyses of inflation left out food and energy prices .
Today , the debate is over “ core inflation , ” which excludes food and energy prices because they are too volatile .
But the oil-price shocks that came after 1973 were in part also a response to the major industrial countries ’ monetary policy in the later 1960 ’ s and early 1970 ’ s .
The real price of oil seemed to be lagging behind , and oil producers ’ dramatic actions in 1973 were part of an effort to correct that .
Other commodity prices had risen rapidly in the early 1970 ’ s , in direct response to monetary easing in the US and elsewhere .
Shortages of natural gas increased fertilizer prices , pushing up food prices .
That led to protests in many poorer countries , and to a political determination to extract additional gains from other commodity exports .
As in the 1970 ’ s , there are more links than may at first appear between the apparently new problems of 2010-2011 .
Food and energy prices are more likely to be affected by monetary policy .
And they produce an economic basis for discontent – which played at least some part in triggering the protests of the “ Arab Spring . ”
Given that food and energy prices respond to monetary developments , and thus are not exogenous , the concept of “ core inflation ” obviously becomes problematic , to say the least .
One consequence is that Fed officials now try to avoid it .
Another way to approach it is to attempt to grasp changing consumer behavior analytically .
As a result , inflation is continually being redefined .
In the UK , the consumer price index is being recalculated to include new products , such as electronic dating services .
It is easy to suspect that this is not just a concession to changing social mores , but that it also reflects a desire to include as many declining prices as possible .
This is less radical than the method adopted by Argentina , where high levels of inflation are both a historical nightmare and a current challenge .
There , the government , whose statistical agency puts annual inflation at 10 % , is punishing private-sector economists who release much higher estimates – typically around 25 % – with heavy fines .
The finance minister claims that there is no “ structural inflation . ”
As the statistical manipulation that attends uncertainty increases , confidence is eroded .
A better approach is to think of the longer-term story as being one of changes in relative prices , which are not well handled by a consumer price index .
That issue is especially acute in the wake of a generalized real-estate crisis .
Until 2007 , many people financed consumer purchases , whose prices were more or less stable , by borrowing against their houses , which were rapidly rising in value .
Consumer goods therefore seemed to be getting cheaper .
Now , by contrast , food and gasoline prices are rising , owing to emerging markets ’ ongoing boom , while house prices continue to plummet .
It is when we worry about relative prices that we get most angry about monetary policy – and when central banks seem to offer no answer .
