Industrial Policy Comes Out of the Cold
WASHINGTON , DC – One of the best-kept economic secrets was strongly reconfirmed in 2010 : most countries , intentionally or not , pursue an industrial policy in one form or other .
This is true not only of China , Singapore , France , and Brazil – countries usually associated with such policies – but also for the United Kingdom , Germany , Chile , and the United States , whose industrial policies are often less explicit .
Given that industrial policy broadly refers to any government decision , regulation , or law that encourages ongoing activity or investment in an industry , this should come as no surprise .
After all , economic development and sustained growth are the result of continual industrial and technological change , a process that requires collaboration between the public and private sectors .
Historical evidence shows that in countries that successfully transformed from an agrarian to a modern economy – including those in Western Europe , North America , and , more recently , in East Asia – governments coordinated key investments by private firms that helped to launch new industries , and often provided incentives to pioneering firms .
Even before the recent global financial crisis and subsequent recession , governments around the world provided support to the private sector through direct subsidies , tax credits , or loans from development banks in order to bolster growth and support job creation .
Policy discussions at many high-level summits sought to strengthen other features of industrial policy , including public financing of airports , highways , ports , electricity grids , telecommunications , and other infrastructure , improvements in institutional effectiveness , an emphasis on education and skills , and a clearer legal framework .
The global crisis has led to a rethinking of governments ’ economic role .
The challenge for industrial policy is greater , because it should assist the design of efficient , government-sponsored programs in which the public and private sectors coordinate their efforts to develop new technologies and industries .
But history also tells us that while governments in almost all developing countries have attempted to play that facilitating role at some point , most have failed .
The economic history of the former Soviet Union , Latin America , Africa , and Asia has been marked by inefficient public investment and misguided government interventions that have resulted in many “ white elephants . ”
These pervasive failures appear to be due mostly to governments ’ inability to align their efforts with their country ’ s resource base and level of development .
Indeed , governments ’ propensity to target overly ambitious industries that were misaligned with available resources and skills helps to explain why their attempts to “ pick winners ” often resulted in “ picking losers . ”
By contrast , governments in many successful developing countries have focused on strengthening industries that have done well in countries with comparable factor endowments .
Thus , the lesson from economic history and development is straightforward : government support aimed at upgrading and diversifying industry must be anchored in the requisite endowments .
That way , once constraints on new industries are removed , private firms in those industries quickly become competitive domestically and internationally .
The question then becomes how to identify competitive industries and how to formulate and implement policies to facilitate their development .
In developed countries , most industries are advanced , which suggests that upgrading requires innovation .
Support for basic research , and patents to protect successful innovation , may help .
For developing countries , Célestin Monga and I have recently developed an approach – called the growth identification and facilitation framework – that can help developing-country governments increase the probability of success in supporting new industries .
This framework suggests that policymakers identify tradable industriesthat have performed well ingrowing countrieswith similar resources and skills , and with a per capita income about double their own .
If domesticprivate firms in these sectors are already present , policymakers should identify and remove constraints on those firms ’ technological upgrading or on entry by other firms .
In industries where no domestic firms are present , policymakers should aim to attract foreign direct investment from the countries being emulated or organize programs for incubating new firms .
The government should also pay attention to the development by private enterprises of new and competitive products , and support the scaling up of successful private-sector innovations in new industries .
In countries with a poor business environment , special economic zones or industrial parks can facilitate firm entry , foreign direct investment , and the formation of industrial clusters .
Finally , the government might help pioneering firms in the new industries by offering tax incentives for a limited period , co-financing investments , or providing access to land or foreign exchange .
Our approach provides policymakers in developing countries with a framework to tackle the daunting coordination challenges inherent in the creation of new , competitive industries .
It also has the potential to nurture a business environment conducive to private-sector growth , job creation , and poverty reduction .
As economies around the world struggle to maintain or restore growth in 2011 , industrial policy is likely to be under a brighter spotlight than ever before .
Given the right framework , there is no reason for it to remain in the shadows .
