Latin America at a Crossroads
Last year witnessed a decisive turn in Latin America .
A growing number of countries in the region now seem determined to pursue their interests regardless of what the United States desires .
José Miguel Insulza ’ s election as Secretary General of the Organization of American States , and the consequent defeat of the candidate supported by the Bush administration , emphatically demonstrated the decline of America ’ s continental leadership .
The US not only lost control of the OAS , an organization that generally serves US interests , but also failed to get last month ’ s Summit of the Americas in Mar del Plata Argentina to endorse unanimously a declaration supporting America ’ s trade and political positions for the region .
This rejection came about despite the summit be structured in such a way as to promote and defend those interests .
Attempts throughout 2005 by the Bush administration to discipline Venezuela ’ s government also failed .
President Bush was simply unable to get other governments to back to the policy of isolation he sought to impose on President Hugo Chavez ’ s government .
America has also been frustrated in its desire to obtain regional support for its policy of direct involvement in the Colombia ’ s internal strife .
Of course , not everything went against America .
The election of the Colombian Luis Alberto Moreno as president of the Inter-American Development Bank had clear US backing . This means that the bank is likely continue its orthodox , neo-liberal policies .
But a clear line in the sand has been drawn between Latin American countries that want to pursue regional integration on their own terms , and those who see hemispheric integration as directed by the US .
Some countries – Mexico , Colombia , and Peru – appear to want a privileged direct relationship with America .
Other countries – Bolivia , Chile , the countries of Central America – prefer regional solutions in which they have a clear and equal say .
The latter group , for example , are generally supportive of the plan to build a Community of South American Nations , a scheme backed primarily by Argentina and Venezuela .
The Mercosur countries don ’ t want a confrontation with anyone , including the US , but do seek a more just and democratic international system .
But it is the ideological picture that presents the starkest contrasts .
Indeed , there could be political consequences that could affect the entire region if the confrontation between Venezuela and the US worsens beyond today ’ s tense relations , or if there were an electoral victory for the Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional in Nicaragua , or for Evo Morales 's Movimiento al Socialismo in Bolivia .
The eventual formation of a triangle that links Cuba , Venezuela , and Nicaragua is likely to be considered a direct threat to regional stability by the United States , which would have dangerous consequence of putting Latin America atop the security agenda of the Bush administration .
Yet you cannot see Latin America in 2005 only in terms of the region ’ s relations with the US .
Deep concerns about the internal situation many countries who suffer almost permanent political and institutional crises , such as Haiti , Ecuador and Bolivia , abound .
As the structural causes that have pushed these countries into near permanent states of crisis seem unlikely to be resolved anytime soon , there problems may well become linked to Latin America ’ s tense relations with the US .
Indeed , local problems are likely to exacerbate regional tensioins .
2005 saw the return of seemingly buried territorial disputes , such as defining the maritime limits between Chile and Peru , as well as the revanchist pressures that are mounting in Bolivia for recovering access to the sea that was lost in the 19th century , an urge strengthened by Bolivia ’ s growing willingness to perhaps use its gas exports as a pressure point .
The dispute between Costa Rica and Nicaragua over navigation on the San Juan River , and the heated jurisdictional arguemnts between Colombia and Venezuela also help raise regional tempers .
The result of all this tension is that Latin America is seeing its biggest arms race for decades , a sad trend when the region ’ s worst problems are poverty , inequality , and the marginalization of indigenous people .
If these problems go unattended , destabilization will undoubtedly grow .
One last problem is contributing to the region ’ s anxieties : massive migration .
The problem is not just about illegal migration to the US , though those Americans who seek to play the anti-immigrant card do antagonize regional sensibilities unnecessarily .
For migration – triggered by dire economic conditions – is also happening between Latin American countries . Keeping this peaceful will be a vexing problem for the region ’ s leaders in the months and years ahead .
Across Latin America , if poverty and violence are not ameliorated , tensions are bound to grow .
Latin America is truly at a crossroads : 2006 may well determine whether the continent lapses back into the sad days of chaotic past , who finds a new maturity to strike out on its own path to growth and stability .
