Iran ’ s Political Clerics
Iran ’ s theocratic regime appears more confident than ever .
Its standoff with the West over its nuclear program , together with its ties to Syria and its growing influence in Lebanon and Iraq , suggest the emergence of a strong regional power .
But , while Western analysts and Iran ’ s neighbors raise the alarm , the regime ’ s authority is in fact built on insecure foundations .
The 1979 revolution , which ended Iran ’ s monarchical tradition , created a new political order based on Shiite theological foundations and giving absolute ruling power to a Shiite jurist / cleric .
Throughout Iran ’ s long history , Shiite seminaries exercised great influence on Iranian society and politics , but they had been considered civil institutions .
It was not until the Iranian revolution that the seminary establishment came to be considered a source of political legitimacy .
The change followed Ayatollah Khomeini ’ s theory of the “ jurist-ruler . ”
In Khomeini ’ s view , the jurist-ruler could modify religious laws , depending on his interpretation of the needs of the regime .
As a result , religious interpretation – previously , a highly decentralized function undertaken by various seminaries – was concentrated in the hands of a political leader .
Accordingly , the seminary establishment was no longer a civil structure managing only religious affairs , but instead developed into a unified , ideological party serving the interests of the regime .
That transformation was far-reaching .
Traditionally , Shiite seminaries were rather unorganized , unstructured places , based on pre-modern styles of management .
The concept of a decentralized religious establishment is difficult for Westerners to understand , given the highly structured administrative framework of Christian churches and ecclesiastical orders .
But this fluid hierarchy , an absence of written rules and organizational order , allowed the various seminaries – and their different interpretive traditions – to survive despotic political regimes and resist intervention by different dynasties and monarchies .
This change in Shiite orientation also reflects a very modern influence on politics .
Since Shiite fundamentalism is itself a recent phenomenon , the early Iranian revolutionaries inevitably rebuilt the religious seminaries along lines suggested by the Iranian opposition ’ s most powerful pre-revolutionary discourse : communist ideology .
By “ modernizing ” the seminaries following a single-party model , the revolutionaries gained control over them . The seminaries became little more than an extension of the political system .
The death of Ayatollah Khomeini – and that of other religious authorities ( marjas ) like Ayatollah Abul Qassem Khoi in Najaf , Iraq – marked the end of the ideal of a ruler who had mastered both religion and politics .
Iran ’ s current supreme ruler , Seyyed Ali Khamenei , whose religious degree was a focus of suspicion in the seminary and among the clerical elite , was not considered a jurist by merit .
Consequently , Khamenei ’ s evident lack of religious legitimacy has pushed the government to assume full control over the clerical establishment , further depriving the seminaries of their historical independence .
The last decades have provided the regime with near-ideal conditions to seize control over the Shiite clerical establishment in Iraq as well .
Under Saddam Hussein , restrictions were imposed on the Shiite seminary in Najaf – traditionally a counterbalance to Iran ’ s Shiite establishment – forcing the emigration of a number of clerics to the Iranian seminary in Qom .
Indeed , growing Iranian control of the Shiite clerical establishment extended beyond Iraq .
It was also strengthened by the regime ’ s activities in the 1980 ’ s , when it created Hezbollah as a guerilla organization in Lebanon , thereby expanding its domination over the most important Shiite areas in the region .
The Iranian regime then consolidated its mastery of the Shiite network in the Middle East , and now uses this control to further its own interests .
There is thus little prospect of an alternative Shiite power center emerging out of the chaos in Iraq .
Khamenei , the supreme leader , has succeeded in politicizing the Shiite clerical establishment , primarily by controlling the financial resources of the religious authorities and Shiite institutions in Iran and the region .
Iraq ’ s leading Shiite cleric , Ayatollah Ali Sistani , has not been able to act independently and has avoided opposing Iranian policies toward Iraq in order to protect his fragile network of institutions .
As a result , despite Saddam ’ s fall , the Najaf seminary remains impotent .
Ironically , it seems that theocratic theory in Iran has led to anti-theocracy .
With the seminaries politicized and their independence greatly reduced , the religious establishment is no longer in a position to confer political legitimacy on the regime .
Nor can it exercise its traditional functions in the religious sphere to provide support to civil society in the country .
At a time when the Islamic Republic has failed in its economic and political promises to the Iranian people , the regime ’ s most glaring weakness may prove to be the absence of a credible religious authority that can justify its shortcomings .
