Liberty and Music
NEW YORK – North Korea , officially known as the Democratic People ’ s Republic of Korea , is one of the world ’ s most oppressive , closed , and vicious dictatorships .
It is perhaps the last living example of pure totalitarianism – control of the state over every aspect of human life .
Is such a place the right venue for a Western orchestra ?
Can one imagine the New York Philharmonic , which performed to great acclaim in Pyongyang , entertaining Stalin or Hitler ?
All totalitarian systems have one thing in common : by crushing all forms of political expression except adulation of the regime , they make everything political .
There is no such thing in North Korea as non-political sports or culture .
So there is no question that the invitation to the New York Philharmonic was meant to burnish the prestige of a regime , ruled by The Dear Leader , Kim Jong-Il , whose standing is so low – even in neighboring China – that it needs all the burnishing it can get .
Interviews with some of the musicians revealed an awareness of this .
A violinist was quoted as saying that “ a lot of us are … not buying into this party line that music transcends the political . ” She was “ sure that it [ would ] be used by Pyongyang and our own government in attempting to make political points . ”
The conductor , Lorin Maazel , who chose a program of Wagner , Dvorak , Gershwin , and Bernstein , was less cynical . The concert , he said , would “ take on a momentum of its own , ” and have a positive effect on North Korean society .
Well , he would say that , wouldn ’ t he ?
But could he possibly be right ?
No one , not even Maazel , pretends that one concert by a great Western orchestra can blow a dictatorship away , but authoritarians ’ wariness of the subversive power of music dates back to Plato ’ s Republic .
In Plato ’ s view , music , if not strictly controlled , inflames the passions and makes people unruly .
He wanted to limit musical expression to sounds that were conducive to harmony and order .
This , more or less , has been the line taken by dictatorships as well .
The officially prescribed musical diet of North Koreans consists of patriotic hymns to the Communist Party , odes to the Dear Leader , to his father , the Great Leader , Kim Il-Song , and to the heroic spirit of the Korean people .
Almost nothing else is permitted – except in the inner sanctum of the rulers themselves .
The Dear Leader ’ s son , Kim Jong-chol , is said to be a fan of Eric Clapton .
An invitation has now gone out to the British rock star to perform in North Korea , which really would be something new .
Rock music was severely restricted in Communist dictatorships , just as jazz was in Nazi Germany , for all the Platonic reasons : uncontrolled passions were seen as a threat to the perfect order of the state .
Precisely because of this , “ forbidden ” music was politicized .
Subversive youths in Hitler ’ s Germany – the “ Swing Jugend ” – secretly listened to jazz .
The air of Czechoslovakia in 1968 was electric with the imported sounds of the Rolling Stones and Frank Zappa ’ s Mothers of Invention .
After the Soviet tanks put an end to the Prague Spring , a Russian policeman threatened one young Czech that he would “ beat the Zappa music out ” of him .
Václav Havel was a fan of Zappa .
So was a Czech rock band called the Plastic People of the Universe , who so upset the commissars that they were thrown in prison ­ ­ – not because they were engaged in political activities , but because , as their singer , Milan Hlavsa , put it , “ we just wanted to do what we liked doing . ”
Of course , that was the point .
Hlavsa and his long-haired fans , celebrated in Tom Stoppard ’ s brilliant play , Rock n ’ Roll , didn ’ t want the state to spoil their party .
They didn ’ t care what the commissars thought .
They wanted to dance to their own tunes .
Obviously , Dvorak and Wagner are not Zappa and the Stones .
And if Clapton came to Pyongyang at the government ’ s guest , he might not have enough “ street cred ” left to light the fuse of rebellion .
When the Stones themselves finally performed in China , in 2003 , they agreed to cut some of their racier numbers from the program , because , as their local promoter put it , “ They know there are differences between Chinese and Western cultures .
They don ’ t want to do anything against the Chinese government . ” So much for the spirit of 1968 .
Nevertheless , Maazel may have a point .
Performing good music in North Korea just might have a positive effect .
Stalin ’ s empire needed no foreign classical orchestras .
They had enough of their own .
China no longer needed the Stones , either .
There are plenty of rock bands in China already .
But the stranglehold of North Korea ’ s dictatorship is based on total isolation .
For half a century , the North Koreans have been deprived of any art , ideas , or music not authorized by the state . They were told that North Korea was a heroic little country besieged by Satanic enemies , led by the United States .
This permanent diet of paranoia has created something akin to a nationwide insane asylum , where ignorance , terror , and suspicion rule .
In such conditions , even a conventional program of classical music by the New York Philharmonic comes as a gust of fresh air .
It may not topple the dictatorship , but it will offer some solace to those who are forced to live in it .
And that , for the time being , is a good enough reason to play .
