Mengele in America
LONDON – It ’ s 1946 .
On one side of the Atlantic , American lawyers are prosecuting Nazi doctors at Nuremberg for crimes against humanity – so-called “ research ” carried out on concentration camp prisoners .
On the other side of the Atlantic , in Guatemala , the United States Public Health Service ( PHS ) is deliberately infecting prisoners and mental patients with syphilis in another “ experiment ” aimed at replacing the ineffective drugs used by soldiers during the war that had just ended .
It sounds too perverse to be true .
Yet a special commission appointed by President Barack Obama has just confirmed that the Guatemalan experiments really did take place .
Obama has also issued an apology to the people of Guatemala .
But why did it take so long to get to this point ?
Sixty-three years after the Guatemalan experiments , an American historian , Susan Reverby , was rummaging through archived medical papers from the 1940 ’ s .
Reverby was completing a final task in her two decades of studying the PHS ’ s detestable Tuskegee experiments , in which hundreds of African-American men with late-stage syphilis were observed but not treated , even after penicillin was developed .
She was examining the papers of Thomas Parran , US surgeon-general from 1936-1948 , when the Tuskegee research was already in full swing .
So , too , she found , was the previously unknown Guatemalan experiment .
For years , Tuskegee has been a byword for ethical abuses in scientific research – to the extent that President Bill Clinton apologized to its surviving “ subjects . ”
Hard as it may be to believe , as Reverby was to discover , the abuse in Guatemala was even more egregious .
As Reverby put it , “ I ’ d spent nearly two decades explaining that there had been no inoculation at Tuskegee , that while the PHS had used deplorable ethics , they had never infected anyone with syphilis . ” That was not true in Guatemala .
There , “ the US government ’ s health service had deliberately infected 427 Guatemalan men and women , prisoners and mental patients , with syphilis . ”
The US prosecutors at Nuremberg didn ’ t know about the Guatemala experiments , so there ’ s no allegation of deliberate hypocrisy .
But the case is no less troubling for that .
How could the public-health authorities override medicine ’ s basic ethical rule – “ First do no harm ” ?
Why was informed consent from the research “ subjects ” considered unnecessary ?
Could such a thing happen again ?
Most experts believe that the answer to the last question is no – at least not in the same form .
In fact , one should view the Guatemalan study , with its incontrovertible horrors , as an extreme example of the biggest ethical problems in research today .
Now , as then , richer developed countries are able to put pressure on weaker , poorer ones .
A report in 2010 revealed that foreign citizens made up more than three-quarters of all the subjects in clinical trials conducted by US firms and researchers .
The US Food and Drug Administration inspected only 45 of these sites , about 0.7 % .
There is no suggestion that Third World patients are deliberately being made ill when research is outsourced – unlike in the Guatemalan case – but that does not attenuate the inherent vulnerability of populations lacking basic medical care or experiencing epidemics .
During a major meningitis epidemic in northern Nigeria in 1996 , the drug company Pfizer supplied doctors with the oral antibiotic Trovan , which the firm wanted to test against the most effective known drug , Ceftriaxone , as a “ control . ”
This procedure is consistent with the general consensus in research ethics that the control group must receive the best-known treatment for comparison .
The Trovan trial nonetheless caused a storm of controversy , for two reasons .
First , even if the trials proved favorable , Trovan was never intended for sale in Africa , but rather for the US and European markets . Second , the sparsely staffed clinical teams were already facing measles and cholera epidemics as well .
As Jean Hervé Bradol , who was president of Médecins sans Frontières at the time and led its African teams , put it : “ It was not a time for a drug trial at all .
They were panicking in the hospital , overrun by cases on the verge of dying .
The team were shocked that Pfizer continued the so-called scientific work in the middle of hell . ”
Nowadays , another major controversy has erupted in several Indian states , owing to a research project to vaccinate girls against cervical cancer – an issue that has now entered the US presidential campaign , because Texas ’ s governor , Rick Perry , now seeking the Republican presidential nomination , backed a similar mandatory program .
While preventing cervical cancer might seem a genuine benefit , critics charge that the program seems to be mainly about meeting targets , rather than serving the health-care needs of disadvantaged groups .
Apart from one recommendation – to create a government compensation program for Third World nationals harmed by trials intended to benefit First World subjects – US Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues , chaired by Dr. Amy Gutmann , the president of the University of Pennsylvania , did not get much beyond vague notions of community engagement and transparency .
But , with 70 % of all drug trials now conducted by private companies , such concepts won ’ t go very far towards tougher regulation .
And why should government should pay the costs anyway ?
Because private companies reap the benefits of the trials that do succeed , they should also shoulder the risks .
