How Women Go Bankrupt
As the world struggles to emerge from the economic near-collapse of last fall , there is one sub-group that has slid below the waterline in record numbers : formerly middle-class women .
A new report shows that a million American middle-class women will find themselves in bankruptcy court this year .
This is more women than will “ graduate from college , receive a diagnosis of cancer , or file for divorce , ” according to the economist Elizabeth Warren . Their plight , symptomatic in many ways of the plight of women around the world , holds lessons for us all .
These bankrupt women are better educated than their male counterparts : most have some college ; and more than half own their own homes .
What tipped them from middle-class lifestyles to incomes just above the poverty line were likely to have been one or all of three factors .
Two are economic , and , for many women , the third may be emotional .
First , these women tend to be awash in debt .
Just about everyone spent above their means in the recent bubble , but middle-class women have a special relationship to debt .
Many of them have jobs that require them to dip into credit lines just to stay afloat .
But others have been successfully targeted by luxury-goods manufacturers and credit-card companies , which benefit from the way that mass culture ties certain kinds of consumerism – the latest designer clothes , this season ’ s “ it ” bag , the right highlighting , and even the trendiest sports car – into a narrative of successful femininity .
Nor is this pressure confined to the United States .
New middle classes are emerging globally , and magazines like Cosmopolitan and Vogue are targeting newly middle-class women in India and China – many of them part of a generation with its own disposable income for the first time ever in their family histories – with the very same luxury goods .
The second reason that a million US women have filed for bankruptcy is that legislation enacted in 2005 now pits individual women – who can ’ t afford costly legal advice – against credit-card companies in terms of who gets paid first when ex-husbands owe delinquent credit-card payments and child-support payments .
These pressures are serious , and both are discussed publicly .
But there is frequently a third factor in middle-class women ’ s economic stress , one that is seldom publicly addressed , much less measured .
It has to do with many middle-class women ’ s emotionally complex expectations and projections about money .
In the young women ’ s leadership program that I help to run at the Woodhull Institute , we regularly see that middle-class women , more often than working-class women , find it embarrassing to talk about money .
When they do bring it up – to employers , for example – they use apologetic , self-defeating language .
They are reluctant to negotiate salaries and rarely know how to do so .
They believe that asking for money in exchange for their labor makes them “ unfeminine . ”
They frequently assume that working twice as hard as those around them – while never speaking up for their own worth or accomplishments – will generate a raise because an authority figure will notice .
Moreover , these women tend to have unrealistic notions about their economic paths .
Young , middle-class women often fail to save because they assume – still – that marriage will rescue them financially .
As a result , they often see buying trendy shoes or a great haircut – rather than giving some money each month to a broker – as an “ investment ” in their romantic futures .
And the familiar cliché is all too often true : older middle-class women fail to become financially literate in their own households , leaving brokerage accounts , pension accounts , taxes , life insurance , and so on to their husbands .
This leaves them economically vulnerable when divorce or widowhood strikes .
Paradoxically , we have found that working-class women ( and women of color ) rarely harbor such economically problematic structures of denial .
They tend to be more ready than middle-class white women , in our experience , to master the basics of financial literacy and to learn salary negotiation , because they don ’ t have the luxury of assuming that a knight on a white horse will rescue them economically .
Indeed , the financial pragmatism of working-class and poor women is the reason for the successes in the developing world of micro-financing that puts money in their hands .
It would surprise me if middle-class women anywhere in the world – brought up to view certain forms of economic ignorance and naiveté as socially appropriate – could , without climbing a steep learning curve , be as reliable and hard-nosed as the world ’ s poor and working-class women consistently prove themselves to be .
The new book Financial Intimacy , by Jacquette Timmons , a talented financial coach who focuses on women , offers truths that would have been valuable to any of the middle-class women now in crisis . “ Many women today earn significantly more than women in previous generations , ” she writes .
When middle-class women anywhere in the world get over this taboo , we will do so by understanding that money is never just about money , and that becoming financially literate means pushing back against a social role that casts middle-class women as polite , economically vague , underpaid , shopping-dazed dependents .
All the other awful pressures that are driving so many women into bankruptcy will still exist , but at least more women will be facing these pressures with their eyes wide open , and , one hopes , with many better options .
