Is Inequality Inhibiting Growth ?
CHICAGO – To understand how to achieve a sustained recovery from the Great Recession , we need to understand its causes .
And identifying causes means starting with the evidence .
Two facts stand out .
First , overall demand for goods and services is much weaker , both in Europe and the United States , than it was in the go-go years before the recession .
Second , most of the economic gains in the US in recent years have gone to the rich , while the middle class has fallen behind in relative terms .
In Europe , concerns about domestic income inequality , though more muted , are compounded by angst about inequality between countries , as Germany roars ahead while the southern periphery stalls .
Persuasive explanations of the crisis point to linkages between today ’ s tepid demand and rising income inequality .
Progressive economists argue that the weakening of unions in the US , together with tax policies favoring the rich , slowed middle-class income growth , while traditional transfer programs were cut back .
With incomes stagnant , households were encouraged to borrow , especially against home equity , to maintain consumption .
Rising house prices gave people the illusion that increasing wealth backed their borrowing .
But , now that house prices have collapsed and credit is unavailable to underwater households , demand has plummeted .
The key to recovery , then , is to tax the rich , increase transfers , and restore worker incomes by enhancing union bargaining power and raising minimum wages .
This emphasis on anti-worker , pro-rich policies as the recession ’ s primary cause fits less well with events in Europe .
Countries like Germany that reformed labor laws to create more flexibility for employers , and did not raise wages rapidly , seem to be in better economic shape than countries like France and Spain , where labor was better protected .
So consider an alternative explanation : Starting in the early 1970 ’ s , advanced economies found it increasingly difficult to grow .
Countries like the US and the United Kingdom eventually responded by deregulating their economies .
Greater competition and the adoption of new technologies increased the demand for , and incomes of , highly skilled , talented , and educated workers doing non-routine jobs like consulting .
More routine , once well-paying , jobs done by the unskilled or the moderately educated were automated or outsourced .
So income inequality emerged , not primarily because of policies favoring the rich , but because the liberalized economy favored those equipped to take advantage of it .
The short-sighted political response to the anxieties of those falling behind was to ease their access to credit .
Faced with little regulatory restraint , banks overdosed on risky loans .
Thus , while differing on the root causes of inequality ( at least in the US ) , the progressive and alternative narratives agree about its consequences .
The alternative narrative has more to say .
Continental Europe did not deregulate as much , and preferred to seek growth in greater economic integration .
But the price for protecting workers and firms was slower growth and higher unemployment .
And , while inequality did not increase as much as in the US , job prospects were terrible for the young and unemployed , who were left out of the protected system .
The advent of the euro was a seeming boon , because it reduced borrowing costs and allowed countries to create jobs through debt-financed spending .
The crisis ended that spending , whether by national governments ( Greece ) , local governments ( Spain ) , the construction sector ( Ireland and Spain ) , or the financial sector ( Ireland ) .
Unfortunately , past spending pushed up wages , without a commensurate increase in productivity , leaving the heavy spenders indebted and uncompetitive .
The important exception to this pattern is Germany , which was accustomed to low borrowing costs even before it entered the eurozone .
Germany had to contend with historically high unemployment , stemming from reunification with a sick East Germany .
In the euro ’ s initial years , Germany had no option but to reduce worker protections , limit wage increases , and reduce pensions as it tried to increase employment .
Germany ’ s labor costs fell relative to the rest of the eurozone , and its exports and GDP growth exploded .
The alternative view suggests different remedies .
The US should focus on helping to tailor the education and skills of the people being left behind to the available jobs .
This will not be easy or quick , but it beats having corrosively high levels of inequality of opportunity , as well as a large segment of the population dependent on transfers .
Rather than paying for any necessary spending by raising tax rates on the rich sky high , which would hurt entrepreneurship , more thoughtful across-the-board tax reform is needed .
For the uncompetitive parts of the eurozone , structural reforms can no longer be postponed .
But , given the large adjustment needs , it is not politically feasible to do everything , including painful fiscal tightening , immediately .
Less austerity , while not a sustainable growth strategy , may ease the pain of adjustment .
That , in a nutshell , is the fundamental eurozone dilemma : the periphery needs financing as it adjusts , while Germany , pointing to the post-euro experience , says that it cannot trust countries to reform once they get the money .
The Germans have been insisting on institutional change – more centralized eurozone control over periphery banks and government budgets in exchange for expanded access to financing for the periphery .
Yet institutional change , despite the euphoria that greeted the latest EU summit , will take time , for it requires careful structuring and broader public support .
Europe may be better off with stop-gap measures .
If confidence in Italy or Spain deteriorates again , the eurozone may have to resort to the traditional bridge between weak credibility and low-cost financing : a temporary International Monetary Fund-style monitored reform program .
Such programs cannot dispense with the need for government resolve , as Greece ’ s travails demonstrate .
And governments hate the implied loss of sovereignty and face .
But determined governments , like those of Brazil and India , have negotiated programs in the past that set them on the path to sustained growth .
As a reformed Europe starts growing , parts of it may experience US-style inequality .
But growth can provide the resources to address that .
Far worse for Europe would be to avoid serious reform and lapse into egalitarian and genteel decline .
