Let History Judge Russia ’ s Revolutions
A plethora of anniversaries is arriving in Russia .
This month marks the 90th anniversary of the October Revolution of 1917 and the 25th anniversary of the death of Leonid Brezhnev .
Next month will see the 15th anniversary of the Soviet Union ’ s disintegration .
Only by understanding that first event , however , can we understand the others .
The October Revolution has always had many critics .
The Russian philosopher Ivan Shmelev named it “ the great beating of Russia . ”
Vasily Rozanov called it “ The Massacre of Russia . ”
Countless authors view it as a tragedy that broke the flow of history and destroyed Russia ’ s best people .
But the October Revolution also has its apologists , for whom it marked the beginning of a new era in history , a breakthrough to freedom from a world of slavery and oppression , a salvation for Russia and Europe , and a source of hope for Asia and Africa .
According to this view , there was no conspiracy , but a great social revolution that , by virtue of a powerful internal logic , brought to power workers , peasants , and the Bolshevik party , which represented their will .
For the majority of Russians who grew up in the Soviet system , there is truth in both views , but no place for ultra-radical criticism of the October Revolution and other aspects of socialist life in the 20th century USSR .
The revolution is not only history for many people ; it is also a part of life and consciousness .
Of course , this does not excuse those who refuse to listen to reasoned analysis about our country ’ s past , but Russians will not accept glib rants .
Studying the Russian Revolution is almost as old as the revolution itself , and has yielded a massive amount of research both at home and abroad .
But , even today , we are still far from understanding many important factors , connections , motives , reasons , and consequences in what happened in 1917 and during the first years of Soviet power .
Few events in history have generated so many concepts and theories for their explanation and assessment – or so many falsifications , both crude and sophisticated .
Both the Bolsheviks and their opponents were involved in these falsifications , concealing , distorting , and concocting facts and circumstances , whether they referred to the real role of Stalin or Trotsky in the revolution or to the behavior of peasants and Cossacks .
Thousands of names fell out of the history , people ’ s deeds were “ passed ” to others , and the nature , motives , and activities of parties , groups , national movements , and classes were distorted .
The revolution and its leaders were idolized , and falsified reputations and biographies were created .
The real course of events was simplified and “ straightened , ” with each stage of the revolution made into the natural continuation of the previous one .
Nobody talked about the revolution leaders ’ mistakes , doubts , hesitations , and ignorance .
The most important archives were inaccessible , and some documents were destroyed .
The situation started to change in 1988-1991 , when the history of the USSR and the Russian revolutions moved to the center of public attention .
The collapse of the USSR and the Communist Party opened new horizons – and almost all archives – for historians .
Masses of documents and other sources related to the beginnings of Soviet power became accessible for survey and analysis .
Today , no matter what people say of Vladimir Putin ’ s administration , we are free from political and strict ideological censorship .
Although today ’ s new political reality in Russia is creating its own new myths and falsifications , this has not extended to historians ’ work .
So the impartial history of the Russian Revolution that has not been written may yet be .
Putin rarely talks about the problems of Russia ’ s twentieth-century history , once replying to a direct question about his attitude toward the events of 1917 by saying that he considered it to be “ the country ’ s natural reaction to defeat in the First World War . ”
When he visited the Russian cemetery near Paris – where many central figures of the “ White movement ” and Russian emigrants are buried – Putin placed wreaths on the graves of Ivan Bunin , a Russian poet , and Vika Obolenskaya , a hero of the French resistance .
Putin also stopped near the common gravestone of generals and officers of the “ White ” armies . “ We are children of the same mother – Russia , ” said Putin , “ and it ’ s time for us all to unite . ”
The remains of Andrey Denikin , a “ white ” general , have recently been moved to Moscow , and the remains of Vladimir Karpel , another “ White ” general , to Irkutsk .
A monument to Admiral Alexander Kolchak , who led the White effort to overthrow the Bolsheviks , has been erected in Irkutsk , and a monument to Nicholas II has been built in Moscow .
Indeed , the Orthodox Church has consecrated Nicholas II a saint .
These are steps toward the unification of a state and nation , and not attempts to gain revenge or break up Russia .
Today , good conditions exist for calm and unbiased examination of Russia ’ s past , from the Revolution of 1917 to the days of stagnation under Brezhnev .
It is a moment that historians must seize .
