The Inevitable Intifada
PARIS – After the stones of the first Palestinian intifada , or uprising , came the human bombs of the second one .
Now Palestinians have turned to knives .
On the eve of the 20th anniversary of the assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin , the last man to have embodied a real hope for peace , is a third intifada erupting ?
To be sure , the recent knife attacks that have taken place across Israel and the West Bank , have apparently been carried out by “ lone wolves . ”
But they echo a new wave of resistance by Palestinians that goes beyond physical assaults – reflected , for example , in the recent arson attack on a Jewish shrine in Nablus .
With Hamas now calling explicitly for a third intifada , there is no denying the seriousness of the situation .
In fact , a new Palestinian uprising should come as no surprise .
It is not as if anything has happened to break the Israeli-Palestinian cycle of fragile truces and violent explosions .
The situation is not even frozen ; it is deteriorating , owing to increasing political and religious radicalization on both sides .
And yet , judging by the attitude of the international community , no one would know it .
A few days ago , I attended a small conference in Paris focused on the new challenges and changing balance of power in the Middle East .
None of the main speakers made even a passing reference to the rising wave of violence in Israel .
They were too busy discussing the crisis in Syria – which now poses a real threat of international escalation – as well as the diplomatic , strategic , and economic consequences of the nuclear agreement with Iran .
The reality is that world leaders have little energy left to dedicate to the seemingly interminable conflict between Israel and Palestine – a conflict that they have tried and failed to resolve innumerable times .
And , indeed , there are serious doubts as to whether there is a viable alternative to today ’ s frail and sometimes violent status quo .
If Israel refused to leave the occupied territories in the past , how can it be expected to do so now , when the Islamic State is creeping toward the border ?
Doing so would raise massive new risks , in stark contrast to the brief spasms of violence that now punctuate Israel ’ s otherwise stable security situation .
And who on the Palestinian side would be willing , much less able , to engage in serious negotiations with Israel ’ s increasingly right-wing government ?
There are too many rifts and weaknesses on one side , and too powerful an illusion of strength on the other , for talks to yield anything of value .
In any case , even if they did resume talks , Israeli and Palestinian negotiators would not come to an agreement by themselves ; and the international community is too divided , fatigued , and indifferent to impose a deal on them .
If a consensus exists today , it is a negative one . With all parties resigned to the current situation , the dream of a “ two-state solution ” – based on the sound idea of exchanging territory for peace – is effectively dead .
Of course , the status quo is far less desirable for the Palestinians than for the Israelis .
But they may have to do no more than bide their time , as their demographic advantage grows .
Without a viable state of their own , Palestinians will progressively become the majority in the current “ Jewish state . ”
The political , social , and religious implications of such a transformation would be far-reaching – and unacceptable to the Israelis .
The Israel-Palestine conflict has been so intractable because it is a clash between nationalisms .
If it becomes a clash between religions as well , compromise will become nearly impossible , even without further radicalization .
With the two-state solution off the table , and the establishment of a peaceful binational state unviable , some voices , mostly coming from the Israeli left , are now toying with a third idea : a confederation of Israelis , Palestinians , and Jordanians .
Palestinians share a strong kinship with Jordanians , more than half of whom are of Palestinian origin .
At the same time , Jordan is Israel ’ s closest partner in the region .
These factors make Jordan seem to many like an ideal bridge between Israel and Palestine .
Of course , there remains serious mistrust among the parties .
Nonetheless , advocates argue that the clear economic advantages of such a confederation – which would include a free-trade zone and joint economic ventures – could prove tempting enough to all sides to put the idea on more solid footing .
But the proposal , though certainly appealing , is not consistent with the realities of the Middle East today .
Unlike European countries , which emerged from World War II so exhausted by conflict that they agreed to pool their sovereignty for the sake of peace , the countries of the Middle East are experiencing an ever-intensifying climate of nationalism , intolerance , and hatred .
By causing a continuous shift to the political right , Israel ’ s occupation policy has undermined the state ’ s political and ethical foundations , while turning Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu into a hostage of forces even more extreme than he is .
Small minorities of Israeli extremists no longer hesitate to use violence to defend , if not impose , their views on others .
And the radicalization that the occupation has helped to fuel on the Palestinian side is well documented .
But amid the rise of the Islamic State and the end of Iran ’ s international isolation , not to mention the Palestinian knife attacks , who can convince the Israelis that the biggest long-term threat they face is their own policy ?
One cannot say with certainty that if Rabin had lived , peace between Israelis and Palestinians would have become a reality .
But , as the region increasingly becomes trapped in a race to the abyss , the rare combination of courage , modesty , and lucidity that he embodied is badly needed .
