India ’ s Women on the March
CHENNAI – Sometimes countries suddenly take a mighty leap forward , forcing everyone else to take notice .
On one critical issue – sexual harassment and rape – India has moved far into the lead .
Following a number of brutal rapes that became notorious worldwide , Indian women are pushing back in radical , innovative , and transformational ways .
The attacks have been ceaseless and indiscriminate .
A 51-year-old Danish tourist and an 18-year-old German aid worker are among the most recent non-Indians to be raped .
But so is the coverage of them by India ’ s media .
On January 14 , The Weekreported on the case of Suzette Jordan , a 39-year-old Anglo-Indian mother of two in Kolkata , who survived what has become a numbingly familiar story .
In 2012 , she had a drink in a bar and agreed to a ride home with a man she had met ; when she entered the car , four other men piled in .
They put a gun in her mouth , beat her savagely , raped her , and dumped her on the roadside .
Her reporting of the crime brought new recriminations : the member of Parliament for her constituency , Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar , called the rape “ a deal gone wrong ” ; another minister called her experience “ a concocted story . ”
The level of sexual violence directed against women in India is not unusual ; what is unusual is that the country ’ s media are now covering the issue as a burning social problem , rather than sweeping it under the rug .
And women themselves are politicizing the issue , rather than blaming themselves for being too friendly , not careful enough , or in the wrong place at the wrong time . They – and the men who support them – are standing up to rape in ways that should be a model for the rest of the world .
Indian rape laws were changed in the wake of the rape and murder in 2011 of Bhanwari Devi , a 36-year-old midwife whose accusations of sexual misconduct implicated senior political figures .
But Indian activists often refer to the case of another Bhanwari Devi , a social worker who was gang-raped in 1992 , as an early turning point , for it resulted in 1997 in the Indian Supreme Court ’ s Vishaka judgment , which proposed guidelines to prevent sexual harassment in the workplace .
With pressure mounting for legislative action , India last year finally adopted a law banning workplace sexual harassment .
Perhaps some of the impetus for Indian women ’ s radicalism stems from the raw punitiveness with which rape is sometimes deployed – that is , as a weapon or a way to enforce social control .
India currently is reeling from news that a 20-year-old woman was gang-raped by 13 men on orders from a West Bengali village court for having a relationship with a man from another village .
Some of the radicalism may have to do with the extreme violence of many of the rapes .
Marchers in Kolkata , for example , recently protested the rape and murder of a teenage girl in Kamduni last year .
The girl was burned to death soon after – and some believe as a penalty for – reporting the rape .
Another recent case of an Indian woman fighting back shows how transformational this spirit of resistance can be .
The Hindu newspaper recently reported on the case of a 24-year-old lawyer , Anima Muyarath , who was suspended from the Calicut Bar Association after posting a remark on her Facebook page about sexist behavior in the workplace by her male superiors .
Muyarath has won the support of Indira Jaising , India ’ s first woman Additional Solicitor-General .
And Jaising has another brave young attorney to champion : a former law intern who has alleged sexual harassment against retired Supreme Court judge Swatanter Kumar .
This dramatic and outrageous gag order – keeping journalists from reporting on a matter of public record and a situation that is of the public interest – led to a furious protest by the Editors ’ Guild of India against what it called an “ unwarranted intrusion into media freedom . ” The gag order worked , though : by the end of the week , it was impossible to follow the story .
Across India today one sees a feminist fight from the highest levels to the grassroots .
Women at the pinnacle of the bar bravely protest mistreatment and harassment , doing what I have long argued is necessary : naming names in public – even as powerful men circle the wagons and throw institutional tantrums .
And women on the street protest the violence inflicted on them by strangers , neighbors , and acquaintances – and confront the police and officials who condone it .
It may not be entirely clear what has made Indian women so brave and so effectively combative .
But that should not stop the rest of us from taking inspiration from their courage and strategic daring .
