Japan ’ s Rubble Economy
TOKYO – On March 11 , a year will have passed since Japan was struck by the triple tragedy of an earthquake , tsunami , and nuclear accident .
According to figures announced by the country ’ s National Police Agency , the Great East Japan Earthquake left behind 15,848 dead and 3,305 missing – the largest loss of life due to natural disaster in Japan since World War II .
Searches for the missing – mainly at sea – are still continuing .
The number of buildings affected by the earthquake or the tsunami include 128,582 completely destroyed , 243,914 partly destroyed , 281 completely or partly burned , 33,056 flooded ( including 17,806 above the ground floor , and 674,641 with other types of damage .
Approximately 320,000 people lost their homes , of which more than 90 % continue to live in temporary housing .
Where to rebuild their homes remains undecided .
The Great Hanshin Earthquake that struck western Japan in 1995 took 6,343 lives , in part because the city ’ s mazelike streets prevented access by emergency workers .
In the aftermath , the city was reborn in a dramatically different and safer form .
Despite numerous difficulties , recovery from that earthquake was faster than expected : there was no tsunami to complicate matters , and rebuilding efforts could be focused on buildings that had collapsed in the earthquake .
Moreover , the government provided strong leadership and official agencies responded rapidly , ensuring , among other things , a rapid cleanup of the rubble .
Indeed , aside from fiscal issues , disposal of rubble is the greatest obstacle preventing reconstruction after natural disasters everywhere .
The rubble produced in the Great Hanshin Earthquake was equivalent to the amount that Japan normally processes in roughly eight years .
Difficulties like damaged waste-disposal facilities were overcome by local governments ’ cooperation and burden-sharing .
And , fortunately , plans to build Kobe Airport on an artificial island near the coast ensured demand for landfill .
In Japan , waste disposal relies mainly on incineration , but use of landfill off the coast made it possible to process the waste more quickly .
Even so , disposal of the waste took approximately three years , at a cost to the central government of ¥ 324.8 billion .
Compared to the Great Hanshin Earthquake , reconstruction after the Great East Japan Earthquake is moving at a snail ’ s pace .
Rubble is equivalent to 11 years of waste in Iwate prefecture , and 19 years of waste in Miyagi prefecture – enormous volumes that exceed these regions ’ disposal capacity .
The cost of waste disposal , estimated at ¥ 776.7 billion , will be more than double the disposal cost following the Great Hanshin Earthquake .
Unlike the relatively rapid cleanup after the Great Hanshin Earthquake , only 5 % of the total amount of rubble created by last year ’ s disaster has been processed so far .
Temporary sites for rubble in affected areas are being piled with the remnants of building materials and domestic appliances and furnishings , creating little mountains here and there , as rules on recycling instituted since 1995 require sorting waste by material .
Moreover , there are no plans to build an artificial island to use up the rubble , as was done with Kobe airport .
Owing to the tsunami , some of the refuse will ride the waves of the Pacific , reaching Hawaii and the West coast of the United States in a year or so .
But the damage caused by the tsunami also caused significant delays in reconstruction .
Local governments worry about how far from the coast new residential areas should be built , amplifying concerns about the future for people who are being forced to live with strangers in temporary housing in an unfamiliar area .
But the main reason for reconstruction delays is concern about radiation from the destroyed Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant .
Fear of radioactive contamination has stoked strong opposition from residents in areas that would need to accept rubble – even when the rubble is from areas nowhere near Fukushima .
In addition , although incineration greatly decreases the volume of waste , the concentration of radioactive cesium has been increasing over the past year , making it difficult to find suitable final disposal sites .
The heads of local governments in various regions are attempting to convince residents not to fear radiation and to allow for dispersal of rubble .
But the unseen enemy has aroused concerns – particularly among mothers of young children – that are more a matter of psychology than of science .
As the world ’ s only victim of a nuclear attack , Japan ’ s allergy to radiation is stronger than anywhere else .
Nevertheless , with the exception of the special circumstances caused by the Fukushima catastrophe , Japan is hardly the only country with a mess to clean up before it can reconstruct .
Thailand , which earlier this year suffered prolonged flooding , is also facing the need to dispose of rubble as it works to rebuild .
Measures to prevent flooding and steps to repair damaged areas of Bangkok cannot even begin until the rubble is cleared .
Haiti and New Zealand have also encountered similar problems .
Reconstruction constitutes a special kind of public-works project .
The disposal of rubble , given its labor-intensive character , has a particularly marked effect on job creation , at least in the short term .
One might call this “ rubble economics . ”
It is the inevitable formula for recovery – one shovel load at a time .
