How Much is Enough ?
LONDON – The economic downturn has produced an explosion of popular anger against bankers ’ “ greed ” and their “ obscene ” bonuses .
This has accompanied a wider critique of “ growthmanship ” – the pursuit of economic growth or the accumulation of wealth at all costs , regardless of the damage it may do to the earth ’ s environment or to shared values .
John Maynard Keynes addressed this issue in 1930 , in his little essay “ Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren . ”
Keynes predicted that in 100 years – that is , by 2030 – growth in the developed world would , in effect , have stopped , because people would “ have enough ” to lead the “ good life . ”
Hours of paid work would fall to three a day – a 15-hour week .
Human beings would be more like the “ lilies of the field , who toil not , neither do they spin . ”
Keynes ’ s prediction rested on the assumption that , with a 2 % annual increase in capital , a 1 % increase in productivity , and a stable population , average standards of living would rise eight times on average .
This enables us to work out how much Keynes thought was “ enough . ”
GDP per head in the United Kingdom in the late 1920 ’ s ( before the 1929 crash ) was roughly £ 5,200 ( $ 8,700 ) in today ’ s value .
Accordingly , he estimated that a GDP per capita of roughly £ 40,000 ( $ 66,000 ) would be “ enough ” for humans to turn their attention to more agreeable things .
It is not clear why Keynes thought eight times the average British national income per head would be “ enough . ”
Most likely he took as his standard of sufficiency the bourgeois rentier income of his day , which was about ten times that of the average worker .
Eighty years on , the developed world has approached Keynes ’ s goal .
In 2007 ( i.e. , pre-crash ) , the IMF reported that average GDP per head in the United States stood at $ 47,000 , and at $ 46,000 in the UK .
In other words , the UK has had a five-fold increase in living standards since 1930 – despite the falsification of two of Keynes ’ s assumptions : “ no major wars ” and “ no population growth ” ( in the UK , the population is 33 % higher than in 1930 ) .
The reason we have done so well is that annual productivity growth has been higher than Keynes projected : about 1.6 % for the UK , and a bit higher for the US .
Countries like Germany and Japan have done even better , despite the hugely disruptive effects of war .
It is likely that Keynes ’ s “ target ” of $ 66,000 will be achieved for most western countries by 2030 .
But it is equally unlikely that this achievement will end the insatiable hunt for more money . & # 160 ; & # 160 ; Let ’ s assume , cautiously , that we are two-thirds of the way towards Keynes ’ s target .
We might therefore have expected hours of work to have fallen by about two-thirds .
In fact they have fallen by only one-third – and have stopped falling since the 1980 ’ s .
This makes it highly improbable that we will reach the three-hour working day by 2030 .
It is also unlikely that growth will stop – unless nature itself calls a halt .
People will continue to trade leisure for higher incomes .
Keynes minimized the obstacles to his goal .
He recognized that there are two kinds of needs , absolute and relative , and that the latter may be insatiable .
But he underestimated the weight of relative needs , especially as societies got richer , and , of course , the power of advertising to create new wants , and thus induce people to work in order to earn the money to satisfy them .
As long as consumption is conspicuous and competitive , there will continue to be fresh reasons to work .
Keynes did not entirely ignore the social character of work . “ It will remain reasonable , ” he wrote , “ to be economically purposive for others after it has ceased to be reasonable for oneself . ”
The wealthy had a duty to help the poor . Keynes was probably not thinking of the developing world ( most of which had hardly started to develop in 1930 ) .
But the goal of global poverty reduction has imposed a burden of extra work on people in rich countries , both through the commitment to foreign aid and , more importantly , through globalization , which increases job insecurity and , particularly for the less skilled , holds down wages .
Moreover , Keynes did not really confront the problem of what most people would do when they no longer needed to work .
He writes : “ It is a fearful problem for the ordinary person , with no special talents , to occupy himself , especially if he no longer has roots in the soil or in custom or in the beloved conventions of a traditional economy . ”
But , since most of the rich – “ those who have an independent income but no associations or duties or ties ” have “ failed disastrously ” to live the “ good life , ” why should those who are currently poor do any better ?
Here I think Keynes comes closest to answering the question of why his “ enough ” will not , in fact , be enough .
The accumulation of wealth , which should be a means to the “ good life , ” becomes an end in itself because it destroys many of the things that make life worth living .
Beyond a certain point – which most of the world is still far from having reached – the accumulation of wealth offers only substitute pleasures for the real losses to human relations that it exacts .
Finding the means to nourish the fading “ associations or duties or ties ” that are so essential for individuals to flourish is the unsolved problem of the developed world , and it is looming for the billions who have just stepped on to the growth ladder .
George Orwell put it well : “ All progress is seen to be a frantic struggle towards an objective which you hope and pray will never be reached . ”
