Libya ’ s Lord of the Flies
LONDON – “ I am a glory that will not be abandoned by Libya , the Arabs , the United States , and Latin America … revolution , revolution , let the attack begin , ” said the self-described King of African Kings , Dean of Arab Leaders , and Imam of all Muslims , Colonel Muammar al-Qaddafi .
The statement summarizes the Libyan regime ’ s extremely repressive response to the popular uprising against Qaddafi ’ s 42-year dictatorship .
But Qaddafi ’ s tactics have boxed him in .
Should he be defeated , finding refuge abroad , as Tunisia ’ s former President Zine el Abidine Ben Ali did , will be difficult .
And internal exile , such as that currently afforded Hosni Mubarak , will be impossible .
Although the regime ’ s capacity to commit large-scale massacres has shrunk , Qaddafi ’ s defeat will come at a high cost in terms of human life .
In an extreme scenario , the regime could use chemical weapons , as Saddam Hussein did against the Kurds of Halabja in 1988 , or it could launch an intensive aerial bombardment campaign , as Syria ’ s Hafez al-Assad ’ s did in Hama in 1982 .
At that point , international intervention would be more likely than ever .
One and a half million Egyptians and many other foreign nationals , including British citizens , are in Libya and now are in an extremely vulnerable position .
In his first speech during the crisis , Saif al-Islam al-Qaddafi , the Colonel ’ s supposedly “ moderate ” son , alleged an international conspiracy against the regime , involving Egyptians , Tunisians , and other foreign agents .
The response of father and son has been to incite violence against foreigners .
Another possible scenario is a move by the army , or a significant part of it , against Qaddafi and his sons .
The problem is that the Libyan army has not been able to act cohesively since the protests began , in contrast to the Egyptian and Tunisian armed forces .
Senior and junior army officers have defected , often with their troops , to the regime ’ s opponents .
Two air-force pilots diverted to Malta , followed by a navy warship – all in defiance of Qaddafi ’ s orders to bomb the eastern city of Benghazi .
But , at least so far , there have been no splits reported among the Revolutionary Committees , Qaddafi ’ s diehard loyalists , who are estimated to total around 20,000 fighters .
The same is true of Brigade 32 , which is headed by another of Qaddafi ’ s seven sons , Khamis al-Qaddafi .
This brigade is in charge of protecting the Bab al-Aziziya area in Tripoli , where the Colonel lives in his ersatz Bedouin tent .
Libyan military Intelligence , headed by Abdullah al-Sonosi , the Internal Security Forces , led by al-Tuhami Khaled , and the Jamahiriya Security Apparatus also remain intact , with no reported splits .
True , the deep , ingrained rivalry and mistrust between Libya ’ s military-security apparatuses is likely to give rise to splits that will be a key factor in undermining the regime .
But , overall , the Libyan army ’ s tribal nature and allegiances prevent it from functioning as a single unit , either in backing Qaddafi , or in joining the revolt against him .
Tribal allegiances will play a pivotal role if Qaddafi is defeated in the coming days .
Historical rivalries , vendettas , and weapons are widespread among Libya ’ s tribesmen , which suggest that tribal warfare in the post-Qaddafi era is likely .
Yet signs from Libya ’ s East , now a “ Qaddafi-free ” zone , indicate otherwise .
Of course , inter-tribal rivalries are strong in eastern Libya .
But the level of organization and coordination among those leading the rebellion has been quite impressive .
Security , medical , and other committees were rapidly established , just as similar rudimentary institutions of order were created in Egypt by rebellious protesters a few weeks ago .
Moreover , when Ahmed Qaddaf al-Dam and Said Rashwan , two leading figures in the regime , visited Egypt and attempted to recruit tribes with Libyan branches to attack the Qaddafi-free East from Egypt ’ s western desert , they came away with nothing .
Awlad Ali and the other tribes refused the generous bribes offered to them .
Libyan civil society is not as developed as its Egyptian and Tunisian counterparts , which further suggests that Qaddafi ’ s downfall could result in tribal warfare .
But the lessons of Iraq ’ s bloody post-Saddam civil war were learned across the Arab world , and the dedication and maturity of Tunisian and Egyptian youth has become a model for other Arabs seeking freedom and dignity .
Libya ’ s people may be more politically mature and sophisticated than many observers believe .
The international community has a fundamental legal duty towards Libya .
The names of those who head the forces responsible for the killings that have occurred are well known .
If generals and colonels like Abdullah al-Sonosi , Abdullah Mansour , and al-Tuhami Khaled , as well as Qaddafi and his sons , were placed on international watch lists , or if arrest warrants were issued against them , many of their subordinates would think twice before ordering their soldiers to shoot or bombard .
The West has known about crimes against humanity and terrorist plots committed by Qaddafi ’ s regime for decades , most notably the June 1996 Abu Selim massacre , in which more than 1,200 political prisoners were gunned down after protesting against prison conditions .
Yet there was no international inquiry , mainly because oil interests trumped moral outrage .
The West owes it to Libyans to protect them from another massacre .
So far , the Obama administration and European leaders have said all the right words .
But words are not enough ; it is time for concrete action .
