America \ u0027s Other 87 Deficits
NEW HAVEN – The United States has a classic multilateral trade imbalance .
While it runs a large trade deficit with China , it also runs deficits with 87 other countries .
A multilateral deficit cannot be fixed by putting pressure on one of its bilateral components .
But try telling that to America ’ s growing chorus of China bashers .
America ’ s massive trade deficit is a direct consequence of an unprecedented shortfall of domestic saving .
The broadest and most meaningful measure of a country ’ s saving capacity is what economists call the “ net national saving rate ” – the combined saving of individuals , businesses , and the government .
It is measured in “ net ” terms to strip out the depreciation associated with aging or obsolescent capacity .
It provides a measure of the saving that is available to fund expansion of a country ’ s capital stock , and thus to sustain its economic growth .
In the US , there simply is no net saving any more .
Since the fourth quarter of 2008 , America ’ s net national saving rate has been negative – in sharp contrast to the 6.4 % -of-GDP averaged over the last three decades of the twentieth century .
Never before in modern history has the world ’ s leading economic power experienced a saving shortfall of such epic proportions .
Yet the US found a way to finesse this problem .
Exploiting what & # 160 ; Valéry Giscard d ’ Estaing called the “ exorbitant privilege ” of the world ’ s reserve currency , the US borrowed surplus savings from abroad on very attractive terms , running massive balance-of-payments , or current-account , deficits to attract foreign capital .
The US current account , which was last in balance in 1991 , hit a record deficit of $ 801 billion ( 6 % of GDP ) in 2006 .
This gap has narrowed in the past couple of years , but much of the improvement probably reflects little more than the temporary impact of an unusually tough business cycle .
This is where America ’ s multilateral trade deficit enters the equation , for it has long accounted for the bulk of America ’ s balance-of-payments gap .
Since 2000 , it has made up fully 96 % of the cumulative current-account shortfall .
And that is what ultimately makes the China-centric blame game so absurd .
Without addressing the root of the problem – America ’ s chronic saving shortfall – it is ludicrous to believe that there can be a bilateral solution for a multilateral problem .
Yet that is exactly what US officials , together with many prominent economists , believe America needs .
Since the trade deficit is widely thought to put pressure on US jobs and real wages , the US-China trade imbalance has come under special scrutiny in these days of great angst .
Yes , China does account for the largest component of America ’ s multilateral trade deficit – making up 42 % of the total trade gap in 2010 .
Conscious outsourcing and supply-chain management decisions by US multinationals play an important role in exaggerating China ’ s share . But that does little to let China off the hook in the eyes of Washington .
Long-standing charges of currency manipulation provide the proverbial smoking gun that US politicians – of both parties – & # 160 ; believe justifies the imposition of steep tariffs on China ’ s exports to the US ( which totaled $ 365 billion in 2010 ) .
That was precisely the argument behind the US Senate ’ s recent overwhelming approval of a “ currency bill ” that took dead aim on China .
While it may be convenient to hold others accountable for America ’ s problems , this is bad economics driving bad politics .
In an era of open-ended US government budget deficits and chronic shortfalls in personal saving , America is doomed to suffer subpar savings and massive multilateral trade deficits for as far as the eye can see .
In that vein , closing down trade with China , while failing to address the saving shortfall , is like putting pressure on one end of a water balloon .
The Chinese component of America ’ s multilateral trade deficit will simply migrate somewhere else – most likely to a higher-cost producer .
That would be the functional equivalent of a tax hike on beleaguered American families – hardly the solution that US politicians are promising .
This is not to ignore important US-China trade issues that need to be addressed .
Market access should be high on the agenda – especially for a sluggish US economy that needs new sources of growth , like exports .
With China now America ’ s third largest – and by far its most rapidly growing – export market , the US should push hard to expand business opportunities in China , especially as the Chinese economy tilts increasingly toward internal demand .
China should be viewed as an opportunity , not a threat .
At the same time , the US government should come clean with the American public about charges of Chinese currency manipulation and unfair trade practices .
The renminbi has , in fact , appreciated by 30 % relative to the US dollar since mid-2005 .
In broad multilateral terms – a far more meaningful gauge because it measures a currency ’ s value against a broad cross-section of a country ’ s trading partners – the “ real effective ” renminbi currently stands about 8 % above its most recent 12-year average ( 1998-2010 ) .
Yes , China continues to accumulate a vast fund of foreign-exchange reserves .
But this is as much the result of speculators ’ “ hot money ” plays as it is a conscious and perfectly reasonable effort by Chinese policymakers to remain focused on financial stability and manage currency appreciation in a gradual , disciplined , and orderly fashion .
China-bashing in the US speaks to a corrosive shift in the American psyche .
It deflects attention away from those truly responsible for perpetuating the greatest saving shortfall in history .
Washington has been seduced by the political economy of false prosperity .
That seduction has encouraged America to squander its savings and live beyond its means for nearly two decades .
Now the game is up .
The ultimate test of any nation ’ s character is to look inside itself at moments of great challenge .
Swept up in the blame game , the US is doing the opposite .
And that could well be the greatest tragedy of all .
After all , America ’ s 88 deficits did not arise of thin air .
