Kerry and Europe
Those whom the gods would destroy , they grant their wishes .
Those in Europe and around the world who yearn for a victory by John Kerry in the US presidential election ought to keep that bit of ancient Greek wisdom in mind .
During the Cold War , America was the natural leader of the Atlantic community , but the price of this leadership was that the US had to accept the autonomy and influence of its European allies .
After the terrorist attacks of September 11 , 2001 , President Bush embarked on a unilateral foreign policy .
The traditional Atlantic alliance was replaced by what the US called " coalitions of the willing , " where " the mission determines the coalition , " not historic alliances .
This policy divided Europe .
It has also fueled deep divisions in the US presidential campaign , with one of the most potent arguments used by Kerry being that he will restore trust between America and its allies ; that as president he will recruit international help in Iraq .
America undoubtedly needs more allies to bring Iraq 's chaos under control and to build an Iraqi state that is seen as legitimate both by Iraqis and the world .
Allies are seen as an answer to America 's twin credibility and legitimacy deficits in its occupation of Iraq .
But can a Kerry-led US get a fresh start in Europe ?
Will a President Kerry really be able to rally allies to America 's side ?
Iraq 's mayhem has hardened the antagonism of countries like France and Germany , which led the opposition to the war in the first place .
Even countries that rallied to Bush 's call for help , like my homeland , Poland , are now wary of their involvement .
Consider the attitudes of France and Germany .
Their leaders can scarcely hold their tongues , so badly do they want a Kerry victory .
But they are not going to change their policy to help Kerry win , and they won 't change even if he does .
As a gesture intending to boost Kerry 's chances , German Defense Minister Peter Struck suggested that his country might reconsider its position on troops in Iraq .
But Chancellor Gerhard Schröder instantly shot down that trial balloon , declaring : " To be clear , we will send no troops to Iraq . "
Actually , Germany , like most European countries , is politically and logistically unable to send meaningful military forces to Iraq .
France , which did ponder sending 15 000 soldiers to Iraq had the UN given its blessing to the war , is as clear as Schröder .
According to Michel Barnier , France 's Foreign Minister , " Neither today , nor tomorrow , " will French troops be sent .
Both countries firmly believe that military success in Iraq is impossible .
So will transatlantic relations remain as poisoned as they are now if Kerry wins ?
Is Texas swagger merely to be replaced by the distinguished disdain of a Boston Brahmin ?
This is probably too pessimistic .
Europe cannot give an openly negative answer to Kerry 's request for help , because that would be a slap in the face to the most pro-European American likely to be elected president anytime soon .
Such a rejection would not only put transatlantic relations even more at risk than they are today ; it would also put relations
So some compromise must be found should Kerry win .
Fortunately , one is possible .
The first part is purely face-saving : both parties must simply declare their good will .
Today , European leaders are unlikely to throw even that slender lifeline to Bush .
The reality behind such a declaration is that Europe would deliver low-level military and economic involvement in Iraq .
Most European leaders understand the tiny wiggle room that Kerry will have if elected .
The near certainty that the House of Representatives will be in Republican hands , and perhaps the Senate , too , means that America 's Congress will pounce on any supposed attempt by Kerry to " sell out " Bush 's war .
So Kerry may put even more pressure on Europe to help out in Iraq than the unilateralist Bush ever did .
But there is a second , more fundamental , part to any viable compromise : a redefinition of transatlantic relations .
The key point here is joint recognition that a fundamental transatlantic community of values exists , and that both sides need each other .
That transatlantic community must jointly feel responsible for maintaining peace and stability in the world .
The US must accept this principle , and recognize that Europe is a partner , not merely a servant , whether willing or unwilling , of American orders .
If burdens are to be shared , decisions must be shared as well .
This will require that America recognize the validity of Europe 's view of the Israel-Palestinian conflict as the major roadblock toward a peaceful Middle East .
Europe , for its part , must not only show that it feels responsible for the world , but that it is ready and willing to act accordingly by contributing in a significant way to reconstructing Iraq .
Europe 's military means may be limited , but it has important experience in peacekeeping and " state building " that can be brought to bear .
Is Europe really ready to undertake such an effort if its wish for a Kerry victory comes true ?
