China ’ s Hong Kong Follies
HONG KONG – The massive public demonstrations by students and young members of the middle-class that have roiled Hong Kong in recent weeks are ostensibly demands for democracy .
But they actually reflect frustration among a population that has been poorly governed by a succession of leaders picked by China ’ s central government more for their loyalty than their competence .
In fact , the current near-uprising is the culmination of a long series of demonstrations since Hong Kong ’ s handover from the United Kingdom to China in 1997 , after Chris Patten , the last British governor failed to persuade China to allow Hong Kong to establish a genuine democratic government .
In China ’ s view , Patten ’ s position was hypocritical , even offensive , given that the British had ruled Hong Kong autocratically .
China believed that it could easily manage the same kind of “ executive-led ” government that had served Hong Kong well for 150 years under the British .
In order to placate Hong Kong ’ s restive population – which included many refugees from China – a “ one country , two systems ” policy was embedded in the region ’ s constitution , promising Hong Kong “ a high degree of autonomy , ” except in foreign and defense affairs for 50 years .
Indeed , Hong Kong enjoys many freedoms that the rest of China lacks , including a judiciary system that is guided by British common law and independent from the executive branch .
China has yet to follow through on its second promise : that Hong Kong would elect its chief executive by “ universal suffrage ” by 2017 .
Instead , a committee – initially comprising 800 members , but since expanded to 1,200 – selects the chief executive in accordance with the Chinese government ’ s wishes .
Hong Kong ’ s first chief executive , Tung Chee-hwa , was widely viewed as a wise choice .
The Western-educated heir to a shipping fortune , and unusually well connected with the global elite , Tung was thought to be a conservative , thoughtful , cosmopolitan man imbued with liberal values and free of ties to the powerful families that dominated the real-estate industry in the territory .
This perception could not have been more wrong .
Tung turned out to be shallow , radical in his views , more chauvinist than China ’ s top leaders , and prone to rash decision-making on important policies with wide-ranging social and economic consequences .
He forced out his competent chief secretary , Anson Chan , a veteran Hong Kong civil servant , for her colonial background , thereby signaling his mistrust of the entire civil service that the British had created .
It did not take long for Hong Kongers to realize that their new leader harbored a deep – and deeply flawed – “ patriotic ” worldview that regarded Western “ values ” as unsuitable for Hong Kong , the first globalized Chinese city in modern history .
But it was not until Tung tried to ram through draconian internal-security legislation that many of Hong Kong ’ s citizens began to feel that they were being overtaken by the repressive governance from which they were supposed to be exempt .
Under Tung ’ s leadership , mass protests became a frequent sight in Hong Kong .
The Chinese government also belatedly recognized that Tung was a liability .
In 2004 , then-Chinese President Hu Jintao unceremoniously dressed down Tung on live television .
Three months later , Tung resigned for “ health reasons ” and was elected Vice Chairman of the largely symbolic Chinese People ’ s Political Consultative Conference .
Tung ’ s successor , Donald Tsang , was chosen reluctantly .
But he was a senior civil servant , and seemed to be the only technocrat who could credibly hold together Hong Kong ’ s disaffected civil service , which China knew was indispensable to governing the territory , regardless of its British heritage .
But Tsang brought his own weaknesses to Hong Kong ’ s government – most notably , greed .
Tsang , who enjoyed spending time with the wealthy on their yachts and in their private suites , pursued a restrictive land policy that boosted real-estate values – and thus the wealth of the land-owning tycoons .
Prices rose so high , however , that real estate became accessible only to the very well-off , such as the families of high officials from the mainland .
This kind of corrupt behavior earned Tsang a disgraceful exit from government .
Next came Leung Chun-ying , the current governor .
Leung – who was not China ’ s first choice for the position – inherited a mess .
But he did not do himself any favors with his cabinet choices , many of whom had mediocre records that indicated corruptibility .
One of them , Paul Chan Mo-po , was tasked with managing Hong Kong ’ s land-supply policy , despite a history of corruption in his personal property transactions .
Worse , Leung pushed forward an unpopular plan to introduce “ patriotic education ” to Hong Kong , stoking fear among students of a China-dictated brainwashing .
After the failure of three consecutive Chinese-selected leaders to address Hong Kong ’ s concerns , it is no wonder that Hong Kong ’ s citizens are increasingly seeking to loosen China ’ s grip on their government .
But , for the Chinese authorities , this movement reflects an unacceptable challenge to China ’ s sovereignty .
In this sense , Hong Kong is locked in a vicious circle – and it is up to China ’ s government to break it .
The fact is that Hong Kong ’ s citizens understand that they need China , and they have no interest in subverting the central government – nor do they have the power to do so .
Their demands for democracy are simply calls for good governance .
They believe that free and fair elections represent their best chance of having a competent leader – someone like Patten , China ’ s former nemesis , who is remembered fondly in Hong Kong .
China ’ s government is doing itself a disservice by demanding that Hong Kong ’ s citizens bow before their sovereign , while blaming “ outside hostile forces ” for spurring some kind of unconstitutional rebellion .
Instead , it should focus on the problems created by the chief executives that it chose for the wrong reasons , and it should resolve the underlying governance problems that the demonstrations reflect .
