Machiavelli in Euroland
PRINCETON – Niccolò Machiavelli is trending .
More than 500 years after writing his famous treatise The Prince , Machiavelli has reemerged as one of Europe 's most popular political thinkers .
And , indeed , his book – one of the earliest political “ how to " manuals – has some useful advice for economic policymakers at a time when they are facing extraordinarily confusing challenges .
Monetary authorities have turned to Machiavelli to help them understand European Central Bank President Mario Draghi 's policy approach .
France 's new economy minister , Emmanuel Macron , is likely using Machiavelli 's ideas – on which he wrote his master 's thesis – to help shape his plan to modernize his country 's economy .
An influential Moscow think tank called Niccolo M. advises the Kremlin on policies like offensive military communication technologies and hybrid warfare .
But Machiavelli is poorly understood .
The most notorious chapter of The Prince , Chapter XVIII , which explains the circumstances in which it is permissible – and even desirable – for rulers to break promises , appears to argue that the most successful rulers think “ little about keeping faith " and know “ how cunningly to manipulate men 's minds . "
The chapter has been widely interpreted to mean that leaders should lie as often as possible .
Machiavelli 's message , however , was more complex .
With an expert analysis of the wider implications of deception and “ spinning " the truth , he demonstrates that manipulation can work only if the ruler can convincingly pretend not to be engaging in it .
In short , leaders must cultivate a reputation for being dependable and sincere – a lesson that Russian President Vladimir Putin clearly never took on board .
Democratic politics and modern policymaking are based on promises .
Political parties and candidates use promises to woo voters , and then to win support for policies .
People will not respond to implausible pledges , especially if the politicians making them seem unreliable .
A variation of this conundrum emerges in monetary policymaking .
In the jargon of modern monetary technocrats , the issue is how to “ anchor expectations . "
Forward guidance ( a promise about future interest rates ) is not effective when policymakers have to admit that circumstances may force them to change their minds – and their policies – without warning .
Machiavelli saw a need for the appearance of consistency , with officials projecting the virtues that would underpin that image , thereby creating a solid foundation for effective policies . “ To those seeing and hearing him , the ruler should appear to be all mercy , all faithfulness , all integrity , all humanity , and all religion .
And there is nothing more necessary than to seem to possess this last quality . "
In other words , politicians should never seem – much less say – that they do not believe in anything .
Yet modern politics tends to begin with pragmatism and proceed to broken promises .
Europe likes to style itself as a postmodern construct , but one of the features of postmodernism is the reduction of political life to the playing out of cosmetically charged narratives or the convening of constantly changing focus groups .
The malleability of postmodern politics stands in stark contrast to the resoluteness that prevailed under Winston Churchill , Konrad Adenauer , Charles de Gaulle , Alcide de Gasperi , and even Jacques Delors .
The perception that fundamental convictions guided these leaders is what enabled them to engage in political trickery effectively .
Of course , the politics of conviction cannot thrive on words alone .
The only way to be consistently and deeply Machiavellian is to take action to build and maintain the right reputation .
This lesson could be key for European leaders today , at a time when so many are groping for a sense of what being European really means .
The notion that , at its core , Europe should be focused on something as mundane as tweaking fiscal rules seems disappointing , to say the least – especially as the continent confronts an intensifying humanitarian crisis , caused by the influx of refugees from war-ravaged countries like Libya and Syria .
With the Islamic State threatening to drive an ever-increasing number of such refugees to Europe , and the crisis in Ukraine likely to add to the human flood , Europeans are feeling pressure to think beyond the fiscal challenges they face .
That pressure is all the more intense , given that the countries most affected by this humanitarian challenge – Greece , Italy , and Spain – also incurred the most damage from the financial crisis .
It is time for European leaders to step up , showing the kind of conviction that Machiavelli would have promoted , to end the humanitarian crisis .
First , they must ease the suffering of refugees by including or integrating them in a constructive way .
Such an effort would demand substantial financial injections into the countries on the front line of the crisis . If handled correctly , the refugees could become a badly needed source of dynamism for weak economies and a solution to the problem of population aging .
At the same time , Europe 's leaders must work to curb the influx of refugees , by developing a political program to end the violence that is driving despairing people by the millions to their countries ' borders .
Europe cannot afford to be an island of relative stability in a sea of chaos .
Probably the best way to make Europe credible is to stake out a position that is genuinely bold , one that both advances its interests and upholds its deeper values .
Machiavelli 's metaphor for the mystery of effective political conduct provides a potent template .
