America ’ s Sleeping Watch Dog
I want to deviate from my usual economic theme this month and focus instead on the system by which the press – mostly the American press – covers government nowadays .
But perhaps this is not too great a deviation , for the behavior of the press affects not only politics , but economics as well .
Consider an editorial written in March by the Washington Post ’ s editorial director , Fred Hiatt , in which he makes a very small and limited apology for the newspaper ’ s coverage and evaluation of the Bush administration .
According to Hiatt , “ We raised such issues ” as whether the Bush administration had properly thought its proposed adventure in Iraq through , “ but with insufficient force . ” In other words , Hiatt finds fault with himself and his organization for saying the right thing , but not loudly enough .
Next , consider a comment by the former editor of the New York Times , Max Frankel , about how the Washington ecology of media leaks is healthy , because “ most reporters do not just lazily regurgitate ... leaks . ” Instead , “ they use them as wedges to pry out other secrets ” and so oversee the government .
The system may be “ sloppy and breed confusion , ” but “ tolerating abusive leaks by government [ that misinform ] is the price that society has to pay for the benefit of receiving essential leaks about government . ”
So , where Hiatt sees a press corps that was a little too cowardly about overseeing the Bush administration , Frankel sees a press corps where a sloppy and confusing process is nevertheless doing a reasonable job .
I see a very different picture .
It was the summer of 2000 when I began asking Republicans I know – generally people who might be natural candidates for various sub-cabinet policy positions in a Republican administration – how worried they were that the Republican presidential candidate , George W. Bush , was clearly not up to the job .
They were not worried , they told me , that Bush was inadequately briefed and strangely incurious for a man who sought the most powerful office in the world .
One of President Clinton ’ s problems , they said , was that the ceremonial portions of the job bored him – and thus he got himself into big trouble .
Look at how Bush had operated as president of the Texas Rangers baseball club , they said .
Bush let the managers manage the team and the financial guys run the business .
He spent his time making sure the political coalition to support the Texas Rangers in the style to which it wanted to be accustomed remained stable .
Bush knows his strengths and weaknesses , they told me .
He will focus on being America ’ s Queen Elizabeth II , and will let people like Colin Powell and Paul O ’ Neill be America ’ s Tony Blair and Gordon Brown .
By the summer of 2001 , it had become clear that something had gone very wrong .
By that point , Bush had rejected O ’ Neill ’ s and Christine Todd Whitman ’ s advice on environmental policy , just as he had rejected Alan Greenspan ’ s and O ’ Neill ’ s advice on fiscal policy , Powell ’ s and Condoleezza Rice ’ s advice on the importance of pushing forward on negotiations between Israel and Palestine , and – as we learned later – George Tenet ’ s and Richard Clarke ’ s advice about the importance of counterterrorism .
A strange picture of Bush emerged from conversations with sub-cabinet administration appointees , their friends , and their friends of friends .
He was not just under-briefed , but also lazy : he insisted on remaining under-briefed .
He was not just incurious , but also arrogant : he insisted on making uninformed decisions , and hence made decisions that were essentially random .
And he was stubborn : once he had made a decision – even , or rather especially , if it was glaringly wrong and stupid – he would never revisit it .
So , by the summer of 2001 , a pattern was set that would lead British observer Daniel Davies to ask if there was a Bush administration policy on anything of even moderate importance that had not been completely bollixed up .
But if you relied on either the Washington Post or the New York Times , you would have had a very hard time seeing it .
Today , it is an accepted fact that the kindest thing you can say about the Bush administration is that it is completely incompetent , which is the line now taken by hard-line Bush supporters like the National Review and the commentator Robert Novak .
Why didn ’ t the American press corps cover the Bush administration properly for its first five years ?
I really do not know .
I do know that the world cannot afford to rely again on America ’ s press for its information : fool me once , shame on you ; fool me twice , shame on me .
So I appeal to all of you working for newspapers , radio , and television stations outside the United States : it is to you that we – including those of us in America – must look to discover what our own government is doing .
