The Democratic Disruption of Finance
LAGUNA BEACH – There seems to be no limit to the exciting possibilities that come from combining technical innovations , the Internet , and social media .
It is a phenomenon that has been revolutionizing journalism and entertainment ; and , by helping to overcome coordination challenges , it has also had political consequences in a growing number of countries – all of which means an ever-evolving set of opportunities and risks .
What is less appreciated , however , is the extent to which a broadly similar phenomenon may be starting to play out in finance , via a democratization process that could gradually reconfigure a notable part of the institutional landscape , particularly in consumer finance , while challenging regulators to adapt .
Bitcoin is the most visible – albeit far from a good – example of this nascent development , having attracted attention from specialists , regulators , and , slowly but surely , the public .
But the crypto-currency phenomenon is far from the only example , and it is certainly not the most consequential one .
Its impact , both actual and potential , is relatively limited when compared to ongoing attempts to enhance and democratize lending , borrowing , investing , and payments and settlements .
The underlying sequence of disruptive technology is historically familiar .
A bold innovation suddenly lowers entry barriers for certain activities .
Mechanisms emerge to enable a larger part of the population to participate in what is deemed desirable but , until now , had been hard to access .
As the disruptive forces gain traction , existing business models face difficult adaptation challenges , and regulators begin to fall behind .
The situation is often amplified by a natural human tendency to overproduce and over-consume hitherto restricted goods and services .
This , of course , is what has been occurring in media for several years .
The result is a proliferation of platforms for producing , aggregating , disseminating , and consuming content .
Falling entry barriers and lower access costs have significantly democratized participation , whether in production or consumption .
And , as hard as they try , many traditional media outlets – especially those unable to claim quite distinctive content – find it increasingly difficult to compete .
Now something somewhat similar is starting to happen in finance as well , albeit at a less frantic pace and – at least until now – in a less disruptive manner . And , as with media , the main innovations are being spearheaded by those outside the traditional institutional setup .
Most consequentially , an emerging cohort of technology entrepreneurs understand the power of online / social media innovation to disrupt components of traditional finance , and are now leading efforts that include behavioral scientists and finance experts .
Recall that Bitcoin started in 2009 as an attempt to produce a “ better ” currency , championed especially by those who mistrust central banks ’ management of fiat money .
These early adopters were joined by a growing number of financial speculators attracted by highly volatile price movements .
But Bitcoin ’ s success , which remains highly uncertain , ultimately depends on it attaining sufficient stability to perform the most essential function of any currency ( as opposed to a speculative commodity ) – that of providing a relatively predictable medium of exchange .
Fulfilling that function would require a lot to happen .
At a minimum , Bitcoin would need a more solid institutional foundation ; and broad acceptance of it would require much greater clarity concerning regulatory and supervisory approaches .
More promising examples , albeit less well-known , may be found in Internet-driven lending and borrowing clubs or , more generally , the peer-to-peer initiatives in consumer financial services .
By seeking to compress net interest margins , including through lower expenses and more efficient data assessments and aggregation , and by targeting an enhanced consumer experience , such empowerment schemes could serve to reduce the cost of financial intermediation while providing for fairer risk-pooling outcomes and better credit underwriting .
Likewise , so-called digital wallets and mobile transfers are efforts to improve payments and settlement in a retail financial sector that gets a lot less attention than its institutional peers .
The prospects for each of these democratizing developments vary significantly , as do the probable cost-benefit equations .
Much will depend on whether the underlying technology is stable and secure , trust is established , transparency is convincing , consumer protection is effective , new content is coupled well with strong distribution channels , and broad-based validation and institutional verification boost credibility .
Looking ahead , we should expect the underlying forces of innovation to remain strong .
Some existing businesses will fend off disruptive threats , including through takeovers ; others will adjust ( for example , Walmart recently announced an expansion of its financial-services offerings ) ; but many may well prove insufficiently agile .
Regulators will also likely lag initially in their response to new structures and activities .
The challenges of getting this right in finance are considerably more difficult than they are in media ; and the consequences are far more profound , given the centrality of finance to broad swaths of the real economy .
Anyone who doubts that should recall how last decade ’ s securitization boom and bust – another example of a disruptive financial innovation that was over-produced and over-consumed – contributed to a credit and liquidity crisis that pushed the global economy to the verge of Great Depression II .
In their recent book , Google ’ s Jared Cohen and Eric Schmidt brilliantly remind us of the opportunities and risks afforded by multi-speed developments in the real and virtual worlds .
Having redefined media , similar developments are slowly beginning to play out in finance – in a rather isolated way for now , but soon likely to start transforming how capital is mobilized and allocated in support of economic growth and employment .
Individuals , companies , and governments would be well advised to devote more time and other resources to comprehending this important and transformative phenomenon .
