America ’ s Zombie Prison
NEW YORK – Why add to something that is not supposed to exist ?
The something in question is the Unites States ’ prison in Guantánamo Bay , for which the Pentagon recently requested $ 49 million in extra funding .
Despite Barack Obama ’ s promise in 2009 – one of his first as President – to shut down “ Gitmo , ” the US evidently has no intention of doing so anytime soon .
In fact , the only thing concerning Gitmo that the Obama administration has shut down is the office of the special envoy , Daniel Fried , who had been tasked with its closure .
The US State Department reassigned Fried in late January , and he will not be replaced .
How better to memorialize that decision than with a building boom at the prison ?
The new facility for which the money is to be earmarked will house 106 prisoners ( the precise number is uncertain ) who have been neither tried nor charged .
Eight of the prisoners are now entering the second month of a hunger strike .
According to the spokesman for the US Southern Command , which oversees Gitmo , the hunger strikers are disillusioned , because they believed Obama ’ s pledge to close Gitmo .
Indeed , they are cleared to leave , and it is only Obama ’ s failure to keep his promise – and the US Congress ’ s failure to legislate their transfer – that is keeping them there .
So now they feel that the only way they can get the world ’ s attention is to “ do something drastic . ”
One reason why the Pentagon needs to build a costly new facility has to do with the role of private contractors in driving detention policy .
At Gitmo , corporate contractors run the show .
They share signage with military units ; enjoy better housing than military personnel ; run the food services ; and import Southeast Asian workers to build the gigantic infrastructure , which was new when I visited in 2009 ( calling into question the “ deterioration ” cited to justify the latest cash infusion ) .
Contractors also ran the military tribunal facility , and even set policy – deciding , for example , what could be told to the press .
Based on some disputes that I witnessed , contractors appeared to outrank soldiers .
The vast , often undocumentable profits that flow to these companies go a long way toward explaining why facilities like Gitmo – and privately owned and operated prisons in the US itself – never close .
The transfer of public money to private corporations is far more attractive than old-fashioned market capitalism .
But then there is the brutality of the prison .
I recently toured Alcatraz , the former US federal prison in San Francisco Bay .
Like Gitmo , Alcatraz was created , in the 1930 ’ s , to house what was then “ the worst of the worst ” – the Muslim terrorists ( or accused terrorists ) of their day .
Mass murderers and gangsters – including , for example , Al Capone – were incarcerated there .
Alcatraz was closed 50 years ago , in 1963 , owing to its perceived inhumanity , and the prisoners were transferred elsewhere .
Yet I was struck by how much more humane the facility and regime at Alcatraz were compared to Gitmo .
For starters , prisoners at Alcatraz who broke rules or were violent were punished by being put in “ D Block , ” where the cells had no windows ; at Gitmo , all the cells that journalists are shown lack windows or natural light .
Solitary confinement in D Block was seen as the harshest punishment , and it was never used for more than 48 hours at a time .
At Guantánamo – and in other US facilities – prisoners are placed in solitary confinement for days or weeks at a time , which can lead to psychosis .
Likewise , in Alcatraz , prisoners had access to a fully stocked library , monthly visits from loved ones , and mail delivery .
At Gitmo , contrary to Red Cross rules , prisoners may not receive visits or mail from family , their reading is dramatically curtailed , and news is censored .
They are not even notified of the deaths of parents and children .
Prisoners at Alcatraz also had basic privacy .
They were stripped naked on entry , but then wore clothing and showered in single-sex groups with male guards .
By contrast , prisoners in Guantánamo must shower in individual shower stalls that are placed in main hallways and fronted by glass , leaving them naked in full view of female guards .
And , of course , the prisoners in Alcatraz had been tried in a court of law , defended by lawyers whose communications with them were privileged , and duly convicted of their crimes .
The men in Guantánamo have never been tried ; their lawyers ’ communications are monitored ; and their lawyers may not even report to journalists or tribunals what was done to their clients to extract confessions , because – in a twist worthy of Franz Kafka – investigators ’ methods , which detainees claim include torture , are classified .
The eight hunger strikers are being fed through tubes inserted into their stomachs .
This is a brutal process – the men are strapped onto restraint chairs twice a day and force-fed , in a facility that I witnessed .
During my visit in 2009 , a Yemeni hunger striker , Mohammad Saleh , died .
As with all hunger strikers who have died at Gitmo , the US military ruled his death a suicide .
Perhaps , someday , tourists will travel to Guantánamo and look in horror and amazement at what America built .
Until then , Americans need to ask themselves what has coarsened in the national conscience between 1963 and today .
How is it that a prison too brutal for gangsters , too un-American to house the worst of the worst , was more humane than a place that Americans are spending millions to enlarge ?
