Israel ’ s Nightmares
Paris – “ It is reasonable to believe in miracles , ” David Ben-Gurion , the first Prime Minister of Israel , once said .
Today ’ s Israelis do not seem to believe in miracles .
Instead , more than ever before they are obsessed by nightmares , foremost among them , the prospect of a nuclear Iran .
To prevent a regime imbued with an absolute ideology from gaining possession of the “ absolute weapon ” is Israel ’ s paramount priority .
Everything must be done , even a unilateral military strike , to prevent or at least delay Iran ’ s acquisition of such a weapon .
This Israeli conviction on what it considers an existential issue stands in stark contrast with the fatalism that otherwise dominates Israelis ’ thinking about themselves and their relations with the Palestinians .
How is this fatalism manifesting itself , where does it come from , and what can be done to transcend it ?
These questions are important , because “ fatalism ” has become a major obstacle that must be overcome by anyone seriously interested in bringing peace to the region .
For this fatalism is a strong card in the hands of someone such as Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu , who is intent on preserving the status quo .
A majority of Israelis would probably back a preventive attack on Iran and satisfy themselves with the preservation of the status quo in relations with the Palestinians .
In the aftermath of the Israeli election in February , which brought to power a government coalition that includes the extreme rightist Avigdor Lieberman , now Israel ’ s foreign minister , an Israeli friend whose sympathies had always been with the left said to me in a resigned , cryptic way , “ It ’ s sad , but it does not change anything ; we have no one to talk to anyway . ” He gave me approximately the same answer when I referred to the need to change Israel ’ s electoral system based on proportional representation , which produces weak majorities at best and near-paralysis at worst .
The same fatalism directly applies to the prospect of peace with Palestinians and the Arab / Muslim world in general .
It is as if , paradoxically , Israelis had internalized the concept of “ temporary truce ” advocated by their Hamas adversary , and had given up the goal of peace through a two-state solution that they once pursued with the Palestinian Authority .
For a majority of Israelis today , the present and the foreseeable future are not about peacemaking , but about conflict management , through the preservation of credible deterrence – a hard-core realistic assessment darkened by the perception that , while time is not necessarily on Israel ’ s side , that there is no alternative .
Israelis don ’ t want to delude themselves the way they did in the 1990 ’ s during the so-called Oslo peace process .
The same fatalism also applies to relations with the outside world .
A majority of Israelis are even more convinced today than they were yesterday that they can count only on themselves and , at the margin , on the Jewish Diaspora .
This vision not only tends to encourage a process of self-isolation , but it raises serious issues in the long run .
At the end of the day , there are only 13.2 million Jews in the world and nearly 1.3 billion Muslims .
Israel needs allies , because its ultimate security depends on its legitimacy nearly as much as on its deterrence capability .
If each relative military success is accompanied by an absolute political defeat , as was the case with the recent military operations in Gaza , what is the ratio between costs and benefits ?
These deep Israeli emotions are the product of the encounter between the weight of the past and the “ facility ” of the present .
It could be said without any exaggeration that the weight of the Holocaust is even more present today than it was decades ago .
By calling for the destruction of the “ Zionist entity , ” Iran ’ s president rubs that raw nerve .
A little more than 60 years after the Shoah , one does not play lightly with such an evocation of destruction .
In a world where , for many Israelis and non-Israeli Jews , Israel is becoming to the community of nations what Jews once were in the community of peoples – a pariah state , if not an eternal scapegoat – the memory of the Shoah resounds with a vengeance .
On the other hand , there is great comfort in the status quo .
After all , if you walk along Tel Aviv ’ s beaches , the dramas of Hamas-controlled Gaza and Hezbollah-controlled southern Lebanon seem so far away .
If the United States wants to be seriously involved in a renewed peace initiative , it can neither ignore nor passively accept the hierarchy of Israeli emotions .
But creating a new balance that contains a little less obsession with Iran and a little more concern for the Palestinians is a formidable challenge .
