America ’ s Reactionary Feminists
NEW YORK – It is obvious that the left and the media establishment in the United States cannot fully understand the popular appeal of the two Republican tigresses in the news – first Sarah Palin , and now , as she consolidates her status as a Republican presidential front-runner , Michele Bachmann .
What do they have that other candidates don ’ t – & # 160 ; and that so many Americans seem to want ?
Both Bachmann and Palin are regularly derided in the mainstream press .
In Palin ’ s case , the dominant perception is that she is an intellectual lightweight : a clip of her unable to mention a single newspaper or news magazine that she reads regularly got millions of hits on YouTube during the last presidential election .
Bachmann , on the other hand , & # 160 ; is portrayed as being slightly unhinged .
Indeed , I can attest from personal experience that to debate her is to encounter someone who is absolutely certain of facts that must exist somewhere in a parallel universe .
But it would be a mistake simply to dismiss their appeal with no effort to comprehend its source .
This is especially true of Bachmann .
Palin has not managed to secure the support and mentorship of the Republican Party establishment , and will continue to showcase her odd appeal as a media personality .
But Bachman , weirdly , might become President of the United States .
The nature of their attraction has to do with two strains in American thought to which the US left and media establishment are truly blind .
One is the American tradition of populist demagoguery – a tradition that , in the twentieth century , included the racist Father Charles Coughlin in the 1930 ’ s , the anti-Communist witch-hunter Joe McCarthy in the 1950 ’ s , and the radical Malcolm X in the 1960 ’ s .
Populist leaders inspire passionate devotion , usually in people who feel ( and often are ) economically , politically , and culturally marginalized .
These populist movements ’ energy can be directed for good or ill , but demagogues in America embrace similar tactics to fuel their rise to visibility and power .
They use emotive rhetoric .
They often invent shadowy networks of “ elite ” forces ranged against the ordinary , decent American .
They create an “ us versus them ” scenario .
And they ask their listeners to believe that they alone will restore American dignity and articulate the wishes of the unheard .
Palin and Bachmann speak this highly personal or emotional language , which even the most rock-ribbed male Republican finds difficult to emulate .
In the last three decades , America ’ s male-dominated politics has become increasingly wonky , abstract , and professionalized .
This is bad for demagoguery , but it does not inhibit the tigresses on the right , who did not come up through the “ old boy ’ s club . ”
As a result , Palin is free to talk about “ death panels ” – a wholly invented threat of President Barack Obama ’ s health-care reform – and Bachmann can summon the spirit of McCarthy to raise the equally bizarre specter of socialism ’ s tentacles infiltrating the highest levels of government .
Both can issue homespun appeals as “ hockey moms ” or “ soccer moms ” – precisely the type of emotionalism that more cut-and-dried professional male politicians , even ( or especially ) at the top of the party , cannot manage to deliver .
The second reason that Bachmann and Palin appeal to so many Americans – and this should not be underestimated , either – has to do with a serious historical misreading of feminism .
Because feminism in the 1960 ’ s and 1970 ’ s was articulated via the institutions of the left – in Britain , it was often allied with the labor movement , and in America , it was reborn in conjunction with the emergence of the New Left – there is an assumption that feminism itself must be leftist .
In fact , feminism is philosophically as much in harmony with conservative , and especially libertarian , values – and in some ways even more so .
The core of feminism is individual choice and freedom , and it is these strains that are being sounded now more by the Tea Party movement than by the left .
But , apart from these sound bites , there is a powerful constituency of right-wing women in Britain and Western Europe , as well as in America , who do not see their values reflected in collectivist social-policy prescriptions or gender quotas .
They prefer what they see as the rugged individualism of free-market forces , a level capitalist playing field , and a weak state that does not impinge on their personal choices .
Many of these women are socially conservative , strongly supportive of the armed forces , and religious – and yet they crave equality as strongly as any leftist vegetarian in Birkenstocks .
It is blindness to this perfectly legitimate approach to feminism that keeps tripping up commentators who wish to dismiss women like Margaret Thatcher , or Muslim women , or now right-wing US women leaders , as somehow not being the “ real thing . ”
But these women are real feminists – even if they do not share policy preferences with the already recognized “ sisterhood , ” and even if they themselves would reject the feminist label .
In the case of Palin – and especially that of Bachmann – we ignore the wide appeal of right-wing feminism at our peril .
