An Arab Spring ?
PARIS – Is Tunisia the first Arab authoritarian domino to fall ?
Or is it a unique case that should not be viewed as a precedent for either the Arab world in general or the Maghreb in particular ?
The region ’ s dictators have sought to dismiss the “ Jasmine Revolution , ” but the spark that started in Tunisia could spread – perhaps in a matter of months or years – to the entire Arab world .
Indeed , the wall of fear has crumbled , the people have spoken , and an “ Arab spring ” could be at hand .
The message from Tunisia , at least so far , is clear : corrupt and authoritarian regimes , beware : unless you reform deeply and quickly , your days are numbered .
The greatest danger is that the Jasmine Revolution could go the way of Romania ’ s anti-communist uprising of 20 years ago , with the old regime ’ s underlings expelling their bosses in order to stay in power .
But the best analogy for Tunisia today is Spain in the years preceding and following the death of Francisco Franco .
By opening itself to the world through tourism , and with its emphasis on education and women ’ s rights , Ben Ali ’ s regime created something unique in the Middle East : a vibrant middle class .
But the regime , like Franco ’ s dictatorship , did not treat the members of this new middle class like adults , thereby encouraging widespread frustration .
Given this , it would seem wrong , if not dangerous , to compare Tunisia and its Jasmine Revolution to other national contexts in the region .
Nevertheless , if Morocco looks stable today , this largely reflects two factors : monarchy and reform .
Led by a group of technocrats surrounding the young King Mohammed VI , a reform process – including political liberalization – has begun in earnest , even if the results still seem modest .
Moreover , Mohammed VI , as “ Commander of the Believers , ” benefits from a “ Muslim ” legitimacy that the leaders of Algeria and Egypt , two of the region ’ s most vulnerable regimes , do not possess .
And Morocco , contrary to Algeria , does not suffer from the curse of oil .
Even if the case of Tunisia is largely unique , it would be shortsighted to dismiss its potential influence elsewhere in the region , where many young Arabs in this age of Facebook and Twitter now “ feel Tunisian . ”
They , too , are humiliated by their leaders ’ performance and , more deeply , their vulgar despotic essence .
They , too , thirst for freedom .
Whatever the Jasmine Revolution ’ s outcome , and even if it cannot become for the Arab world what the fall of the Berlin Wall was for Europe , it will establish a “ before ” and an “ after . ”
The “ after ” is likely to highlight two potential models of political development for the Arab world : Turkey and Iran .
If the revolutionary wave that began in Tunisia spreads to the rest of the Arab world , how many countries will be tempted by Turkish openness , and how many by Iranian fundamentalism ?
Of course , that is a somewhat simplistic dichotomy .
There are grey areas in the Turkish experiment with “ moderate Islam , ” and , beyond Iran ’ s Mullahs , there are reasons for hope in the vibrant and resilient character of that country ’ s civil society .
What is clear is the West ’ s preference for the Turkish model .
Most Europeans may want to keep Turkey at a reasonable distance , but , confronted with changes and possible disorder , if not chaos , in the Arab world , they look favorably on Turkey ’ s potential to play a stabilizing role .
To be sure , history never repeats itself , but could some kind of neo-Ottoman order be the best answer to the risk of “ Arab chaos ” ?
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan ’ s Turkey already plays a growing role in the region , and has strengthened its image with ordinary Arabs by taking a muscular diplomatic position against Israel ’ s deadly military assault in June 2010 on a Gaza-bound aid flotilla that had been organized by a Turkish charity .
But it is one thing to be popular and another to serve as a model .
Turkey is demonstrating that Islam and modernity are compatible .
But the Turks are the Ottoman Empire ’ s heirs , and the Arab world , contrary to Western hopes , may not be ready to exchange its current frustration for the humiliating admission that it requires its former rulers ’ model to progress toward modernity .
It would be dangerous to assume that after Tunisia , democracy in the Arab world is just around the corner .
But the belief that nothing will change is equally illusory .
For better or worse , history is on the move in the Arab world – and there is very little the West can do about it .
