Powerless Women in Power ?
NEW YORK – Are women political leaders finally coming into their own ?
Are they not only winning more elections , but also finally able to campaign and govern with no more – or less – scrutiny , scandal , and mockery than their males peers ?
Superficially , it may seem as if we have reached that breakthrough moment at which gender is no longer the most important issue .
In the United States , Hillary Clinton is preparing for her second run for the presidency , and Janet Yellen is the first woman Chair of the US Federal Reserve Board – widely regarded as one of the world ’ s most powerful offices .
Moreover , TV shows that feature women portraying top political leaders are filling America ’ s airwaves , including “ Madame Secretary , ” starring the improbably comely Téa Leoni as US Secretary of State , and “ Veep , ” with Julia Louis-Dreyfus as a charming , comical vice president .
The central issue in these television programs is not that the main roles are played by women .
Character , not gender , drives the narrative .
Outside of the United States , women have already reached the highest level of power .
In Germany , Chancellor Angela Merkel , having won three general elections , is respected or resented for her austerity policies , not for her gender .
Argentina ’ s President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner is attacked for mismanaging the economy , and by US banking interests for forcing debt restructuring on her country ’ s creditors , not because she is a woman .
In Israel , hawks attack Justice Minister Tzipi Livni for leaning slightly to the left on Palestinian statehood – just as they would attack a man in her position .
And women have achieved the premiership in all Scandinavian countries except Sweden .
Most intriguingly of all , Brazil ’ s first female president , Dilma Rousseff , is now in a neck-and-neck race with another woman , Marina Silva .
Rousseff ’ s popularity has plummeted in the wake of public protests over spending on the World Cup , together with a sharp economic slowdown .
Now Silva is drawing broad support , including from evangelical Christians – a bloc not known for backing women leadership contenders anywhere .
So has democratic politics around the world reached the point where voters judge politicians , male or female , strictly on their merits ?
Certainly , many of the women now in power , or running for office , are doing so on the basis of their track records .
The last three decades have yielded a cadre of women leaders even where women otherwise lag far behind in terms of opportunity – for example , South Korean President Park Geun-hye , Ukraine ’ s two-time former prime minister , Yuliya Tymoshenko , and Presidents Ellen Johnson Sirleaf of Liberia and Joyce Banda of Malawi .
But the sad irony is that women are finally finding their moment in the political sun at a time when the nation-states they are leading are finding their ability to forge national solutions to their problems extremely limited .
With increasing frequency – as , for example , with international trade treaties , such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership – private actors are taking the place of governments , legislatures , and heads of state in setting policy .
Some even suggest that women are emerging at the top because men do not want to take the blame for impending failure .
Senior executives – those who are drawn to the arguments presented in such groundbreaking analyses of the workplace as Sheryl Sandberg ’ s Lean In – know that corporate realpolitik can include calling in a woman when the ship is sinking .
This reflex might explain the presence of a woman at the helm of GM during its current damaging recall of defective cars , for example .
Similarly , African-American leaders sometimes joke wryly about gaining the reins of municipal power just when a city is about to go bankrupt .
Powerful white men , it is suggested , do not like to sign their names to projects or enterprises in trouble , and they are often happy to have the cosmetic benefit of a female – or nonwhite – face at the helm , when the real power may be draining away behind the scenes , or moving on elsewhere .
But , though nation-states and their politicians are more constrained than ever before , the records of women like Merkel and Rousseff suggest that individual leaders remain a potent force , for better or worse .
Most international business leaders bitterly oppose the austerity program that Merkel has imposed on the European Union .
And Rousseff ’ s use of revenues from the Brazilian energy giant Petrobras to fund domestic social programs has caused the firm ’ s share price to halve – alienating oil investors .
So are today ’ s women leaders the real deal or just figureheads ?
The answer is likely to be the same for men and women .
