Why Europe ?
PRINCETON – What is the point of Europe ?
The threat of an explosive disintegration of the eurozone – and with it of the European Union – is receding .
But the confused outcome of Italy ’ s recent parliamentary election , with an upper house dominated by a party that campaigned on an anti-EU platform and a pro-European majority in the Chamber of Deputies , has revived the fundamental debate about the purpose of European integration .
Europeans find it hard to find a positive way of describing the exercise in which they have been engaged for the past six decades .
One common interpretation is that integration makes people better off .
Unity is supposed to be a foundation of prosperity .
The Common Market was defended at the outset in terms of the gains that would follow from increased trade .
The case for capital-market integration , and then for a single currency , was similar .
All of this recalls some powerful arguments that were made in the nineteenth century about national integration and unification .
In particular , the two countries whose problems drove much of the need for twentieth-century European integration – Germany and Italy – were culturally and politically highly diverse .
In both countries , early-nineteenth-century romantic nationalism gave way to a sober obsession with economic forces after the failed revolutions of 1848 .
The influential German journalist Ludwig von Rochau , who coined the term Realpolitik , described the new German mood on the eve of Otto von Bismarck ’ s last war of unification .
German unity was not a question of the heart ’ s desire ; it was “ a mundane business transaction , in which no one should lose , but everyone should grab as much as they could for themselves . ”
Italians shared the same belief after the disillusion of 1848 .
Patriotism could generate business opportunities .
The great Florentine liberal statesman , Bettino Ricasoli , concluded that Tuscany was simply financially unviable on its own .
This sort of economic nationalism in Germany and Italy briefly produced coalitions of interests that supported the drive to national unification under Bismarck and Cavour .
But the credibility of the national project seemed to crumble when growth faltered , leading to the emergence of movements that championed the aggressive , confrontational , and violent assertion of cultural identity .
Mario Monti is the twenty-first-century descendant of those nineteenth-century patriots who argued for the economic necessity of national unity .
Now it is European unity that is needed for economic reasons .
This vision of Europe is not idealistic ; it is simply concerned with how Europeanization can benefit Italians .
And , like its nineteenth-century precursor , it is vulnerable to severe backlashes , especially when it appears to bring only pain and suffering .
Indeed , when today ’ s Europeans peer into the future , they see only prolonged recession and austerity .
Europe means nothing but sacrifice : northern Europeans paying for southern Europe ’ s woes through large transfers , or southern Europeans repaying onerous – and maybe impossible – levels of debt .
A variant of the economic argument for European unity is the claim that enhanced integration makes it easier to finance debt , because interest rates are lower .
A reduction in borrowing costs constituted a powerful motive in the 1990 ’ s for southern European governments to join the monetary union .
But the costs of moving into a non-defaulting environment are high .
Here , another historical parallel is helpful .
France in the ancien régime repeatedly imposed semi-default on its creditors by reducing interest rates and extending maturities .
In the 1780 ’ s , a new consensus against such measures emerged .
But the impossibility of raising revenue then triggered the French Revolution , with the revolutionaries demanding confiscatory taxes and impositions on the wealthy elite .
The alternative to thinking about European integration simply as a way of generating wealth and prosperity frequently analogizes it to a marriage .
In the late 1980 ’ s , for example , then-European Commission President Jacques Delors , raising the prospect of a two-speed Europe , suggested that one or two countries might need a “ different kind of marriage contract . ”
The marriage analogy was used initially to signal that the European relationship was an exclusive one .
Europeans had a unique relationship with which no one – & # 160 ; especially the United States – should interfere .
As Dominique Strauss-Kahn , then France ’ s finance minister , put it in 1997 , “ People who are married do not want others in the bedroom . ”
But marriage can be a fraught institution ( as Strauss-Kahn may know better than most ) .
The British economic journalist Martin Wolf thinks of Europe as a marriage kept together only by the high cost of divorce .
Others see it as a sham marriage .
Traditional marriage vows entail a commitment that binds the partners through changing circumstances : for richer and for poorer , in sickness and in health .
Even if the marriage does not make the partners better off , they still need to stick with it .
So neighbors who have a quarrelsome or violent past are not always well advised to reconcile by marrying .
The problem was that the Europeans did not understand what marriage really meant and why they should want to get married .
Enthralled by promises of material well-being and security , they had exaggerated expectations of romantic wedded bliss .
The unhappy marriage analogy for Europe ’ s current malaise , while depressing , is helpful .
At least it tells Europeans that they are not stuck together only for material reasons .
But , until that lesson is really learned , Europe must brace itself for more setbacks and backlashes , which means that it must still answer the fundamental question : Why stick it out together , especially at a time when more and more Europeans are choosing not to get married at all ?
