How India Survived the Financial Crisis
NEW DELHI – As the world economy begins to recover , Indians are looking back with particular satisfaction at how they coped with the recent crisis .
Despite an unprecedented global recession , India remained the second fastest growing economy in the world .
Whereas most countries suffered negative growth in at least one quarter over the last two years , India ’ s GDP grew by more than 6 % throughout this period – and by 7.9 % in the last quarter of 2009 .
India ’ s achievement is all the more striking given that the Pakistani terrorist attacks on Mumbai – India ’ s financial nerve center and commercial capital – in late November 2008 came in the midst of the crisis .
The terrorists dented the worldwide image of India as an emerging economic giant , a success story of the era of globalization , and a magnet for investors and tourists .
Indeed , in late 2008 , foreign investors did withdraw $ 12 billion from India ’ s stock markets .
But India ’ s resilience in the face of adversity , and its mature restraint in the face of violent provocation , encouraged investors to return .
Foreign direct investment totaled $ 27.3 billion in 2008-2009 , despite the global financial crisis , and reached $ 1 billion in just one week in May 2009 .
India ’ s ability to stave off the economic gales was helped by the fact that it is much less dependent than most countries on global flows of trade and capital .
India relies on external trade for about 20 % of its GDP ( the figure for China is roughly double ) .
The country ’ s large and robust internal market accounts for the rest .
Indians continued producing goods and services for other Indians , and that kept the economy humming .
Though India ’ s merchandise exports did register declines of about 30 % , its exports of services continued to do well throughout the crisis .
Indians abroad stayed loyal to India : remittances from overseas Indians remained robust , reaching $ 46.4 billion in 2008-2009 , the bulk of which came from the mainly blue-collar Indian expatriate community in the Gulf countries .
India ’ s generally conservative financial system played a vital role , too .
Its banks and financial institutions were not tempted to buy the mortgage-supported securities and credit-default swaps that ruined several Western financial institutions .
Among the drivers of growth , domestic capital formation retained much of its momentum from preceding years .
Moreover , India ’ s government adopted a pro-active fiscal policy , rolling out two rounds of stimulus packages .
The authorities pursued pro-growth policies , including lower interest rates , expanded credit , and a reduction in excise duties .
There are still challenges ahead .
Reform is pursued hesitantly by a coalition government constantly wary of voters ’ reactions .
A decision to de-regulate petrol and diesel prices has sparked massive street protests and stoked fears of rampant inflation .
Privatization of India ’ s bloated public sector ( from massive coal and steel enterprises to the loss-making national carrier Air India ) has been slow to get off the ground .
And , of course , the persistent complaints of corruption and bureaucratic red tape have not faded with liberalization .
The country ’ s infrastructure remains woeful , as any visitor flying into an Indian airport notices .
Power shortages are frequent .
Some 40 % of the population still lives below a poverty line drawn just this side of the funeral pyre .
Yet all these problems are being dealt with by a confident Prime Minister Manmohan Singh , who has steered the ship of state through some particularly treacherous waters .
India is simultaneously tackling the “ hardware ” of development ( ports , roads , airports ) and its “ software ” ( health care , education ) .
Success will not occur overnight , but progress has been impressive and is continuing .
In the last 15 years , India has pulled more people out of poverty than in the previous 45 – roughly 10 million people per year on average in the last decade .
The country has visibly prospered , and , despite population growth , per capita income has grown faster , and to a greater level , than ever before .
The current financial crisis , far from prompting India to retreat , is an opportunity to safeguard and build on those gains .
India can advance with the confidence that it can cope with the world from a very secure base .
As the 2010 monsoon nourishes India ’ s plains , that ’ s an encouraging place to be .
