Learning to Leave Extremism
BEIRUT – Report after report from the World Bank , United Nations Development Program , and the Arab League emphasize that the education deficit in the Arab world is among the main causes of its underdevelopment .
With 5 % of the world ’ s population and the bulk of the world ’ s oil and gas , the Arab world nonetheless lags behind most of the rest of the world , and suffers from what can best be termed “ educational poverty . ”
Without dramatic improvement at all educational levels , unemployment , illiteracy , and income inequality will continue to worsen , and the region will remain a danger to itself and its neighbors .
Even before the current economic recession , unemployment in the Arab world was estimated at 14 % – the world ’ s highest average outside sub-Saharan Africa .
Among young people and recent graduates , the figure is more than double .
The Arab world also has the highest population growth rate in the world , with almost 40 % of its population now below the age of 15 .
According to some estimates , the Arab world accounts for one-quarter of the world ’ s unemployment among the 15-24 age group .
Just to keep up with the inflow of young people into the labor market , Arab economies will have to generate 100 million new jobs over the next 10 years , which will be impossible if education remains impoverished .
Enrollment ratios in the Arab world have improved over the past decade , but Arab countries still have one of the lowest average net enrollment ratios in the developing world .
About one-fifth of eligible children , more than seven million , are not in school , and 60 % of these are girls .
The average years of schooling for Arabs is less than half that for the East Asian countries .
Not surprisingly , despite progress in recent decades , illiteracy remains at around 30 % on average , and in some Arab countries reaches 50 % and 60 % .
The quality of Arab education is also an obstacle .
Today ’ s job market demands skills based on problem-solving , critical thinking , modern languages , and technology , but Arab educational systems generally remain traditional , rote-based , and authoritarian .
Research throughout the world shows that education is a key prerequisite for sustainable growth .
The East Asian tigers invested heavily in education , and it paid off in terms of a capable and modern workforce .
By contrast , development in the Arab world , driven largely by oil revenues , has left the population under-educated and economically marginalized .
Education is also important in the Arab context because of its special status in Islam , which , like Judaism and Christianity , is a religion of the book .
The Gospel of St. John says , “ In the Beginning was the Word ” ; the first word that was revealed to the prophet Muhammad by the Angel Gabriel was “ Read … ” Among the Prophet ’ s sayings is , “ It is the duty of every Muslim man and woman to seek learning . ”
Moreover , Islam does not have a priesthood , just scholars .
The Arab golden ages , in eleventh-century Baghdad and fourteenth-century Andalucía , are revered as periods of great learning .
Schools and universities received large-scale support , and students and scholars traveled from city to city in pursuit of knowledge .
After these golden ages , education fell into decline .
By the 1970 ’ s and 1980 ’ s , the Arab world ’ s post-independence states had made great improvements in their education sector .
But they did not have the resources to keep up with their own growing populations .
The dramatic levels of investment of the 1950 ’ s and 1960 ’ s tapered off , with the result that too many children are now either outside the school system or are receiving a low-quality education that leaves them without basic literacy and numeracy skills .
And there are still too many disparities based on gender , location , wealth , disability , and other markers of marginalization .
What the West has most , and what the Arab world most needs , is education .
It requires more schools and fewer guns ; more universities and fewer aircraft carriers .
The American University of Beirut , founded in 1866 , has arguably done more to transform the Middle East in positive ways than any other comparable institution , yet it receives only $ 3 million in annual aid from the United States , which spends billions on armies and weaponry in the region .
Indeed , the cost of a single month of western military spending in Iraq or Afghanistan would be enough to triple total aid for education in the Middle East .
The cost of two cruise missiles would build a school , the cost of a Eurofighter a small university .
Education can also have a fundamental effect on forming values .
Radical Islamists recognized this long ago and plowed their resources into schools .
Saudi Arabia recognized it in the 1970 ’ s as it sought to expand its influence , and over the years the Kingdom has funded thousands of schools and colleges that teach its stringent brand of Wahhabi Islam .
In Afghanistan and Pakistan , the radical vision is conveyed to the young in religious schools known as madrasas .
Indeed , “ Taliban ” means “ students . ”
The struggle for the future of the Arab and Muslim worlds that is being fought now will be won or lost not on the battlefield , but in the classroom .
