Saving Public Sarkozy
Ever since key public figures signed a manifesto in a French magazine denouncing the dangers of a monarchical drift – without ever mentioning the president ’ s name – the political atmosphere in France has been electric .
Nicolas Sarkozy ’ s rapid fall from grace is unprecedented in the history of the Fifth Republic .
His popularity ratings are plummeting , and his party , the conservative UMP , is predicted to fare badly in the municipal elections in mid-March .
What is behind the collapse in Sarkozy ’ s popularity ?
Can he recover ?
These questions are crucial not only for France , because we are five months away from a French presidency of the European Union that should have been an important step in Europe ’ s own rebound .
The attacks on Sarkozy are very personal , and focus as much on his “ essence ” as on his performance .
Can he incarnate France with dignity and legitimacy ?
Can he transform intuitions and speeches into concrete actions ?
Has he already lost touch with reality , surrounded as he is by a court of media courtesans ?
In the eyes of a majority of French citizens , for whom presidents are “ elected monarchs , ” Sarkozy has “ de-sacralized ” the presidency .
Unlike constitutional monarchies , France does not distinguish between the symbol and the reality of power .
Sarkozy may want to be a combination of Margaret Thatcher and Tony Blair , but in symbolic terms he is also the Queen .
And , in his quest for modernity and transparency , he has de-legitimized the symbolic dimension of his function by mixing his private and public lives .
On the one hand , Sarkozy ’ s fascination with rich people has helped isolate him from the average Frenchman .
Yet , on the other hand , his flashy style is considered vulgar by traditional French elites , who are keen to dissociate themselves from someone whose educational background and instinctive reactions clearly marks him as not one of them .
His love life is not seen as a human , romantic affair and a sign of youthful energy , but as a possibly fatal distraction , the ultimate proof of his “ immaturity . ”
Of course , if the international economic environment had been more favourable , and if there were not so much legitimate concern about declining purchasing power , the French might have shown greater indulgence towards their young president .
But it looks as if Sarkozy , once obsessed with gaining power , has progressively lost touch with reality since achieving his goal .
You cannot proclaim your impotence in the face of empty state coffers after pushing through useless and costly tax breaks for the richest .
And you cannot adopt a Churchill-like call to sacrifice when you indulge in a series of highly publicized luxury weekends with your latest fiancée .
Moreover , if Sarkozy has eroded , perhaps fatally , the “ sacred ” symbolic nature of the presidency , his governance has failed to provide any compensating reassurance .
Multiplying initiatives , being everywhere at once , accelerating the pace of reforms at the risk of confusing quality and quantity , breaking taboos , and blurring the lines between secularism and religion , Sarkozy has reinforced lingering doubts about a brilliant politician ’ s ability to become a statesman or at least an effective ruler .
The influence of his court has been seen as excessive and dangerous , marginalizing and frustrating the government , parliament , and his own party .
But it is much too early to bury Sarkozy .
While he has seemingly lost touch with the French people , he is deeply aware of and wounded by his declining popularity , and no one should underestimate his ability to reinvent himself with a new government after the municipal elections and greater distance from his immediate entourage .
In any case , France is not Russia .
Despite some troubling similarities between Sarkozy and Vladimir Putin , French democracy is not in danger .
What is at stake is the dignity of the presidential office and , beyond that , France ’ s ability to modernize .
Indeed , the most serious casualty of the current political climate in France is Sarkozy ’ s reform agenda .
It is as if his personality had become the biggest obstacle to his determination to break with the past .
Perhaps too much uncontrolled rupture in style can ultimately lead to paralysis in substance .
