Another Failed British Experiment
FLORENCE – British politics has always been something of an experimental laboratory for the industrialized world .
In the 1970 ’ s , Britain was where the preeminent postwar model of how to manage the economy collapsed .
That model had been based politically on the creation of consensus , and economically on Keynesian demand management . Today , the equivalent collapse has been of the “ regulation-lite ” regime in which a party that styled itself as “ New Labour ” accepted a powerful role for markets – particularly for largely deregulated financial markets .
In the 1960 ’ s , Keynesian policies delivered the illusion that everyone was benefiting , with high levels of employment and significant wage growth .
Britain was the coolest place on earth , boasting the Beatles and the Rolling Stones and the pastel fashions of Carnaby Street .
But Keynesianism involved continued fiscal expansion , with no offsetting monetary contraction .
By the 1970 ’ s , it had brought to the United Kingdom large and ultimately unsustainable current-account deficits , high levels of inflation , and then political gridlock over what to do .
Which group should be the first to make a sacrifice ?
In early 1974 , Edward Heath ’ s Conservative government was locked in a struggle with the powerful coal miners ’ union over “ who rules Britain . ” He called a premature election in February , in which there was no clear winner .
Heath was deeply unpopular . But the opposition Labour Party was not convincing either , and had little in the way of an intellectual alternative .
It simply sought to avoid confrontation with the unions .
The election produced a political stalemate .
The centrist Liberal Democrats appeared to hold the balance of power , and stories circulated of how Heath was prepared to concede a reformed voting system .
He held out the promise of proportional representation , which would ensure a greater number of parliamentary seats for the Liberal Democrats in future elections , in exchange for the party ’ s support for a new Conservative government .
There appears to be an overwhelming likelihood that the 1974 stalemate will be repeated in the upcoming general election on May 6 .
The political maneuvering has already started , with the unpopular incumbent prime minister , Gordon Brown , today ’ s equivalent of Heath , bidding for the Liberal Democrats ’ support by promising a constitutional reform that would give the party major advantages .
In 1974 , the touted Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition never materialized , as the Liberal Democrats were wary of hitching their fortunes to an unpopular and discredited politician .
The result was a minority government that struggled for support and legitimacy , and in the end offered only policies that provided no real answer to the country ’ s underlying problems .
Britain today resembles 1974 much more than it resembles 1979 , when the Thatcher revolution set the country on a new path .
There is again a major economic problem , the end of a credit-driven boom , and a threat to the banks ( except that it all looks much bigger , owing to the financial system ’ s massive growth and internationalization ) .
Both major political parties look tired , and at the same time as if they are competing to imitate each other .
The choice appalls voters .
There is also an ominous resemblance to Italy in 1992 , when both major parties of the previous 40 years , the Christian Democrats and the Communists , simply melted away in a mixture of corruption and intellectual failure .
In the 2000 ’ s boom , as in the 1960 ’ s , it looked as if everyone could live on the never-never .
In 1960 ’ s , it was counter-cyclical fiscal policy that held out the promise of prosperity for all ; in the 2000 ’ s , it was that individuals rather than the state piled up debt .
The magic of markets made possible an individualization of borrowing and consumption .
As in the meltdown of the 1970 ’ s , it is easy to see how everyone benefited from the recent boom : homeowners saw their houses rising in price , social-welfare payments were expanded , and people seemed swept up in a new wave of 1960 ’ s-style “ Cool Britannia . ”
But now , as then , Britain ’ s future is bleak and overshadowed by debt .
Major adjustments are needed .
At the same time , the main parties find it hard to address the country ’ s problems , because they are reluctant to call for sacrifice before an election .
And , because the party programs of the Labour government and the Conservative opposition are not clearly distinguishable , they find it hard to differentiate themselves from the Liberal Democrats .
Both major parties are appealing to the political center , but they will never be as convincing as a political party that really is in the political center , and that is unencumbered by the scandals attached to the past exercise of power .
The course of the electoral struggle so far indicates that the Liberal Democrats will do very well .
Their leader outshines his Conservative and Labour counterparts in television debates and on the campaign trail .
Moreover , Labour and the Conservatives are in a political trap .
The moment they start to disagree with the Liberal Democrats , they will make themselves look extreme and will forfeit voter sympathies .
But this demand for political moderation impedes the search for the radical and painful solutions that Britain needs .
Little wonder , then , that currency markets are treating the likely outcome in Britain – a hung parliament , with no clear majority for any party – as a repeat of the mid-1970 ’ s , with no clear solution to the country ’ s underlying economic problems on offer .
