Quantitative Easing and the Renminbi
CAMBRIDGE – The United States Federal Reserve ’ s policy of “ quantitative easing ” is reducing the value of the dollar relative to other currencies that have floating exchange rates .
But what does the new Fed policy mean for one of the most important exchange rates of all – that of the renminbi relative to the dollar and to other currencies ?
The effect of quantitative easing on exchange rates between the dollar and the floating-rate currencies is a predictable result of the Fed ’ s plan to increase the supply of dollars .
The rise in the volume of dollars is causing the value of each dollar to fall relative to these currencies , whose volume has remained constant or risen more slowly .
The Fed ’ s goal may be to stimulate domestic activity in the US and to reduce the risk of deflation .
But , intended or not , the increased supply of dollars also affects the international value of the dollar .
American investors who sell bonds to the Fed will want to diversify the dollars that they receive from it .
One form of that diversification is to buy foreign bonds and stocks , driving up the value of those currencies .
The Fed ’ s policy of increasing the supply of dollars also increases investors ’ concern about the future rate of inflation in the US .
That provides a further reason for American investors to shift part of their portfolios from dollars to other currencies that are not likely to experience rising inflation .
In particular , since the European Central Bank has clearly rejected quantitative easing , investors will want to buy euro bonds issued by Germany and other European countries that are not in danger of default .
Likewise , outside the eurozone , Sweden ’ s clear inflation target makes its currency attractive .
South Korea , Brazil , and other emerging-market countries are also attractive diversification investments , causing their currencies to appreciate .
But the market forces that cause those currencies to appreciate do not work on the renminbi , because China has only very limited capital-account convertibility .
Investors in the US and other countries cannot buy either renminbi or renminbi-denominated bonds in the way that they can buy other currencies .
The Chinese government , acting through the People ’ s Bank of China , determines the renminbi ’ s exchange rate .
So the relevant question is how the Chinese government will choose to respond to the Fed ’ s quantitative easing and the impact of the Fed ’ s policy on other currencies .
Between 2008 and June of this year , the Chinese held the renminbi at a fixed rate of 6.8 to the dollar .
In June of this year , the Chinese authorities decided to allow the renminbi to appreciate at a moderate pace , as it had done between 2006 and 2008 .
Indeed , in the five months since that announcement , the Chinese government has allowed the renminbi to appreciate by 3.1 % – not much less than the average rate of appreciation that it allowed between 2006 and 2008 .
It is significant that this policy was adopted before Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke ’ s speech in August , in which he announced his tentative plans for quantitative easing .
While the renminbi has appreciated slightly relative to the dollar since June , the greater fall of the dollar relative to many other currencies means that the renminbi has generally also fallen relative to those currencies .
The overall trade-weighted value of the renminbi has thus declined significantly , particularly relative to the currencies of the emerging-market countries with which Chinese producers compete .
Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao has stressed that China does not want more rapid appreciation of the renminbi , because of the potential adverse impact on Chinese exporters .
Rising Chinese exports between 2006 and 2008 , despite renminbi appreciation , suggests that this worry is misplaced or at least exaggerated .
But it is clear that the fall of the renminbi against other currencies that has resulted from the Fed ’ s policy of quantitative easing now gives the Chinese scope for more rapid appreciation of the renminbi relative to the dollar .
Greater scope for renminbi appreciation comes at a good time for China .
A stronger renminbi would help to reduce rising inflationary pressure in China by reducing the cost of imports , which would also increase Chinese households ’ real incomes – a key goal of China ’ s new five-year plan .
Even those Chinese households that do not buy imported goods would benefit , because the lower cost of imported raw materials would reduce the cost of goods produced in China .
In short , the Fed ’ s policy of quantitative easing is likely to accelerate the rise of the renminbi – an outcome that is in China ’ s interest no less than it is in America ’ s .
But don ’ t expect US officials to proclaim that goal openly , or Chinese officials to express their gratitude .
