An Iraqi Film Hero in America
NEW YORK – & nbsp ; One of Iraq ’ s only working filmmakers , Oday Rasheed – whose brilliant film & nbsp ; 2005 Underexposure followed a group of characters in Baghdad after the United States-led invasion & nbsp ; in 2003 , and whose new film Qarantina is now premiering – is in Manhattan .
The glamorous settings in which he is now showing Qarantina – a screening at the Museum of Modern Art , for example , and in the private homes of American directors and stars – could not be further removed from the violence-riddled context of his daily life .
In Baghdad , Rasheed has gained fame – and notoriety – by seeking to inspire a new generation of Iraqi filmmakers and other young artists .
Qarantina is one of only four feature films completed in Iraq in the past 12 years .
A member of a collective called Najeen ( Survivors ) , Rasheed is part of a vanguard of younger artists , writers , and filmmakers whose & nbsp ; work attests to their commitment to art in the midst of crisis .
It is startling to see him walk into a New York living room : his demeanor is quiet and dignified .
He has experienced unthinkable trauma , and is still exposed to it .
“ Of seven close friends I had growing up , ” he tells me , “ five are dead . ” One was recently murdered by a gunshot to the head while he was standing in his kitchen .
Some days , he says , “ you wake up and the radio or TV reports five car bombings , ” leading to a kind of claustrophobia – part of the subject matter of his film .
I noted that he might be experiencing post-traumatic stress from the loss of his friend . “ I have had that – have done that already , ” he smiled .
Rasheed is just turning 40 , and his life reflects his country ’ s dramas : part of what has been called a “ lost generation ” of Iraqi artists and intellectuals , he and his friends were isolated for years by sanctions .
But he also describes the Saddam years as an era in which , while there was no freedom , intellectuals had room to maneuver , as long as they “ knew what to leave alone . ”
He lived through the US-led invasion during a formative time in his creative life – he was writing for television and engaged in film criticism and commentary while trying to survive bombardment , looting , and chaos .
But he also had to maintain his intellectual integrity .
When the US military sought to showcase the fact that a filmmaker was at work in occupied Iraq , Rasheed was swept to a formal dinner in one of Saddam 's former palaces in the Green Zone , attended by senior US officials and military contractors – an invitation that one would not want to receive , and would not be able to turn down .
Now Rasheed reflects on his country ’ s turn toward religious extremism : he describes a pre-invasion Iraq in which women were professionals and fairly emancipated , whereas now women wear headscarves under pressure , “ for a peaceful life . ”
His friend , a young Iraqi actress named Zahra Zubaidi , had to flee the Middle East after having played a rape victim in the Brian de & nbsp ; Palma film Redacted ; she has since emigrated to New York .
Constant & nbsp ; intimidation by religious extremists and political factions is the intellectual ’ s fate in Iraq today .
And yet Rasheed refuses to be discreet : “ Everything I believe , I believe in it , ” he says .
Rasheed is in New York mainly because it is the location of his next film , which “ deals with the influence of & nbsp ; the US contractors after the invasion of Iraq , not only on the lives of Iraqis , but also on the life of the US . ” As for Iraq today , Rasheed says , “ I do not think that Americans are indifferent to what happened and what is happening , but the daily details of cruelty do not give them either the time or the energy to think about larger issues . ”
Indeed , Rasheed notes that at every US screening of his film , audiences need to apologize before they begin to relate to Rasheed as a filmmaker rather than as a representative of his country . “ Personally , I do not ask anything ;
Iraq , ravaged by war and now shaken daily by violence , is known as the most intellectually inclined of the Arab countries .
As Iraqi and other Muslim intellectuals in the region often repeat : “ Books are written in Egypt , printed in Lebanon , and read in Iraq . ”
Here is hoping that Raheed and his colleagues continue to build up an Iraqi culture that is vibrant and free ; and here is hoping that the relationship of US and international audiences to Rasheed goes from one of expiation to one of engagement with his work .
His embrace of the right to his truth , which is the artist ’ s task , is nonetheless remarkable , given that he is working in an environment in which part of the creative process involves trying to stay alive .
