Two Views of Finance
WASHINGTON , DC – The International Monetary Fund ’ s annual meetings will be held on October 10-12 in Washington DC , and the world ’ s financial sector is a central item on the agenda .
That will make for an interesting meeting , because two diametrically opposed views of the global financial system will face off against each other .
The first view is that “ we have done a lot ” since the global financial crisis erupted in 2008 .
According to this view , which is put forward on a regular basis by some US Treasury officials and their European counterparts , there may be a bit more to do in terms of implementing reforms , but our banks and other financial firms have already become much safer .
The crisis of 2008 cannot soon be repeated .
The second view is that we are a long way from completing the far-reaching changes that we need .
Even worse , on at least one key point , the very language used among policymakers and leading journalists to describe finance is badly broken .
The issues are complex and nuances abound , but much of what divides the two sides in this debate comes down to this : Is it acceptable to say that banks “ hold ” capital ?
This is an expression used with great regularity among top finance reporters ( though not , for example , by Bloomberg / BusinessWeek , which has long been much more careful on this point ) . “ Banks will need to hold more capital ” is a common refrain , describing efforts by regulators – and , in the United States , some legislators – to require that financial institutions fund themselves with relatively more equity and less debt .
Using “ hold ” in this way is both completely conventional and deeply misleading . In any other common English language usage , “ hold ” is an active verb or a noun with a similar connotation .
You hold a baby in your arms . Please hold on tight to this rope .
He had a strong hold over his colleagues .
This matters , because “ holding ” capital has become a disguised or implicit metaphor .
The implication is that banks are being asked to sequester part of the asset side of their balance sheets – and this naturally leads to the perception that somehow “ less is available ” to lend , for example , to the real ( non-financial ) economy .
I encounter this view frequently , even in sophisticated circles – for example , on Capitol Hill .
But this interpretation is a complete – and sometimes deliberate – misunderstanding of bank capital and the policies being pursued .
( Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig have pointed out that there are many misperceptions in this area ; but , of these , misconstruing capital is surely the most fundamental . )
Capital , in this context , is simply a synonym for equity , which is on the liability side of a bank ’ s ( or anyone ’ s ) balance sheet .
It refers to how a bank ( or other firm ) finances its activities , not to how it uses the funds that it has available .
Higher capital requirements mean , in essence , more equity funding and – by implication , under any sensible definition – relatively less debt for a given balance-sheet size .
This is an attractive and sensible policy , because today ’ s global banks have relatively small slivers of equity underpinning their operations .
The best comparable measures of bank capital are those found in the Global Capital Index produced by Thomas Hoenig , Vice Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation .
Hoenig looks at how much equity banks have in the simplest and most transparent measure ( also known as leverage ) .
Six years after the world ’ s largest financial crisis , our megabanks have equity amounting to no more than 5 % of their balance sheets .
( In fact , some banks have not much more than 3 % equity . )
That means that 95 % of their operations are financed by debt – and thus that only a small negative shock would be needed to push them toward insolvency .
Many measures are still needed to address this vulnerability , including the formalization of international cooperation to handle failing financial firms .
We need these firms to be able to fail without causing a global panic .
They should prepare meaningful “ living wills , ” to show how this will be possible ; in fact , such plans are a requirement – still unimplemented – of the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial reforms in the US .
But there is a much simpler step that would make a big difference : A senior policymaker , such as a member of the Federal Reserve ’ s Board of Governors or the president of the New York Fed , should make a speech that explains clearly what bank capital is ( and what it is not ) .
Journalists who ignore the guidance on terminology in this speech should be called – in private – by the Fed .
The Fed devotes considerable effort to ensuring that the public understands its monetary policy ; officials should devote similar effort to communicating regulatory policy precisely .
And Hoenig ’ s index should be picked up and publicized by a major organization , such as the IMF .
We need not only more precise use of language , but also timely and accurate measurement of banks ’ capital levels .
