Of Saints and Servants
MOSCOW : In July 1918 , the last Tsar , Nikolai II , his family , three servants and a doctor were executed by a Cheka firing squad in a cellar in the Urals city of Ekaterinburg .
Their bodies were then chopped up , covered in quicklime , burnt , buried , dug up , and buried again in an unmarked pit .
In the summer of 1998 they were re-buried with honour in Saint Petersburg .
This summer , the Russian Orthodox Church canonized our last Royal family as martyrs .
The four servants who died with the Tsar ’ s family , however , were not canonized .
Those four could leave ; they could have chosen to go but didn ’ t .
They never asked whether their fate was their Master ’ s fault .
They never expected benefits or rewards .
They were faithful until the end and were killed for it .
Our family , all through the Stalin , Khrushchev , and Brezhnev years , also had servants .
There were many of them and they carried out different tasks .
We never called them servants , however ; it was not a polite word .
When reading tales as a girl about kings and grandees surrounded by servants , my child ’ s heart wept at those crimes against equality and justice .
No , the people who lived with us , who cooked for us , who walked the baby carriages , washed windows and cleaned fur-coats in summer time were never called “ servants . ”
They had names and would never be asked to carry out dreadful or dangerous tasks .
The most ancient in our family was Nanny Grusha .
She was small and light , with white fluffy hair .
Once , awakened by a nightmare , I shouted for her in panic .
She sighed , muttered , and noiselessly took her seat nearby my bed .
Her cheeks gurgled : “ psh-sh-sh . ”
Nanny Grusha smelt of lamp oil , soap flakes , and chimney smoke .
I held her by her dress ; it was a dark-brown dress with small white spots .
For me , that shade of brown remains the colour of safety .
The monsters who lived under my bed couldn 't kidnap me so long as Nanny was near .
In daytime I cried in Nanny 's skirt ; if I was hungry I ran to Nanny . Nanny never said : “ Eat what is on your plate . ”
She never said : “ You must share with others , ” or “ don 't be greedy . ”
Nanny never taught . Right and wrong were not her tasks .
She never took anything away from me ; never held somebody up as an example ; never put me to shame .
If I beat my sister or spat , pulled her hair or took away her toys , Nanny would wait for my storm to blow itself out , then take me to a distant room and feed me sweets and pies , taken from an old pillowcase .
Nanny had no idea about limits and fairness .
Hers was not kindness but the pure , strong poison of love .
For a long time I was sure that “ nanny ” was a kind of blood relationship .
You can be “ a granny ” smelling of perfume and wearing a pearl necklace , but you can also be “ a nanny ” smelling of smoke and oil and with a cross on a string under your brown dress .
I once asked Nanny : “ Do you believe in God ?
Stop it now !
There is no God !
The Cosmonauts haven 't seen anybody up there . ” But Nanny only muttered : “ He would never come into sight . ”
Nanny never married ; never had children of her own .
She raised other ’ s babies .
She loved them blindly , greedily , saving them from wind , hunger , monsters , parents and , most of all , other people .
I noted the chill between my father and Nanny ; they didn ’ t even say “ hello ” to each other .
Nanny loved my mother because my mother was once her baby .
Sometimes it seemed to me that she would kill anyone who would dare to hurt us .
Only years after her death did I learn of the crime she committed for us .
In the days of the Nazi blockade of Leningrad , Nanny took out of the city a sack of flour .
She did it when Leningrad was dying of hunger , when dead bodies lay everywhere and people ate people .
She removed a sack of flour from a city where people were killing each other for a crust of bread .
She went onto the icy Neva river during a bombardment , together with a baby committed to her care – my mother ’ s 30 year-old brother .
He was a grown man to everyone but Nanny , always remaining for her a small , pink , frightened , tear-stained child .
Nanny ’ s small nephews died from hunger in Leningrad during the siege . “ How could you do it ? ” – my Grandmother asked .
Nanny stayed in our family forever . She raised my mother ’ s seven children and five grandchildren and reached a great age without asking anything for herself .
I have never loved anyone in the world as strongly as I loved Nanny .
No one has loved me as strongly as she .
I did nothing to deserve her love .
More : if it were not for her , I would never have known that love is bottomless .
White hair , brown dress , a crucifix on a string – she was my small guardian angel , given to me for nothing .
So Russia ’ s Church blessed the last Tsar but forgot his servants .
But we should remember who , it is said , will pass through the eye of a needle to find salvation .
The Moscow Patriarch would likely become stuck in that needle ’ s eye because of his pearl-encrusted chasubles , his gold and his Mercedes .
In this hideous century of ours , only beggars and faithful people pass through in the end .
My sinful and simple Nanny got through , but probably not before stopping for a moment to look back and check one last time at how her children were doing .
