A Korean Helsinki Process ?
SEOUL – Last month , North and South Korea narrowly avoided a catastrophic military confrontation .
After 40 hours of strenuous negotiations , the South agreed to stop loudspeaker broadcasts into the demilitarized zone between the two countries , in exchange for the North expressing “ regret ” for the South Korean soldiers killed by a landmine blast in the DMZ three weeks earlier .
While the crisis featured North Korea ’ s familiar belligerence and aggressive rhetoric , there were also some interesting new twists .
Understanding these developments could help to generate enough momentum to initiate , after more than seven years of confrontation , genuine inter-Korean cooperation and help guide the peninsula toward a more peaceful and secure future .
The first new development is the South Korean leadership ’ s much firmer response to provocations from the North .
In 2010 , the South Korean public was sharply critical of the military ’ s failure to retaliate immediately following the North ’ s sinking of the Cheonan , a South Korean warship carrying more than 100 personnel , and its shelling of Yeonpyeong Island later that year .
After the recent landmine blasts , by contrast , President Park Geun-hye would not back down from her demands that the North , which denied planting the mines , apologize .
Her approval ratings soared to 50 % , from around 34 % the previous month .
This shift , while popular in South Korea , carries serious risks for the peninsula .
If an unyielding South becomes engaged in another military game of chicken with the often-audacious and always-erratic North , the results could be catastrophic .
In this sense , an institutional framework for permanent inter-Korean peace is more urgent than ever .
The second development relates to China , which remained silent throughout the latest crisis – a significant departure from its stance in 2010 , when it actively sided with North Korea on the international diplomatic stage .
Of course , it is impossible to know whether China ’ s response this time marks a genuine strategic withdrawal from its role as the North ’ s only ally and key economic benefactor .
China ’ s leaders may simply have decided that a tactical disciplining of the North ’ s leadership was in order .
But , at a time when China ’ s relationship with South Korea is deepening , the silence has been deafening .
If China really is distancing itself from North Korea , Kim Jong-un ’ s regime will be almost entirely isolated internationally .
Will Kim respond to that isolation recklessly , by continuing to antagonize the South , or pragmatically , by becoming more flexible ?
That is not an easy question to answer .
It should be clear to Kim by now that his parade of provocations is not benefiting his country .
His bellicose behavior in 2013 , for example , worsened his relationships with China , South Korea , and the United States simultaneously ; and in the recent crisis , all he earned was a halt to mocking loudspeaker broadcasts .
But Kim is not exactly known for his pragmatism or diplomacy .
Kim ’ s intentions may become clearer next month , when the North is expected to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the founding of the ruling Korean Workers ’ Party by conducting a nuclear test and launching a new intercontinental missile .
But China , South Korea , and the US – whose policies toward North Korea are now more closely aligned than ever – should not simply wait to see what happens .
They should initiate a dialogue with the North and take steps to dissuade Kim from continuing on his path of antagonism .
The third new development on the peninsula is a growing awareness among North Koreans of their country ’ s dire situation .
At this point , the shift is most apparent among North Korean soldiers in the DMZ , for whom the South ’ s recent broadcasts were highly demoralizing .
Today ’ s young soldiers represent the so-called Jangmadang ( “ black market ” ) generation that came of age under the marketization process that followed the massive famine in the mid-1990s .
Exposed to South Korean movies , music , and other products , they recognize the yawning gap between their government ’ s propaganda and the country ’ s grim reality .
The South ’ s loudspeaker broadcasts drove the point home .
As the marketization process continues , soon it won ’ t be just the soldiers who see through the regime ’ s propaganda .
The time for bottom-up change in the North may not be far off .
This opens up a new policy option for the West : impelling North Korea to dial back its foreign and security policy by deepening its economic and social engagement with the rest of the world .
The benefits for the North would drastically change the regime ’ s strategic calculus , particularly concerning nuclear weapons .
International linkages – or , rather , sanctions that blocked the benefits of such linkages – were vital to Libya ’ s decision to denuclearize and Iran ’ s willingness to reach an agreement with world powers regarding its nuclear program .
Sanctions have been less effective in North Korea , largely because the population did not know what it was missing .
Similarly , growing connections between groups within the Soviet bloc and the West played a major role in bringing about the 1975 Helsinki Accords .
The accords represented an effort to improve East-West relations during the Cold War , and included an emphasis on human rights .
Most important , they achieved the kind of sustained engagement that is badly needed on the Korean Peninsula today .
The aftermath of the August crisis may be the moment to think seriously about how to balance continued sanctions on North Korea with deeper economic and social ties .
Without such an approach , North and South Korea could , before long , be locked in another military standoff .
