Thaksin Returns
Former Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra has returned to Bangkok 17 months after being deposed in a military coup .
Thaksin has repeatedly denied that he intends to reenter politics , from which he has been barred for five years .
But how realistic is it to expect so driven and flamboyant a man to stay away from the limelight ?
Thaksin already is believed by many to be providing advice to the government of Prime Minister Samak Sundaravej .
Indeed , Samak ’ s People Power Party ( PPP ) is widely considered a proxy for Thaksin .
It was , after all , formed from the remains of Thaksin ’ s Thai Rak Thai party , which was disbanded after the coup .
Of course Thaksin ’ s political revival can ’ t get underway unless and until he has been acquitted of corruption charges .
But he is likely to have made all the calculations related to the charges and other allegations before leaving London , and to have concluded that his chances of remaining free are high .
After all , Thaksin is too serious a man to risk freedom for the sake of sentimentality .
Moreover , he remains very popular in Thailand , if not in Bangkok . His presence in the country might well spark a clamor for his “ reluctant ” return to politics .
Now , add to all this a soccer team .
Thaksin ’ s ownership of the Manchester City football club might not seem of great importance to observers outside Thailand and Asia .
But Thais are soccer enthusiasts and even bigger fans of the English Premier League .
Thaksin ’ s ownership is a source of considerable pride , especially outside elite circles in Bangkok . His proprietorship provides Thais with a direct connection to an elite team in the world ’ s most popular sport .
This , in turn , gives him a substantial popularity dividend to add to his store .
It was not for nothing that he had two Man City players accompany him on his return to Thailand .
The PPP ’ s victory in the December polls has also been seen as vindication of sorts for Thaksin .
Given the opportunity to vote , voters turned to a party not unlike Thaksin ’ s pre-coup Thai Rak Thai .
So why not complete the picture ?
Obviously , none of this will please Thaksin ’ s opponents .
So the possibility of demonstrations , stalemate , and a new crisis cannot be discounted .
The situation is all the more uncertain in view of a problem facing the PPP .
Just hours before Thaksin returned to Bangkok , Thailand ’ s Election Commission convicted the speaker of the parliament ’ s lower house of fraud after he paid civil servants to campaign on behalf of the party .
The Supreme Court must uphold the ruling , but if it does , the speaker will lose his parliamentary seat .
And more ominously , the case could easily snowball , leading to the dissolution of the PPP and an end to Thaksin ’ s nascent political recovery .
This would throw the party , government , and country into fresh turmoil .
Thus , under almost any scenario , Thaksin ’ s return could well mark a return to those fraught days of 2006 just before the last coup .
