Free Trade and Costly Love
LONDON – The World Trade Organization ’ s ministerial conference in Bali in December produced a modest package of encouragements to global trade .
More broadly , the WTO ’ s multilateral approach has shown its worth by preventing a massive increase in trade barriers , unlike in 1929-1930 , when protectionism helped deepen and broaden the Great Depression .
But the main question – whether globalization is a good thing , and for whom – remains unanswered .
The essence of globalization – free trade – rests on the theory of comparative advantage , which views international trade as profitable even for a country that can produce every commodity more cheaply ( in terms of labor or all resources ) than any other country .
The textbook example given by the Nobel laureate Paul Samuelson is that of a town ’ s best lawyer who is also its best typist .
Provided that he is better at law than at typing , he should specialize in law and leave his secretary to do the typing .
That way , both of their earnings will be higher .
The same logic applies to countries .
Each country should specialize in producing those things that it produces most efficiently , rather than producing a bit of everything , because that way its income will be higher .
Economists regard understanding the theory of comparative advantage as a test of professional competence .
But are the incompetents – say , the average person who believes that buying cheap imports from China destroys Western jobs – always wrong ?
Samuelson , who called the theory of comparative advantage the most beautiful thing in economics , changed his tune a bit at the end of his life .
Free trade , he said , works fine with unchanging technology .
But if countries like China can combine Western technology with low wages , then trade with China will lower Western wages .
True , the West will be able to get its goods more cheaply ; but , as Samuelson put it , “ being able to purchase groceries 20 % cheaper at Wal-Mart does not necessarily make up for the wage losses . ”
Nor , he might have added , would being able to buy goods more cheaply compensate for many other good things in life that are sacrificed to efficiency .
The argument for free trade is an argument for welfare , but welfare defined exclusively in terms of money .
Time is money : the more money you can squeeze out of an hour ’ s work , the better off you are .
But what about all of the things that you enjoy doing , or that you think of as valuable , that do not maximize your earnings ?
The economist responds that the more efficient you are at your work , the more time you will have for those other things .
The trouble is that the more you start to think of your welfare in terms of money , the more likely you are to regard spending time with your friends or making love as an “ opportunity cost ” – the loss of money you would have made by working instead – rather than a benefit .
The goal of squeezing as much money as possible out of time makes a great deal of sense in poor countries , where inefficient use of time can lead to starvation .
The whole point of economic development is , surely , to reduce the cost of inefficiency .
Yet economists , not noticing that their logic is less applicable to rich countries , continue trying to extend it to more and more areas of life .
A newly luxuriant research area is “ life outsourcing . ”
Paying someone else to fold your socks is a way to maximize your own earnings and those of the sock folder .
Even as penniless graduate students , the economists Jon Steinsson and Emi Nakamura borrowed money to pay people to do their household chores , calculating that “ spending an extra hour working on a paper was better for their lifetime expected earnings than spending that same hour vacuuming . ”
Likewise , the economists Betsey Stevenson and Justin Wolfers , pioneers of “ lovenomics , ” cite the tax code as a reason for not marrying .
They also conducted a cost / benefit analysis before having a child .
As Wolfers explains ,
“ The principle of comparative advantage tells us that gains from trade are largest when your trading partner has skills and endowments that are quite different from yours .
I ’ m an impractical bookish Harvard-trained empirical labor economist , while Betsey is an impractical and bookish Harvard-trained empirical labor economist .
When your skills are so similar , the gains from trade aren ’ t so large .
Except when it comes to bringing up our baby .
There , Betsey has a pair of , um , endowments that mean that she ’ s better at inputs .
And that means that I ’ m left to deal with outputs . ”
As Stevenson helpfully clarifies , “ it turns out that fathers can be pretty good at dealing with diapers . ”
At this point , those untutored in economics are likely to start gnashing their teeth .
“ I enjoy doing lots of things that do not maximize my earning power , ” they might protest . But as soon as we accept the premise that to be rational is to seek to maximize one ’ s utility – defined in terms of consumption , with money the way to maximize it – the economist ’ s logic wins .
At that point , we must admit that it is irrational to spend time on long conversations with friends if it is time stolen from inventing , say , new software ( unless the conversation helps the invention ) .
For Wolfers , it is a coincidence that what earns him the most money , economics , is also what he most enjoys doing .
Such reasoning crystallizes opposing views of the world , one in which time is a cost , and the other in which it is a benefit .
The first sees time spent on enjoyment as a missed opportunity ; the second as part of the good life .
We should be clear about what is at stake in the choice between the two .
