Occupy the Mortgage Lenders
WASHINGTON , DC – Participants in the Occupy Wall Street movement are right to argue that the big banks have never properly been investigated for the mortgage origination , aggregation , and securitization behavior that was central to the financial crisis – and to the loss of more than eight million jobs .
But , thanks to the efforts of New York ’ s attorney general , Eric Schneiderman , and others , serious discussion has started in the United States about an out-of court mortgage settlement between state attorney generals and prominent financial-sector firms .
Talks among state officials , the Obama administration , and the banks are currently focused on reported abuses in servicing mortgages , foreclosing on homes , and evicting their residents .
But leading banks are also accused of illegal behavior – inducing people to borrow , for example , by deceiving them about the interest rate that would actually be paid , while misrepresenting the resulting mortgage-backed securities to investors .
If these charges are true , the bank executives involved may fear that civil lawsuits would uncover evidence that could be used in criminal prosecutions .
In that case , their interest would naturally lie in seeking – as they now are – to keep that evidence from ever seeing the inside of a courtroom .
The scale and structure of any out-of-court mortgage settlement should address the damage inflicted by the alleged pattern of behavior .
Many Americans now have too much debt .
About 10 million mortgages are estimated to be “ underwater ” ( the house is worth less than the loan ) .
And , in key markets around the US , four years into the housing slump , home prices continue to fall .
If these were commercial loans , creditors would consider restructuring them – extending the payment schedule and typically writing down principal .
But , in America ’ s home mortgage market , this is much less common .
Banks want neither millions of negotiations nor , most importantly , the need to face the losses implied on their loan portfolio .
As a result , households want to spend less and pay down their debts .
To some extent , this is the natural aftermath of any credit boom .
And household deleveraging in the US will take a long time .
Policymakers can respond in three ways .
First , they could do nothing – apparently the preference of the Republican congressional leadership , which recently wrote to Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke to demand that he not try to stimulate the economy further .
Second , they could continue to rely on conventional monetary and fiscal policy to pull the economy out of the doldrums .
This is the approach still preferred by the Obama administration , despite its poor performance .
Third , we could adopt an alternative approach that directly reduces the value of underwater mortgages .
At this point , any improvement in consumer balance sheets would directly stimulate the economy and create jobs .
Start with the proposal made by Martin Feldstein , who recommends a trade : the government should reduce the value of mortgages when they are sufficiently underwater , with the government and the banks splitting the losses ; in exchange , the borrower must agree that the new loan becomes “ full recourse . ”
That means that lenders could pursue borrowers ’ other assets – not just the house – in case of default .
The key to this proposal is that banks must agree ; it is a voluntary debt restructuring , compelled by no legal authority .
In principle , banks should be attracted to the proposal , because restructured loans are less likely to default .
In practice , the banks have consistently dragged their feet on mortgage restructuring – and are laying off staff , rather than hiring people who could help them deal with an initiative of the required scale .
Feldstein calculates that the one-time cost of principal reduction would be around $ 350 billion .
Of course , in our current fiscal environment , it will be hard to find additional resources from the budget .
But $ 350 billion is roughly what the financial sector as a whole earned in an average quarter during the credit boom – and profit levels in recent quarters have reached or exceeded those levels .
So , if the entire write-down cost were covered by banks , most of them would lose the equivalent of no more than one year ’ s profits – spread over several years .
Those boom-time profits were in any case overstated , because they were not adjusted for risk .
And when the downside risks materialized , the losses were largely socialized – the primary reason why US public debt has soared in recent years .
Asking shareholders and management to pay a relatively small amount is entirely fair and appropriate under these circumstances .
Some in the financial sector would , of course , threaten dire consequences .
In fact , bank stock prices might drop , and it is entirely possible that compensation and bonuses would be curtailed , at least in the short term .
On the other hand , a large-scale settlement that legitimately and finally removed the threat of future legal action would lift an enormous cloud that hangs over some of the largest lenders , including Bank of America , and creates significant risks for the rest of the financial system .
If the banks were ever really held accountable for the social costs of their behavior , the bill would far exceed $ 300-400 billion .
Realistically assessed , the full downside legal risks to financial institutions are in excess of $ 1 trillion – particularly if it can be demonstrated that the “ mortgage-backed securities ” sold to investors were not backed by mortgages at all , because the proper legal paperwork was never done .
Any settlement should also include the banks ’ explicit agreement that they will support modifying America ’ s bankruptcy law to enable inclusion of mortgages in the usual court-run processes .
If the Occupy Wall Street movement tells us anything , it is that the last thing the US economy needs is more households overwhelmed by debt .
