Nigeria ’ s Sick Man Democracy
How sick is Nigerian president Umaru Yar ’ Adua ?
In May , he admitted during a live television broadcast that he suffers from a kidney ailment , but sought to quell rumors that he was terminally ill by insisting that fears for his health are greatly exaggerated and politically motivated .
There are plenty of world leaders in less-than-perfect health .
But the stakes are especially high in Nigeria , where Yar ’ Adua embodies the country ’ s delicate political balance .
With the fall of Nigeria ’ s dictatorship and the introduction of democracy in 1999 , governors in the mainly Muslim northern provinces believed they had struck a deal with their southern counterparts on a regional rotation of the country ’ s presidency .
In 2007 , arguing that it was their turn to choose a chief executive , they bitterly opposed a bid by then-President Olusegun Obasanjo , a southerner and a Christian , to rewrite Nigeria ’ s constitution in hopes of winning a third term .
Southern governors countered that the north had controlled the country through more than three decades of authoritarian rule and that a southerner should hold the presidency for years to come .
Tensions mounted .
Once it became clear that his gambit would fail , Obasanjo found a compromise : he named a man he trusted , Yar ’ Adua , a little-known northern governor and devout Muslim , as his preferred successor .
Western and African observers charged that widespread vote-rigging had tainted the official result , and Nigeria ’ s Supreme Court has yet to rule on challenges to the election ’ s legality .
But Yar ’ Adua shrugged off charges of electoral fraud , and in the first days of his presidency , he drew praise , both at home and abroad , for promises to tackle corruption and pursue an agreement with militia groups in the oil-rich , violence-plagued Niger Delta region .
In reaching out to armed groups like the Movement for Emancipation of the Niger Delta ( MEND ) , one of his primary assets has been his vice president , Goodluck Jonathan , a native of the area .
Pacifying the Delta is vitally important , because Nigeria , the world ’ s eighth-largest oil producer , earns 86 % of its export revenue from oil .
Attacks on pipelines have recently intensified ahead of a planned summit meeting between the government and various militia leaders , as small groups of militants stage attacks on oil infrastructure in the Delta to establish their relevance and win a potentially lucrative seat at the negotiating table .
The summit is likely to generate an agreement and positive media coverage , but northern Muslim members of parliament could complicate efforts to implement the deal .
The Nigerian government could use some good news .
Electricity shortages have intensified on Yar ’ Adua ’ s watch , producing blackouts in many areas of the country and darkening the foreign investment climate .
Rising food and energy prices pushed inflation up to 9.7 % in May , from 8.2 % in April .
Corruption investigations launched by Yar ’ Adua ’ s government have uncovered broader and deeper problems than many knew existed .
A battle between the president and legislature over control of federal spending has not been fully resolved .
For foreign investors , the greatest near-term concern may be a broad range of attacks from parliament and some of Yar ’ Adua ’ s economic advisors on Charles Soludo , the central bank governor , who is widely credited for Nigeria ’ s improved economic performance in the past several years .
Under Obasanjo , Soludo initiated much needed banking reforms and argued strenuously that Nigeria should pay its foreign debt .
But Soludo ’ s recent decision to create a sovereign wealth fund has ignited a firestorm .
Lawmakers complain they weren ’ t consulted .
Northern Muslims wonder why Soludo , a southern Christian , believes the government should horde excess cash that could be spent to relieve poverty among their constituents .
A favorite of the West , Soludo may not survive the year .
With so many challenges ahead , Nigeria can ill afford an ailing president .
Yar ’ Adua insists that he ’ s fine and that his trips to Germany for medical treatment , during the election campaign last year and again this April , have been unfairly politicized .
But there are plenty of unanswered questions about his kidney condition and rumors that he may even have Churg-Strauss Syndrome , a life-threatening autoimmune disease .
The true state of his health may matter less than public fears that he ’ s hiding something .
Yar ’ Adua ’ s health worries are creating risks to Nigeria ’ s stability that run far beyond questions about the Niger Delta or any single political issue .
If Yar ’ Adua were to die in office , his vice president would succeed him – returning the presidency to a southern Christian .
Nigeria ’ s northern Muslims are highly unlikely to accept that result without protest .
There is no reason to believe that Goodluck Jonathan will preemptively resign , and removing him from office if he assumes the presidency might well stoke unprecedented violence in the Delta .
Given the political friction and violence generated by last year ’ s election campaign , new balloting would prove a less-than-appealing prospect .
Only Umaru Yar ’ Adua ’ s doctors know for sure how sick he is .
But as answers begin to emerge , we will learn much more about the health of Nigeria ’ s fragile democracy .
