Poland ’ s New Golden Age
FRANKFURT – Today ’ s world is not the stable , post-historical place some had imagined in 1989 , when the Iron Curtain fell and communist rule in Eastern Europe came to an end .
But , though the events of 1989 did not bring about perpetual peace and prosperity , they did set in motion some true success stories .
One of the most impressive is Poland ’ s rise as a political and economic heavyweight in Europe .
This year ’ s triple anniversary – 25 years of democracy , 15 years of NATO membership , and ten years of European Union membership – is a source of pride for the Polish people , and rightly so .
Imagine how miraculous Poland ’ s success is .
Here is a country that disappeared from the map of Europe in the eighteenth century and was divided and ruled by imperial occupiers for 150 years .
In the twentieth century , Poland was the victim of two inhuman ideologies , fascism and Stalinism .
Its golden age was some 500 years ago , and at the beginning of this century many still viewed it as a symbol of backwardness .
But the Polish people struggled and sacrificed to bring about their nation ’ s rebirth – and in the process ushered in a new era for Europe and the world .
The Berlin Wall would not have fallen when and how it did without Poland ’ s Solidarność movement and its struggle for freedom and human rights .
Nonetheless , Poland , like the EU ’ s other “ new ” member states ( a term that , after ten years , has become inadequate ) , remains relatively unknown to many in the “ old ” member states .
To discover Poland is to find a country that offers a rich cultural heritage , a vibrant civic life , and industrious , creative people who can overwhelm guests with their hospitality .
As a German , I am happy that German-Polish relations have never been better than they have been since Poland ’ s accession to the EU .
That is a crucial development , and one that must be carefully protected , for it provides a powerful guarantee of peace and stability in the center of Europe .
Last month , Donald Tusk , Poland ’ s former prime minister , was appointed President of the European Council , thus becoming one of Europe ’ s three top leaders .
This decision not only reflected Tusk ’ s successful leadership in Poland , where he ensured political stability and oversaw impressive economic progress ; it was also a clear signal that EU leaders fully acknowledge Poland ’ s political and economic importance .
It also signaled to the other new member states that they are true equals in European decision-making .
Again , it was Poland that paved the way , reminding the old member states from the outset of the accession process that it was not an outsider or a poor relative in need of charity , but rather a source of inspiration in the European integration process , its impact delayed only by World War II and its aftermath .
Now , after ten years of EU membership , a new Golden Age for Poland may be on the horizon .
Poland has the potential to become a European leader again .
Firmly anchored in the community of Western democracies , its role transcends the technical aspects of the European integration process , for it bears the responsibility of ensuring that no new barrier excludes our Eastern neighbors from taking part in this process .
It was logical that Poland was the spiritus rector of the EU ’ s Eastern Partnership , which led to EU association agreements with Ukraine , Georgia , and Moldova .
No other country has a stronger interest in the successful transformation of the EU ’ s eastern neighbors , particularly Ukraine .
Indeed , during the ongoing crisis , Poland has taken a firm stand : no one has the right to deny a European country its sovereign decision about its relationship with Europe .
The two countries ’ historical ties have put Poland in a better position than others to understand the nature of Ukraine ’ s problems , and it would therefore be wise to listen carefully to Polish officials ’ advice .
The Polish people deserve a bright future .
Their lesson for the rest of Europe is that dreams can come true if we fully engage in realizing them .
And , just as Tusk promised to polish his English as he moves to the center of the European stage , perhaps the rest of us should start brushing up on our Polish .
