Taking Systemic Risk Seriously
WASHINGTON , DC – There are two leading views about the world ’ s financial system .
The first , heard mostly from executives at leading global banks and their allies , is that the system is safer than it has ever been .
According to this view , the events that led up to the global financial crisis that erupted in 2008 cannot happen again ; the reform process has succeeded .
By contrast , a growing group of current and former officials continues to express concern about current and potential future risks in the United States , Europe , and globally .
US Treasury Secretary Jack Lew made such an argument in a recent congressional testimony , in the context of explaining why the Financial Stability Oversight Council ( FSOC ) should be allowed to consider whether any kind of firm or activity could pose a risk to the broader system .
And a striking new voice has joined the fray – Kara Stein , a commissioner at the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) .
Stein delivered a far-reaching speech in June , in which she argued that systemic risk must become a more central responsibility for financial-market regulators .
Systemic risk refers to problems that spill across different kinds of firms and markets , often in unexpected ways and sometimes very quickly .
Perhaps the most prominent example from 2008 is the way that the failure of the investment bank Lehman Brothers risked brining about the imminent collapse of the insurer AIG , while also leading to intense pressure on money-market mutual funds .
Jeremy Stein ( no relation to Kara Stein ) , until recently a governor of the US Federal Reserve System , has suggested that forced “ fire sales ” of assets are one important way that risks are transmitted .
When asset prices fall as a result of such selling , the solvency of other firms can be affected – even if the creditworthiness of the underlying asset has not really changed .
Bank regulators are starting to take these issues more seriously – an encouraging change from the 1990s and early 2000s , when the Fed was among the cheerleaders for unfettered financial innovation , without adequate consideration for systemic risk .
But securities regulators also need to start thinking along the same lines – and this is where Kara Stein wants them to go .
For example , the SEC has traditionally thought about adequate equity capital in a regulated business , primarily as the amount needed to help compensate customers in the event that individual firms fail .
But it would be much better , as Stein suggests , to think about equity capital from a systemic perspective – that is , how much loss-absorption is needed to prevent some form of a cascading confidence crisis .
Similarly , regulators should start to think about how and when the structure of particular financial transactions creates a potential systemic risk .
For example , short-term funding markets involve the supposedly safe business of borrowing against the collateral of tradable securities , which is a mainstay of how broker-dealers finance themselves .
Unfortunately , as we discovered during the financial crisis , such markets can become less liquid or even dry up completely when lenders start to fear unforeseen problems , either with borrowers or with the assets that they pledge as collateral .
The systemic risks in this case do not necessarily lie with an individual firm ; rather , the issue is the way in which a particular market has come to operate .
Stein has some detailed and credible ideas about how to make such operations less risky for the system as a whole .
More broadly , however , her point is that we need the FSOC to be able to do its job – to look for and assess all kinds of potential systemic risks .
This needs to be done as a technical matter , not as part of the political process .
Not everyone at the SEC is as sensible as Stein .
There is also some friction among the various regulators in the US , and we surely need more coordination across national borders – including with Europe .
But the real danger is that powerful lobbies , working through members of Congress , are pushing back hard against the FSOC and its mandate .
No one likes scrutiny , of course .
And everyone in the asset-management industry seems to fear being put under the Fed ’ s microscope , which is what happens if the FSOC determines that a business is systemically important .
The nature of externalities means that financial firms do not care about the costs that they may create for others .
Big and small firms can create a wide variety of externalities , and these have to be examined carefully and dispassionately – exactly as Stein is recommending .
And yet , though assessing systemic risk is a technical matter , there is ultimately and inevitably a political question .
The FSOC can figure out where the risks are lurking , but will it be allowed to do its job ?
If not , when the next crisis comes , those who opposed the FSOC ’ s proper functioning will bear the lion ’ s share of the responsibility .
