World Cup America
WASHINGTON , DC – Something changed – or perhaps was revealed – in the United States during the last month .
Many millions more Americans watched the World Cup soccer tournament in English and Spanish than ever before .
True , with the World Cup ’ s end , many are arguing , as usual , that Americans pay attention only every four years – and only when the US is playing .
But this time something was different : Americans continued to watch even after the US team was eliminated .
Indeed , on a weekday afternoon in the middle of summer , nearly 15 million Americans tuned in to the Brazil-Germany match in the semifinal .
That is more than the usual viewership for ESPN ’ s Monday Night Football , the biggest regular television draw for fans of American football .
Almost every young person at my organization , New America , found ways to watch the US games in the early rounds .
My apartment mate explained that everyone in her office , in the US Department of Education , had used the excuse of a birthday party to watch the US-Germany match .
On the Tuesday afternoon when the US played Belgium in the knockout round , every bar in Aspen , Colorado , was packed .
Of course , Aspen is one of the country ’ s wealthiest communities , and perhaps not representative of the US as a whole .
But US television showed an enormous crowd of fans in Kansas City following the US-Belgium match on a large outdoor screen .
It was not quite the equivalent of the final match between Italy and France in 2006 , when virtually every small Italian town turned out to watch on the main square ; but Americans all over the country spent the month ducking out of work and into sports bars .
America ’ s growing embrace of soccer reflects some important ways in which the US has “ joined ” the world .
For starters , both the US team and the US audience for soccer derive their growing strength from immigrants – many from countries where the sport is a national passion .
For example , in Washington , DC , almost all taxi drivers are newcomers to America .
When my driver was Ethiopian , as often happened , we would commiserate over the national team ’ s defeat by Nigeria in a qualifying round , then celebrate the US defeat of Ghana , and end by agreeing that in four years , or certainly in eight , the US team would be among the world ’ s best .
In almost every case , my driver would tell me that his children were playing in local youth leagues .
These immigrants are not only providing homegrown soccer talent for US teams ; they are a core part of the expanding US audience for soccer worldwide .
Dan Levy , lead writer for the US sports website The Bleacher Report , points out that most commentators define “ American soccer ” as the number of Americans who watch American players in US league play .
Obviously , that is a ridiculous metric .
US tennis fans watch tennis wherever it is played all over the world , and the US audience for golf does not plummet when a tournament is played in the sport ’ s birthplace , Scotland .
More Americans watch soccer in the European and Mexican leagues , in English and in Spanish , than watch baseball and ice hockey , traditionally considered two of the “ big four ” US sports ( along with American football and basketball ) .
For the US , in particular , the World Cup is a great equalizer .
My mother is originally Belgian , though she has been a US citizen for over 50 years ;
I still have an uncle , aunt , and cousins in Brussels .
During the US-Belgium match , emails flew fast and thick across the family network , with lots of friendly rivalry .
My mother claimed divided loyalty , because Belgium , after all , was “ the David against the mighty Goliath . ”
Her three American children all weighed in simultaneously , pointing out that in soccer it is the US that is the underdog .
Where else can the US experience what it is like to be a small country on the global stage ?
Like viewers around the world , Americans rooted for their team together , regardless of their domestic differences .
At a bar in Aspen , where the only open seat was at a table with an older man and his son-in-law ( who welcomed me and offered to put my beer on their tab ) , we cheered and groaned whenever the US got close to scoring a goal or missed a kick .
In the periodic short breaks , we sounded each other out enough to find out that we were definitely in opposing political camps .
Given the current state of polarization in US politics , I think it is likely that in most other settings , my tablemates would not willingly have bought several rounds of beer for someone who spent two years working at the State Department for Hillary Clinton .
Here , though , we were cheering not for our political side , but for our national side .
As our team maneuvered the ball down the field , politics fell away .
That happens at the Olympics , too , of course .
But the Olympics is a smorgasbord of sports , each with its core of devotees , who often cheer on their favorites at the same time , but separately , in different arenas .
And , more often than not , what we are witnessing is individual achievement – the deeply concentrated agility and courage of the downhill racer or the finely disciplined movements of the gymnast – rather than true team effort .
The World Cup allows all of the supporters of one country to come together at one moment for one game between two groups that must , like them , become more than the sum of their parts .
It actually feels incomplete to watch the World Cup alone .
At the end of the game , amid regret over the loss to mighty Belgium but convinced that the US had played a great game , my new friend said : “ We need much more of this . ”
US exceptionalism remains alive and well , of course .
I suspect that we will always call the world ’ s game “ soccer . ”
