Putin ’ s Final Act
MOSCOW – Vladimir Putin ’ s new presidential term is just beginning , but it increasingly looks like the beginning of the end .
Whenever Russia ’ s people pour into the streets en masse , as they currently are doing , from that point on things never work out well for the authorities .
In 1917 , Russian Emperor Nicholas II had to abdicate in the wake of mass street protests , clearing the way for the Bolshevik Revolution .
In 1991 , the Soviet Union – & nbsp ; then seemingly an unbreakable monolith – collapsed in just a few months .
Hundreds of thousands went into the streets to confront the hardline coup against Mikhail Gorbachev ’ s perestroika .
Now it is Putin ’ s turn .
Moscow boasts Occupy Abai , modeled on the Occupy Wall Street movement in the United States ( and located on a boulevard next to a statue of Kazakh poet Abai Kunanbaev , whose work has gone from regional obscurity to one of the top Russian Internet downloads in a month ) .
Other cities are witnessing protests as well , all echoing the same call : Putin must go .
Russians are famously patient and slow to rebel .
And who would blame them ?
If protests have turned out badly for Russian governments over the centuries , they have ended even more disastrously for the protesters .
In 1917 , liberation from absolute monarchy ushered in an even more despotic form of absolutism .
After 1991 , Boris Yeltsin ’ s unruly privatization reduced millions of people to penury , and elevated a corrupt oligarchy into virtual rulership .
But , despite being well aware of their history , once Russians turn on the man at the top , they don ’ t stop until he is out .
History debunks Putin ’ s myth that the majority of the country supports him because they want “ stability , ” and that the protests , headed by “ Western stooges , ” are about to subside .
They won ’ t abate .
And the appointment of Igor Kholmanskikh , a tank factory foreman who had offered to come to Moscow with a burly cohort of his fellow assembly-line workers to defend Putin ’ s regime , to rule the vast Ural region will not scare them .
Soft power has the upper hand today , and tanks can ’ t shut down the Internet .
In nominating his new cabinet ( which he deemed so important that he could not attend the G-8 summit ) , Putin ’ s Soviet origins could not be more obvious .
Leonid Brezhnev used to have his culture and agriculture ministers swap places , as if – bound by the word culture – they were one and the same field of expertise .
Putin ’ s new cabinet is a similar reshuffling of the incompetent with the unqualified .
This debunks another myth – that Putin , now back in charge , will abandon his vulgar anti-Western rhetoric and become a reformer , understanding that only a democratic Russia can maintain its territorial integrity and sovereignty .
And the reason that he won ’ t embrace reform is that he can ’ t , because that old truism – absolute power corrupts absolutely – has proven itself once more .
After more than a decade in power , Russia ’ s leaders are no longer capable of pursuing better polices .
Their personal interests , and riches , are too dependent on maintaining the status quo .
Of course , Russia has seen this pattern before as well .
I will never forget what my great-grandmother Nina used to say about the corrupting nature of power in our own family .
“ Regrettably , the Khrushchev of 1962 wasn ’ t the Khrushchev of 1956 . ”
My great-grandfather denounced Stalin ’ s cult of personality , only to be worshipped – for example , in the over-the-top documentary Our Nikita Sergeevich ( 1961 ) – for his “ super vision ” of how to diminish imperialism and “ catch up with West . ”
Khrushchev ’ s self-eulogizing flatly contradicted his earlier de-Stalinization campaign , the point of which was that Stalin betrayed communism by doing all that he could to resemble the royals of the past .
Everything officially said about him was superior and superlative : “ best friend of Soviet athletes , ” “ father of all children on earth , ” etc .
Later , Yeltsin , upon assuming office as Russia ’ s leader in 1990 , denounced all Nomenklatura privileges as his first order of business .
In his book A Confession , he wrote , “ As long as [ Russians ] are so poor and dismal , I can ’ t eat sturgeon and caviar , I can ’ t race cars , ignoring traffic lights , I can ’ t take imported super-pills , knowing that a neighbor has no aspirin for a child .
Because I am ashamed . ”
When he left the Kremlin in 2000 , his secret fortune , from real estate , yachts , horses , and other properties , was estimated to be worth at least $ 15 million .
In January 2000 , the novice President Putin gave a slew of persuasive interviews to Russian TV networks , praising the rule of law and promising not to remain in office a day beyond his two constitutional terms , or if he lost popular support .
These are the “ rules of the game , of democracy , ” he said .
After two presidential terms , followed by a stint as Prime Minister and now a third presidency , Putin is entering his 13th year in power with 40 % of the population desperately wanting him out .
