Pakistan ’ s Iranian Shadow
As the future of both Pakistan and its president , Pervez Musharraf , wallow in uncertainty in the wake of Benazir Bhutto ’ s assassination , parallels are being drawn to the 1979 fall of the Shah and the Islamic Revolution in Iran .
Once again , a “ pro-American ” autocrat seems to be rapidly losing his grip on power , with his US ally only half-heartedly standing by him .
The liberal elite and intelligentsia rail against the dictator , confident that their country is primed for secular democracy .
The obvious lesson to be drawn from 1979 is that America unwisely rested its entire strategic relationship with Iran on the shoulders of an unpopular dictator .
When his regime crumbled , so did America ’ s ability to realize its interests there .
But the Iranian revolution holds another lesson for Pakistani liberals : obsessed with evicting the Shah , Iran ’ s intelligentsia was delusional about their own society and their potential to emerge victorious via an abrupt political upheaval .
Once the Shah left , the radical minority that was willing to fight and die for its cause devoured the “ moderate majority , ” establishing Islamist rule in short order .
To be sure , profound political and cultural distinctions exist between Iran in the 1970 ’ s and contemporary Pakistan .
Iran lacked an independent judiciary , basic press freedoms , and civil society organizations .
Contemporary Pakistan has , to varying degrees , all of these .
More importantly , Iran ’ s Shia clerics were both organized and politically active in a way that Pakistan ’ s Sunni clergy have not been .
Indeed , Pakistan ’ s Islamist parties have never won more than 12 % of the popular vote .
It would be wrong , however , to think that Pakistan is immune from the Muslim world ’ s Islamist undercurrents .
Around 40 % of Pakistanis live below the poverty line , half the population is illiterate , and , among those who are literate , many have been schooled in Wahhabi-funded madrasas .
Various opinion polls consistently show that a sizable minority of Pakistanis has a favorable view of Osama bin Laden , an unfavorable view of the US , and believe that implementing Islamic law ( Sharia ) should be a priority .
A Pakistani intellectual once confessed to me , “ I fear the weak electoral showings of Islamists in Pakistan has more to do with the fact that a compelling , charismatic Islamist leader – a Pakistani Hassan Nasrallah – has yet to emerge , not that his message wouldn 't resonate . ” Few Iranians had ever heard of Ayatollah Khomeini until 1978 , but it didn ’ t take long for his message to electrify millions .
The army has always been the strongest bulwark in assuring that Pakistan does not go the way of Iran .
But while the officer corps may be steadfast defenders of secular rule , the rank and file reflects Pakistani society .
In the event of an Islamist political awakening , the army ’ s allegiances are not guaranteed .
In Iran , apart from senior commanders , who were either killed or fled the country , the Shah ’ s powerful , staunchly secular army switched sides to Khomeini ’ s revolutionary government virtually overnight .
This is not to suggest than an Islamist awakening in Pakistan is on the horizon , or that Pakistanis must choose between an unpopular autocrat or a Taliban-style government .
On the contrary , Pakistan ’ s liberals are brave to agitate for democracy , the rule of law , and accountability for Musharraf , whose presidency appears beyond rehabilitation .
But they should learn from Iran ’ s revolution that their means of agitating for political reform are relevant to the political ends they hope to achieve .
Emotions are raw in the aftermath of Bhutto ’ s death .
More than 50 people have been killed in riots , and both her party and that of former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif are contemplating mass demonstrations to bring down Musharraf 's government .
But the politics of rage , retribution , and rioting will not bring the kind of tranquil , pluralistic democracy that Bhutto envisioned .
The desire to exact revenge on Musharraf for stifling democracy and failing to provide Bhutto with sufficient security will only inflame a political atmosphere that Pakistani liberals seek to de-radicalize .
Not only in Iran , but also in Lebanon , Palestine , and Iraq , history has shown that Islamists thrive amid political chaos and violence .
Similarly in Pakistan , it is dangerous to bet that the country ’ s pro-democracy lawyers , intellectuals , and students will emerge victorious in the tumult and potential carnage of street politics .
As John Limbert , the erudite Iran scholar and retired US diplomat ( taken hostage in Iran for 444 days ) once reflected on the 1979 Iranian revolution , “ Our liberal-minded Iranian friends proved to be helpless in political turmoil .... [ T ] hey could write biting editorials , ” but lacked the stomach to “ throw acid , beat up opponents , organize street gangs ... and engage in the brutality that wins ” in political uprisings .
Pakistani liberals may be right that their country is invulnerable to an Islamist power grab .
But the costs are too high to be impulsive , and the storms of political Islam are difficult to forecast .
In 1978 , Iran ’ s liberals were bent on removing the Shah by any means .
Instead of creating an atmosphere conducive to an Iranian Gandhi , they unwittingly helped usher into power Ayatollah Khomeini and a theocratic regime less tolerant than the one they helped unseat .
Three decades later , millions of chastened Iranians wish they could relive those heady days differently ; their Pakistani counterparts would be wise to heed their hindsight .
