How to Become an Oligarch
WASHINGTON , DC – Let ’ s say that you would like to become one of the richest people on the planet , someone with enormous wealth and access to the top rung of political power .
This is not an unreasonable aspiration for any fresh college graduate in today ’ s winner-take-all economies .
But how realistic is it ?
You could have a good idea for a new technology with potentially widespread demand .
With the right credentials and some luck , you could attract investment from a venture-capital fund .
Many such ventures do not pan out ; but – particularly in the United States – such equity-financed rapid-growth companies are strongly encouraged .
Or you could issue a lot of debt .
This might seem like a strange idea in the immediate aftermath of a major debt-fueled financial crisis , and with many homeowners still underwater on their mortgages ( they owe more than the house is worth , even if they can still afford the monthly payments ) .
In any case , to the extent that any recent American graduate thinks about debt , it is in the context of paying student loans .
But a new book , Private Equity at Work , by Eileen Appelbaum and Rosemary Batt , explains exactly how a few people have become immensely rich through the shrewd strategic use of debt .
The authors present a broad , detailed , and fair assessment of private equity – the business of investing in established companies through debt-financed purchases of controlling stakes .
( By contrast , venture capitalists support start-ups almost entirely through equity . )
And Appelbaum and Batt are careful to point out that many private-equity firms bring better management or other efficiency improvements to their portfolio companies .
But some of the largest funds – in fact , most of the brand names in the industry – use the clever trick of securing the debt they issue with collateral owned by the company they buy .
This is a little bit like buying a house .
A bank or mortgage originator lends you a large amount of money , which is secured by the house as collateral .
In other words , if you fail to make your payments on time , the lender can foreclose on the loan and take possession of the property – as millions of homeowners have experienced in the last decade .
And yet there is a major difference between how private equity operates and how a family buys a home .
Only a small part of the equity ownership acquired by any private equity fund comes from money provided by the partners who found and operate the fund .
Most of it is raised from outside investors .
( This would be like a family financing its down payment not from its own savings but from distant relatives about whom the family cares little . )
The fee structure in this overall arrangement is such that the people running the private-equity fund want to have as much debt as possible ; this will increase the way upside returns are calculated , which in turn is the main driver of the compensation that the controlling “ general ” partners can receive .
More debt , of course , also means more risk ; but this is not a sector focused primarily on risk-adjusted returns .
If the company cannot make its interest payments , its assets will need to be sold or its activities otherwise scaled back .
But , in contrast to the case of the struggling homeowner , not much of those downside costs typically fall on the general partner .
In addition , there are various other fees – charged to portfolio companies and to investors – that further encourage high levels of debt .
The US tax code allows interest payments to be deducted as a business expense ; there is no equivalent allowance for payments to equity investors .
Appelbaum and Batt document in impressive detail the way in which top-tier private-equity funds have been able to earn high returns and ultimately enormous wealth for their founders , while not necessarily helping the companies in which they invest .
Interestingly , when returns are measured properly , the outside “ limited ” partners in private equity – including pension funds , insurance companies , and university endowments – also do not necessarily do so well .
However , before graduates flock to private equity , they should know that only the very big funds can use debt to skew returns for insiders in this way , primarily because only they can raise the capital needed to buy well-established companies that are rich in fixed assets , and thus in potential collateral .
Smaller private-equity funds typically buy into younger , smaller companies without such fixed assets , and the leverage in those deals is commensurately less .
Regulators have recently woken up to the incentives for excessive leverage in this sector – and to the risks that such leverage poses to lenders and the broader economy .
Not surprisingly , big private-equity firms seem determined to ignore or otherwise circumvent new restrictions .
As the policy debate on this issue heats up , one hopes that all participants will become better informed by reading Private Equity At Work .
If the new graduate in your life has the connections to join a very large brand-name private-equity fund , the path to immense wealth , political influence , or even power becomes much clearer .
Without such initial connections , however , it is very unlikely that he or she will become an oligarch .
