Striking Euro Gold ( and Silver )
PRINCETON – The alternatives for Europe ’ s currency , the euro , seem increasingly limited to a desperate muddling through or a chaotic collapse .
But there is a bolder and more productive approach that relies on past experience with multiple currencies .
The threat posed by Europe ’ s current policy impasse can hardly be overestimated .
In the early 1930 ’ s , monetary-policy incoherence paralyzed US policy , with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York locked in insurmountable conflict with the Chicago Fed over monetary easing ( at that time through open-market securities purchases ) .
Today ’ s chronic policy disputes between Germany and France are producing a level of uncertainty that is potentially even more destructive .
Every few months , European governments launch a new and ever more ingenious initiative to resolve the eurozone ’ s debt crisis .
For a day ( and sometimes only for a few hours ) , financial markets rally euphorically . But soon doubt sweeps back in .
There is no sense of a realistic endgame .
And there is no longer-term vision of how the fiscal integration needed for the effective operation of a monetary union could be achieved in a practical timeframe .
Europeans should look to the past , when previous crises produced innovative solutions .
The extended crisis of the European Monetary System ( EMS ) between September 1992 and July 1993 looked as if it would derail European integration .
What was initially seen as a problem in one country ( Italy ) toppled other currency regimes like dominos : Britain , Spain , and Portugal – and , by July 1993 , even France was vulnerable .
Then , as now , Europe ’ s future was at stake .
The solution adopted in frantic late-night negotiations in Brussels initially looked counterproductive .
The massive widening of the EMS bands to 15 % on either side of a central parity initially made a single currency appear more remote .
But it also took away the one-way-bet character of speculative attacks on vulnerable currencies , and thus removed the fundamental driver of instability .
The modern equivalent of the band widening of 1993 would be to maintain the euro for all members of the eurozone , but also allow some of them ( in principle , all of them ) to issue – if necessary – national currencies .
The countries that did would probably find that their new currencies immediately traded at a heavy discount .
California recently adopted a similar approach , issuing IOUs when faced with the impossibility of access to funding .
The success of stabilization efforts could then be assessed according to the price of the new currency .
If the objectives were met – fiscal stabilization and renewed growth – the discount would disappear .
In the same way , after 1993 , the French franc initially diverged from its old level , but , in a good policy setting , it then returned within the exchange-rate band .
This approach has an important advantage : it would not require the redenomination of bank assets or liabilities .
As a result , it would not be subject to the multiple legal challenges that a more radical alternative would run into .
Of course , there would also be the possibility that no convergence would occur , and that the two parallel currencies would coexist for a much longer period .
This is not a novel thought .
One of the possibilities raised in the discussions on monetary union in the early 1990 ’ s was that a common currency might not mean a single currency .
That possibility is not just a theoretical construct in fringe debates two decades ago ; it is a real historical alternative .
In fact , there is a rather surprising parallel for stable coexistence of two currencies over a long period of time .
Before the victory of the gold standard in the 1870 ’ s , Europe had operated with a bimetallic standard for centuries , using silver as well as gold .
Each metal had its different coinage .
This regime was so successful in part because the coins were used for different purposes .
High-value gold coins were used as a reference for large-value transactions and international business .
Low-value silver coins were used for small day-to-day transactions , including payment of modest wages and rents .
Silver was what Shakespeare termed the “ pale and common drudge ‘ tween man and man . ”
A depreciation of silver relative to gold in this system would bring down real wages and improve competitiveness .
Early modern Italian textile workers would find their pay in silver reduced , while their products still commanded a gold price on the international market for luxuries .
This is one of the reasons why theorists such as Milton Friedman considered a bimetallic standard inherently more stable than a monometallic ( gold-based ) regime .
Nowadays , the equivalent of the adjustment mechanism in the early modern world of bimetallism would be a fall in , say , Greek wage costs paid in the national currency , as long as it was traded at a discount .
These would be the silver currencies .
Meanwhile , the euro would be the equivalent of the gold standard .
It would be kept stable by the institutions that already exist today , the European Central Bank and those national central banks that have no new alternative .
In this sense , the core countries would be the equivalent of eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century Britain , which had only a gold-standard regime .
Maintaining a choice of currencies in a national as well as an international setting seems odd and counterintuitive .
But it can – and has – been done , and it can be remarkably successful at satisfying peak demand for stability .
