Putin ’ s Tipping Point ?
NEW YORK – When incompetence in the Kremlin turns murderous , its incumbents can begin to tremble .
As news of the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over Ukraine trickled into Russia , people with a long memory recalled the Soviet Union ’ s attack , 31 years ago this September , on Korean Air Lines Flight 007 , and its political consequences .
Back then , the Kremlin first lied to the world by saying that it had nothing to do with the missing KAL plane .
Later it claimed that the South Korean jet was on an American spy mission .
But , within the Soviet leadership , the incident was a tipping point .
It ended the career of Marshal Nikolai Ogarkov , Chief of the General Staff and a hardliner of the hardest sort , whose inconsistent and unconvincing efforts to justify the downing of the plane proved deeply embarrassing to the Kremlin .
Ogarkov ’ s ineptness ( and inept mendacity ) , together with the mounting failure since 1979 of the Soviet Union ’ s war in Afghanistan , exposed the system ’ s advanced decrepitude .
The stagnation that had begun during Leonid Brezhnev ’ s rule deepened after his death in 1982 .
His successors , first the KGB ’ s Yuri Andropov and then the Communist Party Central Committee ’ s Konstantin Chernenko , not only had one foot in the grave when they came to power , but were also completely unequipped to reform the Soviet Union .
The huge loss of life in Afghanistan ( equal to the United States ’ losses in Vietnam , but in a far shorter period of time ) already suggested to many that the Kremlin was becoming a danger to itself ; the attack on a civilian airliner seemed to confirm that emerging view .
It was this realization that spurred Mikhail Gorbachev ’ s rise to power , as well as support among the leadership for Gorbachev ’ s reformist policies of perestroika and glasnost .
Of course , history is not destiny , but one can be sure that at least some in Russian President Vladimir Putin ’ s entourage , if not Putin himself , have been thinking about Ogarkov ’ s failure and its impact on the Soviet elite .
After all , Kremlin leaders , Putin included , define themselves through what was , not what could be .
Indeed , Putin ’ s rationale for annexing Crimea closely resembles Brezhnev ’ s reasoning for invading Afghanistan : to confound enemies seeking to surround the country .
In 2004 , speaking to Russian veterans about the Afghan invasion , Putin explained that there were legitimate geopolitical reasons to protect the Soviet Central Asian border , just as in March he cited security concerns to justify his Ukrainian land grab .
In the Brezhnev era , expansionist policies reflected the country ’ s new energy-derived wealth .
Putin ’ s military build-up and modernization of the past decade was also fueled by energy exports .
But Russia ’ s latest energy windfall has masked Putin ’ s incompetent economic management , with growth and government revenues now entirely reliant on the hydrocarbons sector .
Moreover , Putin ’ s incompetence extends far beyond the economy .
His security forces remain brutal and unaccountable ; in some parts of the country , they have merged with criminal gangs .
His managed judiciary provides no comfort to ordinary people ; and the country ’ s military installations , submarines , oilrigs , mining shafts , hospitals , and retirement homes regularly blow up , collapse , or sink , owing to neglect and zero liability .
When public support for Putin ’ s annexation of Crimea wanes – as it will – his failings will shine more starkly in the light of the MH17 catastrophe .
If the Russian state functioned well , Putin could continue to withstand pressure from opposition leaders .
But the opposition ’ s charge that Putin ’ s regime is composed of “ swindlers and thieves ” will resonate more strongly , because Russians can now see the results all around them .
By making himself , in effect , the state , Putin , like the gerontocracy that collapsed with Gorbachev ’ s rise , is increasingly viewed as responsible for all state failures .
And though thoughtful Russians may be hostages to Putin ’ s arrogance and blunders , the rest of the world is not .
Indeed , his partners – particularly the other BRICS countries ( Brazil , India , China , and South Africa ) – are now unlikely to be able to turn a blind eye to his contempt for international law and for his neighbors ’ national sovereignty , as they did during their recent Brazilian summit .
And Europe ’ s last blinders about Putin seem to have fallen , with the result that serious sanctions are almost certain to be imposed .
Putin is only 61 , a decade younger than the leaders who led the Soviet Union to the precipice , and the constitution permits him to remain in power for at least another ten years .
But with GDP up by just 1.3 % in 2013 – and with sanctions likely to hasten the economy ’ s decline – patriotic pride will not be able to shield him much longer .
By overplaying its hand in Afghanistan and lying to the world about the downing of KAL 007 , the Soviet regime exposed and accelerated the rot that made its collapse inevitable .
There is no reason to believe in a different fate for Putin ’ s effort to re-establish Russia as an imperial power .
