Palme \ u0027s Legacy 15 Years On
STOCKHOLM : Olof Palme , Sweden 's then Prime Minister , was assassinated 15 years ago on February 28th .
His death shocked millions everywhere .
The murderer has still not been found , at least he has not been convicted .
The crime was an attack not only on Palme , but on democracy itself .
Murdered , Palme is now part of history .
But history is something that must be freely analysed , not silenced out of deference .
So , as we recall Palme 's assassination we should also remember how he behaved and what he represented .
What , for example , is Olof Palme 's legacy in foreign policy ?
Palme was a powerful , eloquent critic of the US and the war in Vietnam .
He cursed Soviet oppression in Czechoslovakia and General Pinochet 's murders in Chile .
Because of these stands , Palme has often been portrayed as a consistent adversary of tyrannies .
But this is not quite true . In fact , Palme systematically refrained from criticizing many oppressive regimes and , indeed , embraced some of the cruelest dictators , or at least tried not to offend them .
Do not " vilify " the Soviet Union , said Palme , Chairman of Sweden 's Social Democratic Party for 17 years and Prime Minister from 1969-1976 and , again , from 1982-86 . Do not engage in " anti-Soviet agitation " or " the business of anti-Sovietism , " he declared in 1984 , a typical neutralist stand in Palme 's Sweden .
No doubt , Palme reflected the spirit of his times .
The West 's Marxist revival after 1968 deeply impressed journalists and socialists , not least in Sweden .
The Vietnam War changed the world view of many young people .
Palme , however , carried this spirit forward so long after many others had seen the liberal light .
" Neither communism nor capitalism represents a dream of liberty for the peoples of Europe , " he said only a few years before the peoples of East and Central Europe freed themselves from Communism to embrace democracy and capitalism .
Palme also exploited ideological differences over diplomacy to wound other democratic parties in Sweden .
The conservatives were lapsing into " the crusading spirit , aimed at the liberation of Eastern Europe , which prevailed in conservative quarters in the West during the Cold War , " he said in 1983--a moment of heightened tension between the West and the USSR .
Eventually , Sweden 's Liberals and Conservatives , after 44 years of Socialist rule , came to power in 1976 .
None of the threats to Sweden 's foreign policy , which Palme confidently predicted , materialized in their nine years in office during the last quarter century .
Divisive at home , Palme tried hard to divide the West at a critical moment .
In the 1980s Social Democrats in Sweden and Germany developed a close ideological collaboration in foreign affairs .
The so-called " Palme Commission " ( including the influential Egon Bahr ) suggested a policy of " common security " between East and West , and nuclear weapon-free zones instead of NATO 's policy of deploying cruise and Pershing II missiles to counter the Soviet advantage in theater nuclear weapons .
This alliance between the two parties led to serious distortions of fundamental Western values .
Palme and Oskar Lafontaine , then one of the leaders of the opposition in Germany , did not see the Cold War as primarily a conflict between freedom and tyranny .
When Palme visited East Germany in 1984 he never criticized repression there , nor the Berlin Wall .
Instead , Palme praised East Germany 's leader , Erich Honecker , underlining shared goals and the mutual struggle for peace and development .
Palme 's main speech mentioned " détente , " " trust , " and " friendship , " but never " freedom " .
Much the same happened when Palme visited Cuba .
He shared a podium with Fidel Castro at a mass rally in Santiago de Cuba .
Palme spoke appreciatively of " socialist revolution , " never mentioning his own party 's conviction that " revolution " should take place only after free and honest elections .
Indeed , Palme used Marxist slogans , but said nothing about human rights and political freedom , giving the impression that Sweden and Cuba embraced similar ideologies .
In a joint statement with Castro , Palme claimed that the two men were united in all the areas they had discussed .
They even confirmed their happiness that the struggles for freedom of " the Vietnamese and Cambodian peoples have been crowned with victory . "
This was said in the summer of 1975 , two months after Cambodia 's Khmer Rouge embarked on a genocide that killed two million of the country 's seven million people .
Was Olof Palme unaware of Pol Pot 's massacres ?
Newspapers in almost all democracies , including Sweden , were informing us of the Cambodian horrors .
Palme , however , thought it more important to present a united front with Cuba 's tyrant than to worry about atrocities committed by Communists in Indochina .
Palme , indeed , seldom condemned oppression in Third World countries .
He constantly condemned apartheid in South Africa , yet he never criticized Mao 's China , the most murderous regime to arise after World War II .
This double standard was particularly pernicious in the Middle East , where Palme never censured an Arab country , regardless of its corruption or cruelty .
The only nation in that region he repeatedly attacked was its only democracy , Israel .
He even equated the Israelis with the Nazis .
Fifteen years after his murder , Sweden and the West must grapple with what Palme left behind , his anti-Western agitation and his willingness to see fundamental ideals of freedom as merely relative values .
For people seeking or defending democracy and human rights , Palme was an unreliable partner .
It is that aspect of his moral " example " that should be recalled .
