Obama the Statesman
PRINCETON – The world may see Barack Obama as a leader weakened by the intractability of American domestic politics , but , as the 2012 presidential campaign heats up , the American public still sees him as a strong , capable leader in foreign affairs .
Some 49 % of Americans approve of his overall handling of foreign affairs , with 63 % approving of his approach to terrorism and 52 % approving of the withdrawal from Iraq .
Contrast that with the 30 % of Americans who approve of his handling of the economy , or the scant 26 % who back his approach to the federal budget deficit .
With numbers like that , it would hardly be surprising if Obama tried to keep voters focused on foreign affairs in 2012 , with high-profile initiatives like Secretary of State Hillary Clinton ’ s trip to Burma ( Myanmar ) , carefully brokered diplomatic deals , and important international conferences at home , such as the NATO summit in Chicago in May .
But presidential trips overseas in the coming election year are likely to backfire at home , particularly with unemployment above 9 % .
The Obama administration knows the iron law of American politics – “ It ’ s the economy , stupid ” – as well as anyone else .
Nevertheless , highlighting Obama ’ s ability to get things done abroad is more than an attempt at distraction ; it also sends the message that the domestic-policy impasse is not his fault .
So expect plenty of foreign-policy news in the coming months .
Election-year tactics aside , American voters are right .
Obama has performed much better in foreign policy than in domestic policy , which is all the more surprising given the weak hand that he was dealt : an America that had lost its moral authority , its military invincibility , and its credibility as an economic model .
It is easy to focus on what has not been achieved , because Obama raised high expectations and then failed to deliver .
On his second day in office , he appointed two Special Representatives : George Mitchell for Middle East Peace and Richard Holbrooke for Afghanistan and Pakistan .
A month later , Dennis Ross was named Special Adviser for the Gulf and Southwest Asia ( read : Iran ) .
Three years later , Ross and Mitchell have resigned , with no agreement in sight in the Middle East , and Holbrooke died unexpectedly , without having brought the Taliban and the Afghan and Pakistani governments to the negotiating table .
Relations between the United States and Iran are frostier than ever .
But none of Obama ’ s predecessors achieved any of these goals , either , whereas he can claim credit for the killing of Osama bin Laden and more than half of al-Qaeda ’ s top leadership .
Indeed , it is now believed that al-Qaeda could fragment and cease to exist as a military organization within two years .
Obama has also improved relations with Russia and negotiated a major arms-control treaty with the Kremlin .
Moreover , Obama has dramatically increased America ’ s presence in Asia , including signing a Treaty of Amity and Cooperation with ASEAN and joining the East Asia Summit , and moved quickly and flexibly in response to the revolutions across the Middle East .
He changed a 30-year relationship with Egypt in a week ; helped to convince the Egyptian military not to fire on citizens in the first stage of the revolution ; assembled and enabled a successful coalition to intervene in Libya ; worked closely with Turkey , the European Union , and Saudi Arabia to increase pressure on Syria ; cooperated with Egypt to broker a settlement in Yemen ; and worked behind the scenes to convince Bahrain ’ s government to investigate its own violence against Shia protesters .
Moving south , Obama dedicated considerable resources to ensuring that the Comprehensive Peace Agreement , which ended Sudan ’ s civil war , was actually implemented , allowing South Sudan ’ s peaceful secession .
Although engagement with Iran and North Korea may have failed , Obama did help to engineer a historic breakthrough with Burma .
Finally , the US Senate ratified free-trade agreements with South Korea , Panama , and Colombia , clearing the way for the new Trans-Pacific Partnership .
The common thread in all of these achievements is old-fashioned diplomacy .
In choosing Clinton as Secretary of State , Obama appointed one of the world ’ s most admired women .
She has lived up to her reputation .
Similarly , Susan Rice has been a remarkably successful US ambassador to the United Nations , consistently delivering votes in the Security Council .
Obama is pursuing a coherent grand strategy – & nbsp ; what he called in his 2009 inaugural address a “ new era of responsibility . ”
On the international side , his national-security strategy holds that “ the burdens of a young century cannot fall on American shoulders alone . ” The US strategic is committed to an “ international order based on rights and responsibilities , ” including a “ broader voice – and greater responsibilities ” for emerging powers , and the imposition of real consequences on countries that violate their international obligations .
Within two years of taking office , Obama helped to transform the G-8 into the G-20 , secured the re-weighting of votes on the International Monetary Fund ’ s board away from Europe and toward new economic powers , and committed to supporting the candidacies of India and Japan for membership of a reformed UN Security Council .
His administration also devoted enormous energy to building and strengthening regional institutions .
For the first time , the Arab League is playing an active role in addressing political upheaval and government brutality in its midst , as is the Gulf Cooperation Council .
The African Union helped to restore democracy in Madagascar , aided in forcing Côte d ’ Ivoire ’ s president to leave office after losing an election , and sent troops to Somalia .
The East Asian Summit is becoming a forum for region-wide security discussions , from the resolution of maritime disputes to fighting pirates .
Obama ’ s Republican opponents love to hammer home the phrase “ leading from behind . ”
But they miss the point , for they imagine leadership as the equivalent of a nineteenth-century cavalry charge , in which the general is either out front carrying the flag or following along in the rear .
Obama is actually far in front in terms of shaping the world ’ s norms and expectations .
He leads from wherever he needs to lead in order to get results .
And he ’ s gotten plenty .
