Taiwan \ u0027s Democratic Labor Pains
Young democracies can be cruel : their voters are often as unforgiving as political opponents .
The two weeks since Taiwan 's disputed presidential election of March 20 - only the third such democratic vote in the country 's history - has tested this truism almost to the breaking point .
Taiwan 's young democracy must now cope with the balancing act that President Chen Shui-bian 's re-election has thrust upon it .
While canvassing for votes in his hometown in southern Taiwan on the eve of the election , President Chen and Vice President Annette Lu were both wounded by an assassin 's bullet .
The sympathy this secured gave the President his razor-thin margin of victory - with just 50.1 % of the votes - over Lien Chan , the candidate of the Kuomintang Party and People 's First Party ( KMT-PFP ) coalition .
Opposition street protests and shouts that the assassination was stage followed .
A recount was demanded .
None of this is surprising , because Taiwan 's society is evenly and deeply polarized .
President Chen 's Democratic Progressive Party ( DPP ) called for " one country on each side of the Taiwan Strait " and for " preventing the return of an alien regime " ( meaning the KMT , which came to Taiwan in 1949 ) .
But while Chen 's campaign to safeguard Taiwan against threats from mainland China clearly galvanized the party 's supporters , it made the uncommitted nervous and the rival KMT angry .
For the KMT-PFP coalition , the campaign was a virtual holy war , conducted not only to revive an ailing economy , but also to keep the country 's official name : the " Republic of China . "
With so much at stake , both camps mobilized millions of people .
President Chen upped the stakes even more by holding Taiwan 's first-ever popular referendum .
It called for beefing up Taiwan 's defense in the face of mainland China 's missile threats and for building a peaceful framework of relations across the strait that separates Taiwan from the mainland .
Not only did China denounce the referendum as provocative , but so did the US President George W. Bush .
In the weeks since the vote , Taiwan has staggered ahead .
President Chen agreed to a recount .
But the questions on everyone 's lips are whether the loser of the recount will accept the result , and whether Taiwan 's young democracy can survive this tumult ?
For the most important issue facing Taiwan today is not re-unification with China , but consolidating and deepening our democratic institutions .
Traditions of tolerance must replace the turbulence that has so far dominated the building of Taiwan 's democracy .
The one benefit to be gained from the referendum is that , for the first time , Taiwan 's citizens were asked to debate issues related to national defense and cross-Strait relations .
Any citizen could take part in one of ten nationally televised debates and argue with government officials .
Moreover , the presidential candidates themselves engaged in two rounds of televised debates and gave another two televised speeches - a political openness new to Taiwan and unique in the Chinese political world .
Although China 's rulers dismissed the election , Taiwan 's open democratic exercises will have vast repercussions for other Chinese political communities in their pursuit of greater political pluralism .
From this perspective , Taiwan 's democratic traditions can only grow stronger .
The DPP is a relatively young party , formed only in 1986 .
For a long time , indeed , Taiwan was overshadowed by the KMT .
That dominance is now definitively a thing of the past .
The uneven distribution of power between the two parties had many predicting a victory for the KMT-PFP coalition .
Indeed , the DPP had never been able to win more than 40 % of the vote previously .
Its victory has now made it a fixture on the political landscape .
Having ruled for four years , the DPP has already redrawn Taiwan 's political map .
Its calls for more reforms , its belief in Taiwan , and the urgency of its appeal to defend the island against undue influence from China have now captured the allegiance of a small majority of the population .
Yet this should not be considered an outright victory for Taiwanese nationalism .
Were it not for the shooting incident on the election 's eve , the opposition might have eked out a victory , with the soft economy the deciding factor .
The slim majority , and the clear differences between the two political camps , will assure a robust two-party system in the future .
But more than two strong parties have emerged from the campaign .
The law , too , is giving democracy here a boost .
For example , the two parties are now engaged in tense negotiations to amend the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Election and Recall Law to avert any repeat of the current confused circumstances surrounding the current recount .
In the future a compulsory recount will be held should the winning margin be less than 1 % .
A " sunshine law " to regulate political donations was enacted before the ballots were cast .
The finances of the president and his / her family will henceforth be more strictly monitored .
Taiwan 's democratic experiences are messy , but no messier than the vote that brought President Bush to power four years ago .
Yes , Taiwan 's recent vote will leave a divided country behind , but those divisions are democratic divisions , and people are now organizing for the next elections .
Instead of writing off Taiwan 's democratic experiment as doomed to instability or worse , the disputed vote will help consolidate and invigorate our democratic order .
