Life After Schengen
LONDON – Throughout Europe ’ s refugee crisis , which has been building for well over two years , warnings about the threat to the European Union ’ s precious Schengen Area of border-free travel have proliferated .
Indeed , the warning was heard again recently , as EU ministers thrashed out a late-night agreement on border policing and the relocation of refugees .
But , at a time of diminished confidence in the EU , would eliminating border-free travel be such a bad thing ?
In short , no .
Of course , the idea of abolishing borders within Europe holds great symbolic importance and appeal .
But sometimes even sacred cows need to be slaughtered .
With the refugee crisis turning Schengen into a threat to the credibility of the EU as a collective entity and of its national governments ’ ability to maintain order and the rule of law , that time is now .
When it was first created in 1985 , the Schengen Area included just five countries ( Belgium , France , Luxembourg , the Netherlands , and West Germany ) .
Membership has since ballooned to include 22 of the EU ’ s 28 member countries – with four of those left out ( Bulgaria , Croatia , Cyprus , and Romania ) due to join in the future – plus four non-EU members ( Norway , Iceland , Switzerland , and Liechtenstein ) .
All have abolished controls at their shared borders and have adopted a common visa policy for citizens of non-member states .
It is certainly handy to be able to treat a flight from Zurich to Oslo as a domestic journey , with no passport controls to contend with upon departure and arrival .
And it is undoubtedly convenient to be able to drive from Berlin to Barcelona without having to wait in line at each border one crosses .
Indeed , that convenience is probably why only two EU countries ( Ireland and the United Kingdom ) have opted out of the Schengen Agreement .
But the refugee crisis has exposed the flipside of the Schengen Agreement – namely , the difficulty of monitoring national and EU territory without border controls .
And though non-Schengen countries have , in some cases , been able to avoid direct obligations to participate in a common policy – the UK , for example , has remained outside the EU ’ s scheme for the relocation of refugees – they have not been insulated from the challenges of the migration crisis .
They , like the Schengen countries , cannot credibly say how many migrants are in their country , who these people are , or when they arrived .
This loss of control matters , for two main reasons .
First , if statistics about migration are open to doubt , even before taking into account illegal immigration , nationalist anti-immigration political parties can more easily exaggerate the figures to stoke public fears .
Second , if refugees who have been granted asylum can move easily to any Schengen country they choose , burden-sharing agreements lose their credibility and accepting refugees loses its practical appeal .
A country would not want to cover the up-front costs of settling a particular number of refugees , only to miss out on the eventual economic benefits that those refugees could provide when they join the workforce .
To avoid this outcome , it would make sense to implement a transition period – like the seven-year transition periods faced by citizens of new member states – during which successful asylum-seekers are barred from moving to other countries for work .
But Schengen makes this very difficult to enforce – a reality that plays further into the hands of the nationalists , who are keen to portray the EU as a burdensome obligation , rather than as a source of solutions or opportunities .
To be sure , the Schengen Agreement and the EU ’ s principle of free movement of people seem naturally to reinforce each other .
But the issues they raise are not the same .
It is the free movement of people , not border-free travel , that forms an essential component of the EU .
And , under the current circumstances , Schengen is placing that fundamental right and benefit at risk .
Of course , resolving the refugee crisis will take far more than just reintroducing glass booths and uniformed immigration officials at borders .
But suspending or abolishing the Schengen Agreement would boost the credibility of governments ’ efforts to maintain order at home , and thus make ordinary citizens far more amenable to aiding more refugees .
At the same time , reversing a once-cherished policy would prove that the EU , far from being trapped by some utopian ideology , can adapt to changing circumstances in a thoughtful and pragmatic manner .
Reculer pour mieux sauter – backing up in order to jump better – is , after all , a time-honored and very European principle .
