Erdoğan ’ s Pyrrhic Victory
ISTANBUL – Turkey ’ s beleaguered Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and his Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) have emerged victorious from this week ’ s local elections .
Still , the AKP ’ s triumph is unlikely to ameliorate the country ’ s internal conflicts , much less revive its tarnished international standing .
The local elections were widely seen as a referendum on Erdoğan .
The AKP received 44 % of the national vote and now controls 49 of Turkey ’ s 81 metropolitan municipalities , including Istanbul and the capital , Ankara .
The main opposition force , the center-left Republican People ’ s Party ( CHP ) , received 26 % and won only 13 municipalities .
The outcome can be seen as a vindication of Erdoğan ’ s strategy of using political polarization to consolidate his support and counter the challenge to his rule posed by followers of his former ally , the US-based Islamic preacher Fethullah Gülen .
With the AKP ’ s initial support , the Gülen movement gradually infiltrated state institutions , particularly the judiciary and law enforcement , until the alliance eventually ended in an acrimonious split over the distribution of power within Turkey .
The end result was a dirty war of graft allegations spread through social media , apparently by Gülen ’ s followers primarily .
In response , the government has branded its opponents as enemies , and sought to promulgate new laws undermining the independence of the judiciary and restricting freedom of expression – including shutdowns of Twitter and YouTube .
Erdoğan ’ s strategy sought to complement this exercise in damage limitation with a demonstration of its popular legitimacy .
With the AKP ’ s overwhelming triumph in the local elections , Erdoğan can now justifiably claim that the Turkish electorate backs his approach , including his government ’ s suspension of the rule of law in order to obstruct corruption investigations that it views as a judicial coup attempted by Gülen ’ s followers .
Yet the AKP ’ s electoral victory heralds two specific dangers for the future of Turkey ’ s democracy .
The first is the persistence of intense political polarization in the run-up to the presidential election in August and the parliamentary election in the first half of 2015 .
In Turkey , polarization does not have the same political costs as it does elsewhere : Given a weak system of checks and balances , the Turkish executive still has ample room to manage the state ’ s affairs .
And Erdoğan ’ s recent victory will embolden him to continue his polarizing politics as the basis of a presidential run .
The other danger is that of growing alienation from the West .
With a renewed popular mandate , the government is likely to begin prosecuting Gülenists for alleged criminal behavior .
But the creation of a wider siege mentality to boost domestic support also requires the invention of external co-conspirators – global financial markets , the international media , or even Turkey ’ s NATO allies .
Such allegations have been a part of the government ’ s conspiratorial rhetoric since last summer ’ s protests , and the authorities dismissed the recent corruption accusations against Erdoğan in the same way .
Turkey ’ s international standing has thus suffered enormously from Erdoğan ’ s strategy of internal polarization .
Long gone are the days when the prospect of accession to the European Union sustained a powerful dynamic of democratic reform .
With hope of EU membership fading , reform momentum has been lost , and the European Commission is expected to issue a sharply critical progress report in October .
The bilateral relationship with the United States is also under strain .
President Barack Obama and Erdoğan rarely speak with one another anymore , whereas Obama once considered Erdoğan among his favorite world leaders .
Turkey has also lost several regional allies , particularly some of the Gulf monarchies , which are angry at the Erdoğan government ’ s unconditional support for the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt .
Turkey ’ s much-vaunted soft-power diplomacy and neighborhood policy now lie in tatters .
Yet Turkey remains a large and important regional power .
With his popularity reaffirmed , Erdoğan could still move in a different direction .
Aware of the dangers of extreme polarization and reassured by the level of support obtained by the AKP in the local elections , Erdoğan may opt to lower the political temperature at home in the hope of repairing Turkey ’ s frayed relations abroad .
How Erdoğan behaves will not only determine the intensity of domestic political conflict ; it will also greatly affect Turkey ’ s potential to regain the regional clout that it once enjoyed .
If Erdoğan believes that a higher level of antagonism is necessary to retain power , he may remain oblivious to the harm done to Turkey ’ s international standing .
