Race and the US Presidential Race
BUENOS AIRES – Three-quarters of Americans now disapprove of President George W. Bush ’ s performance .
Given this , and the fact that the policies and values of John McCain and his vice-presidential nominee , Sarah Palin , are almost identical to those of Bush , you would expect Obama to be leading in the polls by a wider margin than he is .
The reason that he is not , I suspect , is racism .
When polled , most older white voters overwhelming reject Obama , even if many of them are unhappy with Bush .
Indeed , one-third of Democrats have at various times told pollsters that they will not vote for a black candidate .
And a recent Associated Press / Yahoo News poll suggested that his race is costing Obama six percentage points in the polls .
Most of the time , this racism is covert , only hinted at through code words .
The media , particularly the increasingly popular conservative media and talk radio , are particularly important here .
Obama is consistently criticized for his “ otherness ” and his “ arrogance , ” terms that call to mind the image of the “ uppity nigger ” from the days of segregation , which are actually not so far in America ’ s past .
In a recent interview , Bill O ’ Reilly , the most popular TV talk show host at Fox News , America ’ s most watched news station , talked down to Obama in so condescending a manner that some viewers were reminded of the image of a slave owner in an old Hollywood movie putting a young black upstart in his place .
Sean Hannity , another star host at the Rupert Murdoch-owned Fox News , demanded repeatedly on air from one interviewee , Fareed Zakaria , a well-known columnist at Newsweek with a CNN talk show of his own , whether he thought America to be the greatest nation on earth .
The dark-skinned Zakaria , a naturalized American from India with a Ph.D. from Harvard , felt compelled to affirm his loyalty for America twice .
It is hard to imagine Hannity demanding such a public affirmation of loyalty from anyone with white skin .
So how much is race costing Obama ?
The problem is that pollsters cannot effectively measure the problem .
They call it the “ Bradley effect , ” first noted during the 1982 governor ’ s race in California , when Tom Bradley , the then African-American mayor of Los Angeles , lost the race to his white opponent despite leading in pre-election polls throughout the campaign .
The idea behind the “ Bradley effect ” is that white voters won ’ t reveal their prejudices to pollsters .
Instead , they lie and say that they will vote for the black candidate when , in fact , they have no intention of doing so .
Of course , many people now say that Obama has proven that the “ Bradley effect ” is a thing of the past .
But his continuing difficulties with white working-class voters , who in the primaries went with Hillary Clinton , suggest that , perhaps , the “ Bradley effect ” is still alive and well .
Younger Americans accept inter-racial relationships as part of the normal social and sexual landscape .
Yet , the very speed with which American society has progressed has threatened half of the country , older and mostly white , unable and unwilling to live in the present .
The moderate Republican Party of Dwight D. Eisenhower and the Rockefellers has been taken over by a radical crowd , with even Eisenhower ’ s granddaughter now openly backing Obama .
So it boggles many non-Americans ’ minds that so many in that great nation still do not wake up to the reality that four more years of Republican rule will further degrade and bankrupt the country .
In any civilized society , ignorance is not illegal and being moralistic is anybody ’ s inherent privilege .
But what is alarming is how private religious beliefs and morals have increasingly shaped the secular agenda of America , whose Founding Fathers had specifically designed the Constitution to separate state and church .
Today ’ s radical Republican Party represents a large segment of the population that believes that abortions and same-sex marriage are immoral , God sent America to Iraq , and that bailing out Wall Street is “ socialism . ”
At the Republican Convention in August , the ear-splitting chants of “ USA !
USA ! ” and “ Drill , baby , drill ” sounded like cries of desperation , as well as of defiance against an enemy who threatens American ’ s divine right to remain supreme .
Palin has since identified the enemy , proclaiming of Obama : “ This is not a man who sees America like you and I see America . ”
