That Old Tax Magic
WASHINGTON , DC – Tax time in the United States – the dreaded mid-April deadline for filing annual income-tax forms – has come and gone .
The system , Americans have been reminded , has become painfully complex , with many a loophole through which one might try to squeeze .
The fear of an audit by the Internal Revenue Service lurks in homes across the country .
At such a sensitive time , it is no surprise to hear politicians pitching the idea of “ tax reform ” – suggesting that they can simplify the system , close loopholes , and use the proceeds to reduce tax rates .
The allure of such appeals is that a crackdown on others ’ tax avoidance will mean that you personally will pay less in taxes .
In the policy jargon increasingly heard in today ’ s political discourse , tax reform will be “ revenue neutral ” – meaning that it will not worsen the budget deficit or drive up the national debt .
The broader subliminal message is that you can have whatever you currently expect in terms of government services for less than it costs you now .
The problem with this vision of tax reform is that it is magical – an attractive illusion with no basis in reality .
Consider the recent pronouncements of Mitt Romney – now the presumptive Republican candidate to challenge President Barack Obama in November .
Romney wants to cut tax rates , mainly benefiting those at the upper end of the income distribution .
He also wants to close loopholes , but none of the details that he has offered add up to much .
His boldest proposal – eliminating deductions for interest paid on mortgages on second homes – is trivial in terms of generating revenue .
Obama is only slightly better .
While he talks less about “ tax reform , ” he is currently communicating the message that merely raising taxes on rich people – the infamous 1 % – will bring the budget and national debt under control .
That , too , is a pipedream .
Americans – and taxpayers in many other countries – need a more transparent approach to assessing candidates ’ budget proposals .
In the US , there are groups that offer their own assessments .
For example , the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget performed an admirable service in “ scoring ” the fiscal plans of rival candidates for the Republican nomination .
The problem is that in an election with high stakes and deep polarization , who , exactly , can voters trust ?
Everyone has an agenda , perceived or real .
The veracity of any organization that is funded by particular individuals , or through less transparent corporate channels , will be called into question .
What the US and many other countries need is an independent , competent , and experienced body that leans neither right nor left .
Fortunately , the US has the Congressional Budget Office , which scores legislation in terms of its budgetary impact , assesses official budget proposals , and formulates its own economic projections .
( I serve on the CBO ’ s Panel of Economic Advisers , which comments on the draft forecast twice a year , but does not assess budget proposals or anything else . )
Because the CBO reports to the relevant congressional committees – those dealing with tax and budgets – both Republicans and Democrats watch its every move .
But the CBO , created in the 1970 ’ s precisely to bring greater transparency and accountability to the rather byzantine congressional budget process , really is independent and run by professionals .
The CBO does not , however , score proposals by political candidates , and that is part of the problem .
In the run-up to the pre-election debates between Obama and Romney , both sides should agree to submit detailed budget proposals in the correct format for CBO assessment .
The relevant congressional committees also should agree to this exercise .
If one presidential candidate refuses to cooperate in this manner , that should confer an advantage on the candidate who is willing to disclose more fully the specifics of his plan .
And , to make this pressure to disclose meaningful , part of one debate should focus on budget proposals , with the questions being structured around how the CBO has reacted to specifics .
If either candidate does not want to bring the national debt under control , he should be pressed to explain why .
This is not a matter only for the world ’ s largest economies .
Candidates to lead their countries should not be allowed to get away with speaking in generalities or engaging in vague rhetorical flourishes .
