The Fall of the House of Samuelson
LONDON – To read The Samuelson Sampler in the shadow of the Great Recession is to gain a glimpse into the mindset of a bygone era .
The sample is of the late Paul Samuelson ’ s weekly columns for the magazine Newsweek from 1966-1973 .
Samuelson , a Nobel laureate , was the doyen of American economists : his famous textbook , Economics went through 14 editions in its author ’ s lifetime , introducing future economists worldwide to the rudiments of their craft .
If not the sole originator , he was the great popularizer of the “ neoclassical synthesis ” – the mix of neoclassical and Keynesian economics that defined the mainstream of the field for 50 years .
Samuelson was a convinced Keynesian , though in a limited sense .
He dismissed most of Keynes ’ s attack on the orthodox economics of his day as unnecessary , writing “ had Keynes [ started ] with the simple statement that he found it realistic to assume that money wages & hellip ; were sticky and resistant to downward movements ... most of his insights would have remained just as valid . ” For Samuelson , Keynes ’ s real contribution was the tools he gave governments to prevent depressions .
Reading The Samuelson Sampler , it is extraordinary to realize just how confident economists of his generation were that the New Economics ( as the Keynesian approach was called in America ) had solved the problem of depression and mass unemployment .
As Samuelson put it in his 1973 introduction , “ the specter of a repetition of the depression of the 1930s has been reduced to a negligible probability . ”
Yes , there would still be small fluctuations ; but , as he wrote in 1966 , “ Great Depressions – cumulative slumps that feed on themselves – are indeed extinct . ” The reason was that governments now had the tools , especially discretionary fiscal policy , to check any incipient downturn .
“ What is important about the budget , ” he said in 1970 , “ is whether it is inflationary or deflationary , not whether [ it is ] balanced or unbalanced . ” In other words , “ A deficit in a good cause is good business . ”
Because governments knew how to stop depressions , voters would insist that they use this knowledge . “ If printing bits of green can save banks and business from ruin , ” he argued in 1966 , “ today ’ s electorate will ensure that either party in power will [ so ] act . ”
This was irrespective , Samuelson thought , of the ideological preferences of those in power .
The Republican Richard Nixon was elected US President in 1968 on a platform of scaling down the Democrats ’ expensive Great Society programs . “ I am not an economic determinist , ” Samuelson wrote in November 1968 , “ But I can predict with confidence that Richard Nixon will be using the New Economics if only for the reason that new times make it inescapable . ”
And so it turned out .
Rather than deflating the economy , Nixon took America off the gold standard in 1971 and imposed wage , price , and import controls , proclaiming bluntly , “ I am now a Keynesian in economics . ”
But that was the last of Samuelson ’ s successful predictions .
Less than a decade after his Newsweek columns ended , the New Economics , which he had extolled as a permanent addition to knowledge , was in flight from the ideological assaults of Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher .
Despite his faith that voters would not allow a return to depression , Thatcher ’ s third election victory , in 1987 , came just after unemployment in the United Kingdom had peaked at three million , the highest level since the 1930s .
So what went wrong ?
“ Still to be argued out within the guild [ of economists ] , ” Samuelson wrote in 1969 , “ is the proper quantitative potency of monetary versus fiscal policy . ” This question eventually was resolved in favor of monetary policy .
More important , as he pointed out in 1970 , was that “ even Keynes could not guarantee that mankind would live happily ever after . He left us with an unsolved problem .
How can we have full employment and also price stability ? ”
Reluctantly , Samuelson concluded that there needed to be permanent controls over prices and wages to stop cost-push inflation .
“ Our mixed economy , ” he wrote in 1970 , “ does not know how to have a satisfactory incomes policy that will back up monetary and fiscal policy .... Here then lies the unsolved frontier in modern economics . ”
It was the same frontier that Friedrich von Hayek first surveyed in The Road to Serfdom in 1944 .
Hayek feared that deliberate policies to maintain full employment would lead to increasing state encroachment on the free market and political liberty .
It was this fear that led , from the 1980s onwards , to the piecemeal abandonment of the policy system of the mixed economy – indeed , to the dismantling of the mixed economy itself .
Samuelson was half right : Governments do know how to stop a slide into another Great Depression .
They used this knowledge in the autumn of 2008 and 2009 , which is why we had only a Great Recession .
But , contrary to what Samuelson believed , governments are haunted by fears of large fiscal deficits .
With few exceptions , they have not been prepared to use fiscal policy to jolt their economies out of post-crisis stagnation .
Instead , they have relied on monetary expansion , which is politically more acceptable , but also much weaker in its effects , as it is undermined – just as Keynes predicted – by “ several slips between the cup and the lip . ”
More important , governments have abandoned the goal of full employment ; as a result , all of those bits of interventionist policy previously thought necessary to keep economic activity on an even keel have gone by the wayside as well .
The New Economics may be temporarily resurrected to deal with extreme situations , but policymakers no longer take precautions to prevent extreme situations from arising .
How to do this , while preserving freedom and efficiency , is now the “ unsolved frontier in modern economics . ”
