Death to Machines ?
LONDON – At the start of the Industrial Revolution , textile workers in the Midlands and the North of England , mainly weavers , staged a spontaneous revolt , smashing machinery and burning factories . Their complaint was that the newfangled machines were robbing them of their wages and jobs .
The rebels took their name , and inspiration , from the apocryphal Ned Ludd , supposedly an apprentice weaver who smashed two knitting frames in 1779 in a “ fit of passion . ”
Robert Calvert wrote a ballad about him in 1985 : “ They said Ned Ludd was an idiot boy / That all he could do was wreck and destroy , ” the song begins .
And then : “ He turned to his workmates and said : ‘ Death to Machines ’ / They tread on our future and stamp on our dreams . ”
The Luddites ’ rampage was at its height in 1811-12 .
An alarmed government sent in more troops to garrison the disturbed areas than were then available to Wellington in the Peninsular War against Napoleon . More than a hundred Luddites were hanged or transported to Australia .
These measures restored peace .
The machines won : the Luddites are a footnote in the history of the Industrial Revolution .
Historians tell us that the Luddites were victims of a temporary conjuncture of rising prices and falling wages that threatened them with starvation in a society with minimal welfare provision .
The Luddites , however , blamed their misfortune on the machines themselves .
The new knitting frames and power looms could weave yarn into cloth much faster than the most skilled artisan weaver working in his own cottage . Caught between fixed costs ( the hire and upkeep of their domestic appliances ) and falling prices for their products , tens of thousands of families were doomed to become paupers .
Their plight evoked some sympathy ( Lord Byron made a brilliant speech in their defense in the House of Lords ) ; their arguments , however , did not .
There could be no rejecting progress : the future lay with machine production , not with old-fashioned handicrafts .
Thomas Paine spoke for middle-class radicalism when he said , “ We know that every machine for the abridgment of labor is a blessing to the great family of which we are part . ”
There would , of course , be some temporary unemployment in the technologically advancing sectors ; but , in the long run , machine-assisted production , by increasing the real wealth of the community , would enable full employment at higher wages .
That was the initial view of David Ricardo , the most influential economist of the nineteenth century .
But in the third edition of his Principles of Political Economy ( 1817 ) , he inserted a chapter on machinery that changed tack .
He was now “ convinced that the substitution of machines for human labor is often very injurious to the class of laborers , ” that the “ same cause which may increase the net revenue of the country , may at the same time render the population redundant . ” As a result , “ the opinion entertained by the laboring class , that the employment of machinery is frequently detrimental to their interests , is not founded on prejudice and error , but is conformable to the correct principles of political economy . ”
Just consider : machinery “ may render the population redundant ” !
Ricardo ’ s orthodox followers took no notice of it , assuming it to be a rare lapse by the Master .
But was it ?
The pessimistic argument is as follows : If machines costing $ 5 an hour can produce the same amount as workers costing $ 10 an hour , employers have an incentive to substitute machines for labor up to the point that the costs are equal – that is , when the wages of the workers have fallen to $ 5 an hour .
As machines become ever more productive , so wages tend to fall even more , toward zero , and the population becomes redundant .
Now , it did not work out like that .
Labor ’ s share of GDP remained constant throughout the Industrial Age .
The pessimistic argument ignored the fact that by lowering the cost of goods , machines increased workers ’ real wages – enabling them to buy more – and that the rise in labor productivity enabled employers ( often under pressure from trade unions ) to pay more per worker .
It also assumed that machines and workers were close substitutes , whereas more often than not workers could still do things that machines could not .
However , over the last 30 years , the share of wages in national income has been falling , owing to what MIT professors Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee call the “ second machine age . ”
Computerized technology has penetrated deeply into the service sector , taking over jobs for which the human factor and “ cognitive functions ” were hitherto deemed indispensable .
In retail , for example , Walmart and Amazon are prime examples of new technology driving down workers ’ wages . Because computer programs and humans are close substitutes for such jobs , and given the predictable improvement in computing power , there seems to be no technical obstacle to the redundancy of workers across much of the service economy .
Yes , there will still be activities that require human skills , and these skills can be improved .
But it is broadly true that the more computers can do , the less humans need to do .
The prospect of the “ abridgment of labor ” should fill us with hope rather than foreboding .
But , in our kind of society , there are no mechanisms for converting redundancy into leisure .
That brings me back to the Luddites .
They claimed that because machines were cheaper than labor , their introduction would depress wages .
They argued the case for skill against cheapness .
The most thoughtful of them understood that consumption depends on real income , and that depressing real income destroys businesses .
Above all , they understood that the solution to the problems created by machines would not be found in laissez-faire nostrums .
The Luddites were wrong on many points ; but perhaps they deserve more than a footnote .
