Saigon \ u0027s Fall , Saigon \ u0027s Rebirth : 25 Years Later
Vietnam 's long war ended 25 years ago , on April 30 , 1975 .
Like a passerby staring at the wreckage of a road accident , I watched the fall of Saigon on television in Connecticut with my new family .
Like millions of Americans , I was mesmerized by the collapse of a country where half-a-million American soldiers fought and 50,000 died .
I was lucky .
Barely twelve , I left Saigon a month before its fall with an American officer whom I had befriended in an army hospital , where my mother and I volunteered .
That was 1968 , the year of the Tet Offensive .
We brought him rice porridge , chocolate eclairs , tamarind candy .
He spoke French with me .
As he lay bandaged , I told stories that made him laugh .
Seven years later , as North Vietnamese tanks crossed the DMZ , he returned and adopted me , taking me out several months before my parents made their own escape .
From the safety of our living room we watched as crowds of Vietnamese forced their way into the guarded US compounds .
Helicopters skittered on the Embassy 's rooftop .
This was ‘ Operation Frequent Wind , ' code-name for America 's evacuation from Saigon .
There was an exodus by air , towards the Seventh Fleet patrolling the South China Sea ; an exodus by sea saw waves of barges , fishing boats and other makeshift vessels .
More than 100,000 Vietnamese fled in April and May of 1975 alone , a number swelling to 2 million in the years after .
Wars are often incomprehensible to those who live through them .
The beginning ; the end ; the beginning of the end : these are historians ' questions .
Those who survived the war in Vietnam and fled because we were suddenly on history 's losing side , grappled with questions of forgetting , of how to live an unremembered life – unremembered until an anniversary like this one .
April 30 : the Day of Liberation as it is known in Communist Vietnam ; the Day of National Loss , as Vietnam 's exiles call it .
Reinvented by Hollywood for American self-examination , recrimination , and regret , Vietnam became an allegorical black hole .
In films like Apocalypse Now and Platoon , shadowy enemies lurk in an hallucinatory darkness of fetid swamps and jungles .
Symbols of disillusion abound in Born on the Fourth of July , where a flag-waving patriot is transfigured into an antiwar demonstrator .
The Deer Hunter conceives of Vietnam as a metaphor for insanity , the arbitrary click of a gun in a game of Russian roulette signaling the difference between life and death for American GIs addicted to the madness of war and hell in a very small place .
Years after the war , Vietnam remained a buzzword for something else , never for itself ; a short-hand for disaster .
But for us Vietnamese who made America our new country , Vietnam remains home , a place of controlled forgetting and even more controlled remembering .
In that grey space between remembering and forgetting , most of us invented new lives .
So , for many Vietnamese , April 30 is a day of re-invention and rebirth .
Twenty five years after Saigon 's fall , most of us have inched away from the margins of American life .
We learned English , managed America 's raucous sounds , even as we preserved our multiple versions of the old .
Across America , in Orange County in California , in Houston and Dallas , Arlington and Falls Church , Virginia , Saigon has been resurrected .
In these " Little Saigons , " mini- malls are filled with American-style Vietnamese supermarkets , restaurants , bakeries , nail and hair salons , medical and law offices , travel agencies , and every type of service business .
Ice cream parlors are called " Givrard " and " Brodard " , and restaurants " Pasteur , " after those once frequented in Saigon .
South Vietnam 's flag of yellow with three red horizontal stripes often flies side-by-side with the Star-Spangled banner .
Vietnam remembered remains the stuff of dreams , a voluptuous mix of reproduced scent and sound .
For the generation raised as hyphenated Americans , Vietnam hovers in the recesses of their lives , through stories told by parents and , increasingly , in this technological age , with a click to such websites as ‘ Viet.story ' , ‘ Viet.travel ' , etc .
VC nowadays means not Vietcong , but venture capitalist .
Twenty five years after the exodus from Vietnam , a reverse exodus is taking place .
The Viet Kieu , as the Vietnamese diaspora is called , are returning by the thousands , bringing to Vietnam the precious American dollar .
There , we find ice cream parlors called " Baskin-Robbins , " restaurants owned by locals called " Café California , " and bars with names like " Apocalypse Now . "
For those left behind , it is America that is the stuff of dreams , the American passport that is admired .
In Ho Chi Minh City , a name not even Communist officials use , Saigon remains its old brash , energetic , and audacious self .
In the city that bears his name , Ho Chi Minh is more or less ignored , although his portraits loom alongside Sony and Coca Cola signs .
Before 1986 , it was a crime to own a private business .
As a result of economic reforms , the private economy , especially in Saigon , surpasses the official state economy .
In the city 's markets , on sidewalks and in alleyways , everyone peddles something .
After twenty five years of collapsed expectations , you feel a raw energy in the roar of motorbikes that weave through improvisational waves of traffic , in the spirit of a city revived .
Four years ago , I gave a series of lectures at the invitation of the Ministry of Education and squeezed in a visit with my uncle , a Vietcong who stayed behind after the Communist victory .
What he wanted to learn was how his Mekong Delta province could attract some of the foreign investment going mostly to Saigon .
Hanoi 's officials , too , resent that investors fly to their city to get approval for deals , only to do business in the South .
April 30 is indeed called the Day of Liberation in Vietnam : 1.5 million Vietnamese died during that war ; 3 million were wounded .
But as my uncle suggests , perhaps it was the South that ultimately liberated the North .
