Putin ’ s Ark
Recently I visited Moscow after five years away .
The city , which looked different and strange , impressed me by its ability to change .
My days back in Russia were divided between official meetings , hours wasted in traffic jams , and nights spent with old friends who tried to show me the best of Moscow nightlife .
On my first free evening , I was invited to a place called “ Shinok . ”
The restaurant had many of the traits found in ethnic restaurants everywhere .
Different bits of kitsch , this time Ukrainian , were richly represented .
But the interior decoration had one unique element – an artificial wall with windows separating a part of the restaurant hall .
Behind the wall was a stage set of a village yard .
A real cow , as well as chickens and geese populated that ersatz farmyard .
At times an old woman in traditional dress appeared to feed the animals . Visitors enjoying borscht and pirogi observed her efforts with satisfaction .
“ She works for the restaurant , ” my acquaintance explained . “ She feeds animals and sits in the yard to create the rustic ambiance . ”
Shinok was just an introduction to today ’ s new wave of Moscow restaurant culture .
A few days later , I visited “ The White Sun of the Desert , ” another ethnic hangout .
The White Sun existed in Soviet times .
Back then , it was called “ Uzbekistan ” and was nothing more than an obligatory culinary demonstration of the supposedly unbreakable union of the USSR ’ s fifteen fraternal republics .
Although the restaurant interior had completely changed since then , its decorative themes remained the same .
Nowadays , however , the establishment is named after a popular Soviet borscht-western ( or “ eastern ” ) filmed in 1969 and set in Central Asia during the 1919 Civil War .
The restaurant is decorated not only with oriental carpets , but with life-size figures of the movie ’ s heroes firing machine guns or sitting on crates of dynamite .
This Soviet “ orientalism ” is reinforced by pretty waitresses dressed in sexy outfits more inspired by the Arabian Nights than by any Central Asian reality – then or now .
But the Soviet past , not ethnic motifs , are the biggest element in contemporary Muscovite restaurant design .
The club-restaurant “ Major Pronin : ” is conveniently located in the vicinity of the KGB-FSB headquarters .
It is named after the hero of bad Soviet-era spy novels , a figure who was also the butt of many underground jokes .
The restaurant ’ s interior is decorated with various pieces of espionage equipment .
But the main attraction is a shooting gallery where patrons can test their skills between courses .
Targets depicting serial killers and drug dealers have mottos like “ Save a woman ” or “ Save a boy ” on them . In the middle of the wall is a target representing New York ’ s World Trade Center being approached by an aircraft , with the inscription “ Save America . ”
A new club called “ Zone ” – Russian slang for a concentration camp – is designed to reproduce the feeling of gulag life .
Barking Alsatian dogs , stern guards , and waiters dressed in inmate uniforms work hard to recreate the gulag ’ s sinister atmosphere .
Russian literature is not forgotten .
If the restaurant “ Pushkin ” on Tverskoy Boulevard not far from the monument to the great Russian poet is designed to recreate the “ aristocratic atmosphere ” of the early nineteenth century , the combined bar and diner called “ Gogol ” on Stoleshnikov Lane is an attempt to recreate a vanished Soviet institution called “ rumochnaia . ”
A “ rumka ” is a vodka glass from which exhausted proletarians could revive themselves .
Of course “ rumochnaia ” had nothing in common with Nikolai Gogol , but the establishment named after the famous writer does have a skating rink that is used once a day by a man dressed up as Gogol .
After my return to Washington , I had a dinner with an American politician who had just visited Saint Petersburg .
As a special honor , his Russian hosts organized an excursion to Strelna , the “ Russian Versailles , ” which was recently restored from ruin to become the Petersburg residence of President Vladimir Putin .
The palace didn ’ t impress the American .
The amount of marble used for renovation seemed excessive , and the understanding of what constitutes luxury appeared to correspond to the standards of a Holiday Inn .
The American ’ s excited Russian hosts asked him constantly for his opinion of the palace . Throughout the tour , the American answered with polite exclamations like “ exquisite ” or “ striking . ”
Finally , they reached the attic .
At last , the American was excited .
The attic of the presidential residence was designed as a belly of the seventeenth-century ship . “ The last time I saw something like this was in a Hamburg beer hall in the 1960 ’ s , ” the politician told me .
How perfect , I thought , as I imagined Russia ’ s president climbing the stairs to the attic of his palace to play the role of Peter the Great .
Like the customers in that Ukrainian-style village restaurant , perhaps Putin found his attic ark reassuring in some unconscious way .
A historical wave beyond his control had lifted the former KGB lieutenant colonel from out of the shadows to the pinnacle of power .
But fate might also just as suddenly wash him away .
What could be better than to have an ark at hand if one day the political tides turn ?
Please visit this link for full size photos :
http : / / www.project-syndicate.org / akinsha / photos.html
