Schadenfreude Capitalism
PRINCETON – The protracted financial and economic crisis discredited first the American model of capitalism , and then the European version .
Now it looks as if the Asian approach may take some knocks , too .
Coming after the failure of state socialism , does this mean that there is no correct way of organizing an economy ?
In the aftermath of the subprime crisis and the collapse of Lehman Brothers , fingers were pointed at the United States as an example of how badly things could go wrong .
The American model had supposedly failed , its reputation weakened first by the Iraq invasion , and then by the financial crisis .
Anyone who dreamed of the American way of life now looked stupid .
Immediately after Lehman Brothers ’ collapse , German Finance Minister Peer Steinbrück put this diagnosis as a challenge not only to the US , but also to other countries – notably the United Kingdom – that had “ Americanized ” their financial system .
The problem , Steinbrück argued , lay in over-reliance on highly complex financial instruments , propagated by globalized American institutions : “ The financial crisis is above all an American problem .
The other G-7 financial ministers in continental Europe share this opinion . ”
Criticism of America did not stop there .
Steinbrück ’ s successor , Wolfgang Schäuble , persisted in the same tone , attacking “ clueless ” American monetary policy , which was supposedly designed only to feed the American financial monster .
But such criticism ignores the problems faced by banks that did not use or deal in complex financial products .
Bank regulators had long insisted that the safest possible financial instrument was a bond issued by a rich industrial country .
Then came the eurozone ’ s sovereign-debt crisis , with its roots in lax government finance in some ( mostly southern European ) countries .
Critics now had a new focus .
Naturally , many conservative Americans were delighted by the imminent failure of what they saw as Europe ’ s tax-and-spend model , with its addiction to a costly and inefficient welfare state .
They were not the only critics .
The chairman of China Investment Corporation , Jin Liquin , commented skeptically on a proposed Chinese bailout of Europe , which he called “ a worn-out welfare society ” with “ outdated ” welfare laws that induce dependence and sloth .
Criticism of large European transfer payments may have some justification , say , insofar as French , Greek , and Italian civil servants could indeed retire young .
And restrictive labor laws have indeed discouraged many firms from hiring new workers .
But such criticism captures only one small part of Europe ’ s difficulties .
The fiscal problems of Greece and Spain were also the result of spending a great deal on high-technology and high-prestige projects : facilities for the Olympic Games , new airport buildings , high-speed train links .
And Spain and Ireland before the crisis did not have a fiscal problem , owing to the rapid economic growth produced by a real-estate boom that seemed to promise a new era of economic miracles .
One of the most widely used Chinese terms of recent years is 幸灾乐祸 ( xìng zāi lè huò ) , best translated as “ schadenfreude ” : somebody else – some other society – tripped on an enormous political banana peel .
Asian critics looking at America and Europe could easily convince themselves that the Western model of democratic capitalism was collapsing .
But haven ’ t similar capital investments and soaring property prices also been an increasingly important part of China ’ s transformation since the 1990 ’ s ?
Chinese citizens are now not only frustrated with the high-speed trains ’ increasingly obvious imperfections and inadequacies , but are also wondering whether their government has set the right priorities .
Schadenfreude comes in several flavors .
Russia ’ s Prime Minister Vladimir Putin and Argentina ’ s President Christina Kirchner liked to think that their versions of a controlled economy and society built in the aftermath of default on foreign debt offered a more viable alternative to cosmopolitan international capitalism .
Both now face major problems with disillusioned populations .
In short , the world ’ s major economies share many more vulnerabilities than is commonly supposed .
A response to global challenges based simply on schadenfreude may promote a short-term sense of well-being , as people often like to think how lucky they are to have escaped a mess that originated elsewhere .
But soon they encounter their own banana peel ; indeed , today ’ s global economy is a riot of slipping economic models .
And tomorrow the cacophony will be even louder .
So , is there any absolutely sure way of organizing economic life ?
If the quest is for a way of securing perpetual security or dominance , then the answer is “ no . ”
Underpinning comparisons of different models is the wish to find an absolutely secure way of generating wealth and prosperity .
In a market economy , however , competition rapidly leads to emulation , and high profits associated with an original innovation turn out to be transitory .
From a longer-term perspective , there are only temporary surges of relative wealth , just as there are only temporary surges of apparent success in a particular way of doing business .
During the Industrial Revolution in Western Europe in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries , the pioneers and innovators in textiles , steel , and railroads were not , on the whole , rewarded with immense riches : their profits were competed away .
The late nineteenth and the twentieth century produced a different sort of growth , because public policies and resources could be used to protect accumulated wealth from the otherwise inevitable erosion stemming from competitive pressure .
Behind the idea of a particular model of growth was the belief that a sensibly ordered state could somehow capture and eternalize the fruits of economic success .
Like it or not , states cannot organize themselves in that way any more than individuals can .
