The History of Russia ’ s Future
MOSCOW – Strategic vision has never been a Russian attribute , and it certainly was absent in 2012 .
Russia ’ s vast territory continually seems to obscure for its leaders the need to plan for the future , while its seemingly infinite supply of natural resources convinces them that the country can handle any contingency .
As a result , Russia is perpetually unprepared for the future .
Indeed , just as its leaders failed to prepare for the fall of communism , the softening of the Russian economy shows that they are poorly equipped for the coming decades , which will be characterized by depleted resources , a declining population , and shrinking territory .
Vladimir Putin ’ s return to the presidency this year marked a new low for Russian strategic vision .
After all , the past is the only future that Putin has ever wanted for the country .
When the Soviet Union collapsed , the Kremlin lost not only control of vast portions of territory , but also half of the USSR ’ s nearly 300 million people .
Since then , the population has fallen by millions more , owing to Russia ’ s high mortality rate , especially among men .
Over the same period , the population of the United States has grown from 248 million to more than 300 million .
Despite calls by the Russian public for reform – from modernization of the military and decrepit and corrupt legal institutions to diversification of the economy beyond natural-resource extraction and the military-industrial complex – Putin has stuck to his autocratic guns .
When Defense Minister Anatoly Serdyukov tried to reform Russia ’ s armed forces – by expanding the military ’ s training in modern defense techniques , cutting costs , and boosting efficiency – he was replaced by Sergei Shoigu , Moscow ’ s former governor and a die-hard Putin loyalist , who restored the outdated system .
Even the army ’ s new uniforms , which border on the comic with their eighteenth-century epaulets and World War II jackets , invoke the past , rather than provide the comfort and efficiency needed in modern warfare .
More ominously , in a move reminiscent of Stalin , Putin has initiated a new anti-extremism law , according to which anyone can be accused of terrorism , espionage , being a foreign agent , or disseminating hatred .
The law has proven to be a powerful tool in stifling dissent , which can include mass protests against election fraud , journalists working to expose corruption , or a librarian in Siberia fulfilling a patron ’ s request for a banned book .
Likewise , Putin ’ s foreign policy remains mired in old Russian obsessions , beginning with restoring the empire in whatever form possible .
In his effort to prove that losing its imperial status has not diminished Russia ’ s global role , Putin has meddled relentlessly in international decisions , opposing sanctions against Iran and supporting Syrian President Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime , even as it slaughters its own citizens .
Furthermore , while Russia has finally joined the World Trade Organization , doubts about the country ’ s human-rights record persist .
In 2009 , for example , Sergei Magnitsky , a lawyer , was accused of embezzlement after uncovering a fraudulent tax-refund scheme run by Russian officials .
He died in prison after he was badly beaten and denied medical treatment .
In response , the US Congress has just enacted the Sergei Magnitsky Rule of Law Accountability Act , which prohibits anyone implicated in Magnitsky ’ s detention or death – or others suspected of gross human-rights abuses – from entering the US or using its banking system .
Similar laws have been adopted in Canada and across Western Europe .
But , instead of admitting the crime and working to bring the perpetrators to justice , Russia ’ s leaders have fought back , declaring that certain Europeans and Americans will , in turn , be barred from visiting Russia .
Putin ’ s unwillingness to heed popular discontent , and his failure to develop relations with the West during his 12 years in power , has backed him into a corner – and he is running out of ideas .
In his most recent attempt to restore Russia ’ s empire , he announced the creation of the Eurasian Economic Union with Belarus and Kazakhstan .
( Putin is courting the other ex-Soviet Central Asian countries , as well as Ukraine and Georgia ) .
But , even here , the President is bullying the very leaders he seeks to woo .
Given that Ukraine ’ s participation would significantly enhance the union ’ s legitimacy , Russia is using all available tactics – from lower gas prices to trade sanctions – to persuade its leaders to join .
But Ukraine ’ s President Viktor Yanukovych , who nurtures his own thuggish reputation , wants no part of it .
Putin ’ s effort to unify the ex-Soviet states is hardly the only initiative that exemplifies his flawed vision .
In order to appeal to the leaders of East Asia ’ s fast-growing economies – which Putin has called the most important factor for Russia ’ s long-term success – the government spent billions of dollars this year to modernize the dilapidated port of Vladivostok .
But , given that Asian leaders view Russia as little more than a natural-resource milk cow , it is far from clear that the investment will pay off , particularly given the absence of a comprehensive economic-development plan for the region .
Putin hopes that harsh policies , at home and abroad , will allow him to maintain a stranglehold on Russia .
But they have merely ensured the country ’ s decline .
As 2013 begins , Russia is back on the hamster wheel of history , treating the past as prologue – and thus wasting its resources and blighting its people ’ s lives .
