Olympian Economics
LONDON – As Olympic mania swept the world in recent weeks , it transported the host country , Great Britain , to a rare display of public exultation .
Indeed , the successes of “ Team GB ” produced an upsurge of patriotic rejoicing akin to victory in war .
Britain finished third in the gold medal count , behind the United States and China , much larger countries , but ahead of Russia , which traditionally competes with America for first place .
So , what is the secret of Olympic success ?
The acquisition of medals , precisely because it gives so much satisfaction , has become the object of scientific inquiry and national endeavor .
Before the 2012 Games , the Financial Times combined four economic models to produce the following “ consensus ” prediction of gold medals ( the actual results are in brackets ) : 1 .
Germany , 9 ( 11 ) . The gold medal rankings and overall medal placement ( gold , silver , and bronze ) were correctly predicted in all cases .
The most striking finding is that the medal count can be predicted with great accuracy from four key variables : population , GDP per capita , past performance , and host status .
Everything else – different training structures , better equipment , and so forth – is pretty much noise .
The impact of population and GDP is obvious : A large population increases the chance that a country will have athletes with the natural talent to win medals , and a high GDP means that it will have the money to invest in the infrastructure and training needed to develop medal-winning athletes .
Past performance is also important : the visibility and prestige of a sport increases after Olympic success , as does funding .
Medals attract money ; failure results in cuts .
Finally , the “ home advantage ” includes not just the benefit of morale and the opportunity to train in the actual Olympic venues , but also the funding boost that host status brings .
In 2004 , British athletes received £ 70 million ( $ 110 million ) .
By 2008 , after London was awarded the 2012 Games , the total was £ 245 million , and stood at £ 264 million this year .
Over the past ten Olympics , the host country has won 54 % more medals on average than when it was not the host .
Hosting the Olympics boosts performance before the hosted Games , and has effects that outlast them .
Some sports are more sensitive to income and host-nation effects than others .
Equestrianism , sailing , cycling , and swimming , for example , are far more expensive than running , and this reduces the participation of low-income countries .
It is almost impossible for some countries to produce medal-winning athletes in some sports – Ethiopia has only one swimming pool per six million people .
Sometimes , poor countries are priced out of a sport .
India was historically strong at field hockey , winning almost all of the gold medals between 1928 and 1968 , but , since the Games switched from grass to expensive synthetic turf , the Indians have won just one field hockey medal .
Some of the sports at which Britain has done particularly well , like cycling and rowing , are most highly influenced by income and host effects .
Brazil can therefore expect to improve considerably on its modest haul ( 15 medals ) and 21st-place finish when it hosts the 2016 Games .
As for the others , the formula for success is fairly simple : select your potentially winning sports , pick the potential medalists in those sports , pour money into them , and stick with both the sports and the players until the medals roll in .
The funding can be corporate sponsorship ( as in the United States ) , state money ( as in China ) , or a mixture of National Lottery and state money ( as in the United Kingdom ) .
Two questions arise . First , why should a country concentrate on accumulating trophies at the expense of other desirable goods ?
And , second , can the formula for “ picking winners ” in sports be replicated for competitive success in international trade ?
The answer to the first is not obvious .
An economist would probably argue that money spent on education , housing , and health care brings more “ welfare ” than money spent in the quest for medals .
When all is said and done , sports is entertainment ; the others are necessities .
But that argument ignores the effect of sporting success on national morale , an intangible factor in a country ’ s success in other , more “ serious , ” spheres of endeavor .
A country that can succeed in one sphere of peaceful competition is encouraged to feel that it can do well in others .
One can treat this claim with a certain degree of skepticism – after all , the 2004 Athens Olympics failed to produce a Greek economic miracle .
But it does lead to the second question : Can the methods that produce Olympic winners be applied elsewhere ?
Nothing is more discredited in Anglo-American economics than the policy of “ picking winners . ”
The consensus has been that it inevitably leads to the state “ backing losers . ”
Economic success , on this view , is best left to the unfettered play of market forces .
This philosophy has been heavily jolted by two inconvenient facts : the financial collapse of 2007-2008 and the experience of countries like Japan , South Korea , Taiwan , Germany , and even the US , where economic success depended heavily on sustained government investment of the kind that has produced Olympic medals .
As in sports , so in economic life : government commitment can start a virtuous circle of success , while government neglect can trigger a vicious circle of decline .
Nevertheless , the popular hunger for sporting success , and the celebratory outpouring that it evokes , is bound to provoke some disquiet .
It seems to mark humanity ’ s retreat into infantilism .
But if the douceur of sports can channel aggressive passions into benign , if trivial pursuits , why should we deny our star performers their heroic stature ?
