Russia ’ s Bo-Toxic President Returns
MOSCOW – When a tsar is treated with mockery , rather than regarded with awe , it is time for him to consider retirement , or to prepare for a palace coup .
Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin , who intends to stage a glorious return to the Kremlin as President in the election scheduled for March next year , should reflect on that choice .
This year began with a vigorous ( by Russian standards ) Internet petition urging Putin to take the first option .
Then the whole country laughed when , during his customary visit to a patriotic summer camp run by Nashi ( a pro-Putin youth movement ) , he demonstrated his physical prowess by scaling a rock-climbing wall , only to find that he couldn ’ t climb down .
Now Russians wonder what has happened to their leader ’ s face .
His new smooth-faced appearance has sparked rumors of Botox , or even plastic surgery .
Vampire jokes abound .
Recently , during a dive in the waters at Krasnodar , in southern Russia , Putin miraculously salvaged two ancient Greek urns .
Russians ’ laughter turned Homeric when Putin ’ s spokesman , Dmitry Peskov , inexplicably announced that the urns had been placed there to give Putin a sense of importance .
If I didn ’ t take the incompetence of the Russian state at face value , I might suspect a conspiracy to discredit Putin .
For , make no mistake : Putin has been discredited .
After a recent martial-arts match between an American and a Russian , Putin , a judo enthusiast , stepped into the ring to congratulate the Russian victor , a member of his United Russia party .
The audience screamed wildly , “ Putin , go home ! ” until he did .
Politics , the crowd seemed to say , should be taken out of sports – and Putin out of politics .
Putin thinks that his stunts are essential to governance .
He has kissed dolphins and babies , saved tigers and journalists , and posed bare-chested on horseback and on foot in the Siberian wilderness .
But Putin the performer cannot abide a bad review .
Embarrassed by the judo fiasco , he canceled all of his subsequent unscripted public appearances .
In fact , since that incident , Putin has attended just one event – the Congress of United Russia – where 600 delegates voted unanimously for his nomination as the party ’ s presidential candidate in 2012 .
But the parliamentary elections held on December 4 , which gave barely 50 % to United Russia ( Putin used to be able to guarantee about 70 % ) , had to be fiercely controlled , with an overwhelming police presence .
Observers were harassed and obstructed , and monitoring Web sites were shut down or hacked by the government .
An elections-observing mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe noted that “ most parties have expressed a lack of trust in the fairness of the electoral process . ”
Putin ’ s extravagant vanity has severely undermined the strongman image that he has spent the last 12 years building .
After all , narcissistic publicity stunts and facelifts – which worked well for his friend Silvio Berlusconi in Italy ( until they didn ’ t ) – don ’ t inspire fear , or even respect , among Russians , where an iron-fisted ruler is always the preferred choice .
So now Putin ’ s image as the hard man of politics has been lost forever .
It is difficult to assume a despotic countenance when you can ’ t move your eyebrows .
Indeed , Russians heckle Putin not because he has turned Russia into an industrial banana republic , where exports of oil and other commodities sustain a quasi-authoritarian state , but because he no longer inhabits his role convincingly .
All the same , the origin of discontent with Putin is irrelevant ; the desire for freedom has to start somewhere .
So long as Russians feel empowered to confront the regime , even if only with contempt and laughter , there is hope for change .
And now , with the election results inciting the largest protests since the collapse of the Soviet Union , that hope is growing .
When a tsar loses his image of omnipotence , he eventually loses his grip on authority .
After Putin ’ s long-running melodrama , the Kremlin ’ s options for a sequel are quite limited .
Everyone expects that the current president , the puppet Dmitry Medvedev , to switch roles with Putin after the March elections .
But waiting in the wings is former Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin , who could replace Medvedev should Russia need a factotum of sincerity about economic reform .
Kudrin ’ s reputation for placid competence might just buy Putin some extra time .
But , in Putin ’ s eyes , this is an unlikely scenario .
The once and future president argues that he has already made Russia stronger , and that , as financial uncertainty grips much of the developed world in 2012 , the country has become an island of stability envied by many .
Perhaps , but it is difficult to be a heroic leader and the butt of popular jokes simultaneously .
Putin is often compared to Joseph Stalin , but nowadays , as the 20th anniversary of the Soviet Union ’ s collapse at the end of 1991 approaches , he looks increasingly like Leonid Brezhnev – the symbol of a political system that is well past its expiry date .
All that is missing are the jowls .
