A Putin Boom ?
MOSCOW : Vladimir Putin has more to celebrate than his election as Russia ’ s president in his own right .
After a decade of horrific turmoil , Russia ’ s economy is at last turning around .
Recently , the Moscow brokers Brunswick Warburg predicted that Russia ’ s GDP will surge 5 % this year .
That growth should give President Putin - if he is patient and persistent - leeway to tackle the longer term reforms his country needs if it is to become the powerful state he seeks it to be .
Until now , a broad consensus forecast 1-2 % growth in Russia this year .
The reason behind that uninspiring consensus is simple : people - economists and investors alike - have become so pessimistic about Russia that they no longer can see positive facts .
The conventional wisdom is that Russian industrial growth is only an effect of high oil prices and import substitution , facilitated by a great devaluation of the ruble .
Considering that Russia ’ s growth was 3.2 % last year , a staggering 8.8 % in the last quarter , this makes little sense .
Growth , indeed , is accelerating .
Dynamism like this does not stop without a major shock .
Industrial growth was 8.1 % last year , and has accelerated since , to 14 % in February .
Oil and gas have not led the recovery ; indeed , they stagnated last year .
Major industries with 16-22 % growth were chemicals , light manufacturing , pulp and paper , and machine building ; that is , intermediary goods and simple manufacturing , exactly the kind of industries economists like to see expanding at this stage of a recovery .
Within each industry , the best enterprises dash ahead , as should be the case when real restructuring is taking place .
Another tired argument is that Russia ’ s growth is superficial and not generated by investment .
However , recovery in transition economies from Estonia to Poland to Hungary is usually export led .
Investments tend to follow recovery , as there is so much underutilized capital around .
Even so , investment actually increased by 6 % in 1999 and is rising further .
But the most over-hyped argument concerns Russia ’ s feeble tax collection .
But this obscures the real issue , which is excessive government expenditures .
Last year the government put its finances in order by cutting wasteful and corrupt expenditures , such as enterprise subsidies .
The total government budget deficit stopped at 1.7 % of GDP .
This year it will be nearly eliminated .
Barter and arrears ( ie , debts between factories and firms ) , long major concerns , are also diminishing .
Since the financial crash of August 1998 all kinds of arrears have fallen by two / thirds in real terms and barter by half .
One reason was that in 1999 almost 10,000 loss-making Russian enterprises were put into bankruptcy .
The financial crash introduced hard budget constraints on Russian enterprises ; they realized they had to make money , prompting rapid monetization .
Today , we are seeing the structural changes that we had hoped to see years ago .
Russia is getting some return from the substantial structural reforms it has actually undertaken .
The last real worry was the foreign balance .
Russia has a substantial foreign debt service , but the recent London Club deal reduced Soviet-era debt to commercial banks by half , easing the pressure mightily .
A similar deal is likely in the Paris Club for the regulation of debts to governments .
During the last few months Russia ’ s international reserves have grown sharply , as one would expect of a country with a staggering trade surplus of $ 33 billion this year and which is likely to surge to over $ 40 billion this year . Of course , Russia is still hemorrhaging money .
But the cause of Russia ’ s so-called capital flight is a poor bank system and its dysfunctional tax system .
Fortunately , Russia now has such liberal currency regulations that Russians can keep their money in good international banks instead .
All of these changes mark the beginning of the end of the era of the oligarchs , ushered in with the presidential elections of 1996 .
Mr. Putin has no need for the oligarchs to provide him with media support to avert a communist threat or offer a conduit for covert state financing .
To him , Boris Berezovsky and his cronies are a nuisance ; most are already been broken to Putin ’ s will .
Instead , a new group of Russian businessmen , mainly manufacturers , are rising .
Their increasing strength is a reflection of robust economic growth , which promotes production for the market rather than sheer redistribution of resources , implying a new sort of politics .
Last October , McKinsey Global Institute published a major empirical report of Russian industry .
Its conclusion was that Russia had real and human capital suitable to sustain a growth rate of 8 % a year , and that its problem was primarily the distortions imposed by a poorly functioning tax system and the absence of a land market .
However , neither the bank system nor the legal system were actually impediments at this stage of development .
They will become important as Russia moves to the next stage of growth , and so these new businessmen are demanding these reforms .
Mr. Putin is no great thinker or reformer , but he is astute and genuinely popular .
He is likely to surf on the current wave of economic growth , using broad consensus about the need for reform to clean up the state administration , and liberalize a tax regime which , though grossly inefficient , is heavy-handed when it goes after a company .
Land reform remains so controversial he may shrink from addressing the issue .
My greatest worry is not Putin but that Russia will face an excessive inflow of foreign portfolio investment again , as in 1997 .
Fortunately , the bond markets are dead , and it might take a year to revive them .
Their absence makes it difficult to invest too large amounts of money in Russian securities .
Something fundamental has changed in the Russian economy .
A time comes when all disasters have occurred and all stupidities are recognized .
For Russia , August 1998 marked that dividing line .
It was a horrendous shock , imposing great social costs , but it changed Russia ’ s mentality , not only the exchange rate .
