Ollanta Humala ’ s Limited Options
BUENOS AIRES – The big question in Latin America today is this : Will Peru ’ s newly elected president , Ollanta Humala , orient his country toward Venezuela ’ s Hugo Chávez and his radical allies ?
Or will he choose the path taken by Brazil ’ s former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva and the region ’ s other moderate politicians ?
Humala ’ s own ambiguous words offer little guidance .
So the direction in which he intends to lead must be read from his actions , and these are unlikely to be definitive in the short term .
Peru ’ s domestic and international situation , however , will frame his main decisions .
Humala is no novice politician rising to victory on charm and luck .
In the presidential election of June 2006 , he received 45.5 % of the vote – not enough to defeat Alan García , but sufficient to show how deeply he had tapped into the hopes and trust of many Peruvians .
At that time , populism seemed an unstoppable force in Latin America .
Fueled by an oil boom and vast social spending , Chávez was flying high , blessed and supported by the aging but still active Fidel Castro .
Across the región , Chávez ’ s influence was strong .
His backing was a decisive influence in the election of Bolivia ’ s President Evo Morales in 2006 , and the following year he supported Daniel Ortega in Nicaragua and Rafael Correa in Ecuador , though his impact on their victories is hotly debated .
In 2006 , Humala praised Chavez ’ s policies as a sign of a new era in Latin America .
But , in the recent presidential campaign , he suggested that his policies would resemble those of Lula , not Chávez .
In particular , he would seek to emulate Lula ’ s efforts to include vast sectors of the population in the benefits of a strong economy .
Today , with Venezuela ’ s economy mired in high inflation and overly dependent on oil , Chávez is fading as a regional model and guide .
He has also been startled by the rise of domestic opposition .
So Brazil ’ s mix of diversified economic growth and redistribution is a far more appealing example .
Indeed , a major reason for Humala ’ s victory was García ’ s inability to secure the benefits of growth for Peru ’ s poorest people .
Humala ’ s main campaign argument was that he would not risk the “ success ” of Peru ’ s economy , but would , on the contrary , strengthen it .
His fight against poverty and social exclusion would be undertaken as part of that effort .
Humala comes to power in a regional environment of moderation and growing economic integration , which he would disturb at his peril .
García recently signed an economic agreement with Chile , Colombia , and Mexico , called Pacto del Pacífico , which is destined to reorient Latin America ’ s economies .
These countries will jointly seek to develop a bigger presence in Asian markets , and to offer developed countries a safe option for capital investments in emerging markets .
Moreover , each of the countries has bilateral free-trade agreements with the others and with the United States ( though the US Congress has yet to approve the United States-Colombia Trade Promotion Agreement , as it is officially known ) .
Breaking with these strategic policies would harm Peru ’ s economy .
It would also harm Humala ’ s domestic political base and isolate him in the region .
He would not be able to lean on Brazil , the moderating regional power , but would inevitably fall under the sway of Chávez and Morales , deterring foreign investors and harming the country ’ s foreign relations .
Cuba is out of the question as a patron , due to its preoccupation with Raúl Castro ’ s efforts to reshape its depleted economy in an improbable bid for Chinese-style capitalism in a one-party state .
So Humala ’ s Latin American options are limited : Venezuela , Brazil , or the countries of the Pacto del Pacífico .
Although the last two options might be difficult to merge – Mexico might not want the competition of such a large player as Brazil – they are not mutually exclusive .
In fact , Brazil ’ s leaders have good reason to be flexible : their country needs the access to the Pacific that Peru and Chile offer .
The local stock market ’ s fall immediately after Humala ’ s victory is a clear sign that the most influential forces in the Peruvian economy will continue to press for deeds , not promises – deeds that benefit their interests , of course .
Humala most likely will not follow market dictates robotically .
But he will not be able wholly to avoid them .
Finally , there is the question of political effectiveness .
Humala ’ s coalition , Gana Perú , will have a plurality of representatives in Peru ’ s congress , but will need the votes of ex-president Alejandro Toledo ’ s party to have a controlling majority .
Toledo , a Stanford graduate and a moderate politician , supported Humala during the campaign and provided him with economic advisers , which proved to be decisive in establishing the credibility of Humala ’ s retreat from radical policies .
Both the internal and external environments in which Humala finds himself – and the fact that he won by a margin of only three percentage points – seem to call for moderation and consensus .
Half of Peru ’ s citizens did not side with him .
Polarization may have proved functional to winning an election , but Humala will have to broaden his support in order to forge the consensus he needs in order to govern .
