Spend in haste , repent at leisure : America ’ s latest bailout plan
Cambridge – With minds concentrated by fears of another 1930 ’ s-style Great Depression , America ’ s politicians have adopted , virtually overnight , a $ 700 billon bailout plan to resuscitate the country ’ s rapidly deflating financial sector .
The final deal is an elaborate piece of financial and political engineering whose ultimate effect is almost impossible to predict .
There are good reasons , however , to be skeptical that this will be the panacea that credit markets are ( literally ) banking on .
The plan ’ s central conceit is that government ingenuity can disentangle the trillion-dollar “ sub-prime ” mortgage loan market , even though Wall Street ’ s own rocket scientists have utterly failed to do so .
To boot , we are told that government is so clever that it might even make money on the whole affair .
Perhaps , but let ’ s not forget that a lot of very smart people in the financial industry thought the same thing until quite recently .
Just a year ago , the United States had five major freestanding investment banks that stood atop its mighty financial sector .
Collectively , their employees shared more than $ 36 billion dollars in bonuses last year , thanks to the huge profits these institutions “ earned ” on their risky and aggressive business strategies .
These strategies typically involve far more risk – and sophistication – than the activities of traditional commercial banks .
In mid-August , I had the temerity to predict that risks had come home to roost , and that a large US investment bank might soon fail or be forced into a highly distressed merger .
Little did I imagine that today , there would be no freestanding investment bank left on Wall Street .
Indeed , after years of attracting many of the world ’ s best and brightest into ultra-high paying jobs , collapsing investment banks are now throwing them out left and right .
One such victim , a former student , called me the other day and asked , “ What am I supposed to do now , get a real job ? ”
This brings us back to the US Treasury ’ s plan to spend hundreds of billions of dollars to unclog the sub-prime mortgage market .
The idea is that the US government will serve as buyer of last resort for the junk debt that the private sector has not been able to price .
Who , exactly , does the Treasury plan to employ to figure all this out ?
Why , unemployed investment bankers , of course !
Let ’ s ponder this .
Investment bankers have been losing their cushy jobs because they could not figure out any convincing way to price distressed mortgage debt .
Otherwise , their firms would have been able to tap the trillions of dollars now sitting on the sidelines , held by sovereign wealth funds , private equity groups , hedge funds , and others .
Now , working for the taxpayer , these same investment bankers will suddenly come up with the magic pricing formula that has eluded them until now .
Little wonder that academics across the political spectrum have expressed considerable skepticism .
True , the Treasury will take equity stakes in some firms , so there is some upside potential .
But the main concern centers around the Treasury ’ s apparent intention to pay more than double the current market price ( 20-30 cents on the dollar ) on the premise that Treasury ’ s success in untangling the mortgage market will make any discount seem like a bargain .
Does such nitpicking fail to recognize the urgency of fixing the financial system ?
Isn ’ t any plan better than none ?
I , for one , am not convinced .
Efficient financial systems are supposed to promote growth in the real economy , not impose a huge tax burden .
And the US financial sector , in greasing the wheels of the real economy , has been soaking up an astounding 30 % of corporate profits and 10 % of wages .
Thus , unlike in the 1930 ’ s , the US faces a hypertrophied financial system .
Isn ’ t it possible , then , that rather than causing a Great Depression , significant shrinkage of the financial sector , particularly if facilitated by an improved regulatory structure , might actually enhance efficiency and growth ?
I am not suggesting that the government should sit on its hands .
It needs to provide an expanded form of deposit insurance during this time of turmoil , so that there are no more Northern Rock-style bank runs .
That was a big lesson of the 1930 ’ s .
The government may also need to consider injecting funds more directly into the mortgage sector while the private sector reconstitutes itself .
Certainly , the government must also find better ways to help homeowners and their lenders work out efficient bankruptcy proceedings .
It makes no sense for banks to foreclose on homes when there are workout options whereby people could stay in their homes and banks could recover far more money .
Eventually , after further twists , turns , and huge expenditures , the US will emerge from its epic financial crisis .
But there is a significant risk that this latest step , however grand , might end up doing more for profits and bonuses in the financial sector than for the rest of the economy .
