Putin the Pleaser
MOSCOW : Russia ’ s election campaign was a bore .
I wish I could explain that it was tedious because we are now a normal democratic country , a place where politics is mundane , not a matter of life and death .
But Russia is still another type of country .
So a Russian election that seems Soviet in its utter predictability is not to be welcomed .
Fundamental issues remain unsettled ; hard choices must be made .
Informed , consent is needed , and our democratic election did not provide it .
Voters were so bored that there was real doubt that the minimum 51 % of all eligible voters would cast their ballots and thus make the election results valid .
Abstention on such a scale would at least have made the election interesting .
Outside Russia , of course , the world has been preoccupied by our so-called campaign , probably only because Russia ’ s democracy still seem such a novelty .
As expected for months , Vladimir Putin won by a wide margin .
No longer is he " acting " president .
Instead , Putin rules in his own right .
But what is his mandate ?
No one knows for certain .
Hints as to the general tenor of his presidency can , perhaps , be found in discovering why Putin ’ s star rose so meteorically .
Putin stands for change , inchoate change , but change nonetheless . For Russians tired of Boris Yeltsin long ago .
From a crowd favourite , an idol of women and intellectuals , Yeltsin turned into a feeble old man who aroused pity .
People were sick of his " unpredictability " , of his inability to control his temper or knock sense-- if not integrity--into the Kremlin ’ s corrupt gang .
People held Yeltsin responsible for making Russia a global laughing stock , and were sick of his broken promises .
All of this makes Yeltsin a tragic figure .
He assumed responsibilities beyond his strength .
He undoubtedly saved the freedoms Gorbachev brought--freedom of choice , speech , the press , freedom of conscience .
But he did not succeed in delivering real , sustainable freedom--the freedom to live in a responsible , safe , and stable state .
Under these circumstances , any presidential candidate chosen from Yeltsin 's entourage seemed doomed .
But Putin , because of his non-Moscow and non-Kremlin background , was able to overcome his patron .
He was not perceived as a man from the Kremlin ’ s ragged--through so many government reshuffles--pack of political cards .
He was not deemed a creature of the " family " ( Yeltsin 's trusted advisers , supporters and aids ) .
Putin 's youth , his energy , his ability to talk in a language crowds understand , are the visible signs of the change he seems to promise .
More importantly , he is all things to all people .
Our intelligentsia loves him because he regularly attends theatre , opera , and ballet .
Economists cheer because he understands the free market .
Lawyers are happy ; he promised to establish the " dictatorship of law . "
Politicians from across the political spectrum endorse him because his political program runs the gamut from communism to liberalism .
Last but not the least , he is a man of the military and KGB .
Chechnya also announced his promise of change .
Although many view the second Chechen war as a conspiracy launched with the presidential election in mind , it was the Chechens who handed Putin , through their invasion of Dagestan in August 1999 , a unifying cause and campaign theme .
Ever the opportunist , Putin caught the country ’ s mood and staked his future .
He chose the " unity of Russia , " and the " threat of Russia 's disintegration " as the foundation of his politics and so " took on the noble task to crack down on all separatists . "
Like the northern states that rallied to Abraham Lincoln during America ’ s Civil War , most Russians genuinely supported Putin , for he did not hesitate to fight for " Russia 's wholeness . "
That decision also played well with Russia ’ s wounded national pride , as it offered proof that Russia could act in its own interest , making tough decisions regardless of what the Western said .
Although re-conquering Chechnya focussed Putin ’ s energy , the real prize was Russia and he kept his eyes on it .
The promise to strengthen the state , imposing discipline and order , as encapsulated in the Chechen War seemed to make Putin 's presidential aspirations clear .
The " dictatorship of law , " the only kind of dictatorship Russia has never experienced in its history , is at the heart of his program and is the real source of his strength and popularity .
Russians like strong leaders , and everyone ( especially the West ) insists that Russia needs the rule of law .
Putin may be one of the few leaders ever to base his popularity on a promise to get tough .
Yet , despite his image as a hard man of the KGB , Putin is deft at pleasing people .
Indeed , his most astonishing attribute is intellectual flexibility , to say what everyone wants to hear .
Here Putin resembles a magic mirror .
Everyone who looks in it sees himself .
In a campaign , this is a useful quality , for it brings Putin close to everyone , to those who look forward and those who look back , to liberal democrats and ill-liberal conservatives , to nationalists , patriots , communists and independents , to federalists and confederalists .
Putin wears these many hats well .
But being all things to all people only works well only in a campaign .
Pursued in government , it can weaken .
Putin ’ s rule must amount to more than popularity if he is to be successful .
So what will Putin provide Russia ?
This is the mystery Russia faces , for after our boring campaign we left with only a guessing game .
This is just the opposite of what democracy should be .
Campaigns should excite and point the way ; governing is about the dull slog of detailed policies , and the effort to build enough support for necessary actions to enhance prosperity and freedom to take place .
Success here means opposing as much as pleasing .
To achieve results , Putin will have to stop pleasing everyone and start really governing .
