The Changing Climate on Climate Change
OSLO – In the early 1990s , when I was Prime Minister of Norway , I once found myself debating sustainable development with an opposition leader who insisted that I tell him the government ’ s single most important priority in that field .
Frustrated , I replied that what he was asking was impossible to answer .
I concluded our exchange by explaining why : “ Because everything is connected to everything . ”
Fortunately , such thinking is now more widely held than it was back then , thanks partly to the human development approach , which emphasizes the complexity of nature and recognizes that one-dimensional solutions cannot address multidimensional problems like those we currently face .
Indeed , today ’ s challenges are seldom simply environmental , social , or economic , and their solutions do not lie within the area of competence of a single government ministry .
Without broad , multidisciplinary impact analysis , such narrow thinking can lead to new problems .
This is particularly true of climate change .
Fortunately , a growing realization that rising global temperatures are not simply an environmental concern provides reason to hope that world leaders are finally ready to address the problem in an effective way .
Later this year , the member states of the United Nations will meet in Paris to adopt a comprehensive agreement to combat climate change .
In the talks leading up to the conference , a consensus has emerged that climate change is not only linked to many other major environmental problems ( climate , water , soil , and biodiversity are all a part of the same system ) ; it is also intertwined with social and economic challenges , like poverty , sustainable development , and the wellbeing of future generations .
There is no guarantee that the agreement reached in Paris will work .
As former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan wrote in December , “ All too frequently , leaders will concern themselves with matters that are closest at hand , while the most serious issues are often more distant – geographically or in time .
For example , if we fail to tackle climate change , the worst effects will be suffered by future generations and by poor countries far from global power centers . ”
At the same time , it is not only the future that should concern us .
As the economists Amartya Sen and Sudhir Anand argued more than a decade ago , “ It would be a gross violation of the universalist principle if we were to be obsessed about intergenerational equity without at the same time seizing the problem of intragenerational equity . ”
After ignoring the universalist principle for too long , world leaders finally seem to be acknowledging the magnitude of the problem – as well as their responsibilities to people far beyond their immediate electoral constituencies .
The climate agreement between the United States and China , announced last year , indicates that one of the major stumbling blocks in the negotiations – the schism between rich and poor countries – is being overcome .
With China now working to reverse the growth in its greenhouse-gas emissions , other developing countries will find it increasingly hard to argue against controlling their own emissions .
The European Union continues to set a high bar for action on climate change .
Last year , the EU pledged to cut greenhouse-gas emissions by at least 40 % , relative to 1990 levels , by 2030 .
By that year , at least 27 % of the EU ’ s energy is to come from renewable sources .
The EU ’ s pioneering carbon-trading scheme is also an important step forward , though emission allowances will have to be cut and the cost of emitting increased if the system is to be effective .
Investments in tomorrow ’ s energy supply and production processes will largely come from the private sector ; but it is up to government to develop the institutional and regulatory frameworks that ensure that these investments are allocated in ways that are environmentally sustainable .
Finally , the sharp rise in pledges to the “ Green Climate Fund ” indicates a growing recognition of the disproportionate impact of climate change on the world ’ s poorest and most vulnerable people .
Total national contributions have surpassed the preliminary target of $ 10 billion .
Countries such as Mexico , Panama , Indonesia , and Mongolia are now contributors , even if the main responsibility for the problem rests with the world ’ s major economies .
For billions of people , the stakes could not be higher .
This month , the UN is expected to adopt the Sustainable Development Goals , a set of global targets that represent a quantum leap forward from their predecessor , the Millennium Development Goals , in that they embed sustainability in every aspect of policy and practice .
But the SDG targets are unlikely to be met if world leaders are unable to forge a credible accord to limit the rise in global temperatures to 2 ° Celsius .
A stable climate provides the underpinnings for poverty reduction , prosperity , and the rule of law – in short , human development .
That , I might have told my opponent a generation ago , is the positive side of everything being connected .
