Why Did Putin Turn ?
PRINCETON – Russian President Vladimir Putin ’ s policy toward his country ’ s “ near abroad ” and the West has been badly misunderstood .
Instead of focusing on broader geopolitical patterns – in particular , the effect of the 2007-2008 financial crisis on global politics – commentators have been turning Kremlin policy into a psychodrama that can be understood only through a deep exploration of the Russian soul .
The result has been rampant misconceptions about what drove Putin ’ s shift from what seemed to be a modernizing , conciliatory , and even pro-Western stance to aggressive revisionism .
Two such flawed explanations for Russia ’ s current foreign policy have been offered .
The first , proposed by Germany ’ s self-described Putin-Versteher ( “ Putin sympathizers ” ) , is that Russian policy is a logical response to the West ’ s strategy of encirclement .
The eastward expansion of NATO and the European Union , they contend , was an unnecessary provocation .
In fact , none other than George Kennan , the originator of America ’ s Cold War containment strategy , opposed NATO enlargement in the 1990s on precisely these grounds .
There are obvious limits to this theory .
For starters , it is based on the claim that , at the time of the Berlin Wall ’ s collapse and the Soviet Union ’ s disintegration , the West promised that there would be no NATO expansion .
Even Mikhail Gorbachev , on the 25th anniversary of the Wall ’ s demise , accused the West of not keeping the promises it made in 1989 , instead taking “ advantage of Russia ’ s weakening ” in the 1990s to claim “ monopoly leadership and domination of the world , ” including through NATO enlargement .
But , in reality , the West never promised not to expand NATO .
In fact , in the spring of 1990 , the United States presented a powerful case that a reunifying Germany could not be part of two different security systems .
A more fundamental point is that Russia in the 1990s evinced little concern about the expansion of European economic and security structures into the Soviet Union ’ s former satellites in Central and Eastern Europe , or even into newly independent former Soviet republics .
If it had , it probably would not have taken the Kremlin nearly two decades to strike back .
The second popular explanation of Putin ’ s shift is that he is irrational , and that Russia ’ s foreign policy is merely an extension of the fantasies of a man who stages stunts like leading Siberian white cranes along their migration route in a motorized hang glider .
But that raises an obvious question : How did a person who once looked like Russia ’ s most modern and dependable ruler since Czar Alexander II – a man whom US President George W. Bush called “ very straightforward and trustworthy ” in 2001 – suddenly become crazier than Rasputin ?
A better explanation can be found by tracing the chronology of Russia ’ s foreign-policy shift , which began with the 2008 Georgia crisis .
When Georgia , which had been flirting with NATO membership , mounted a military response to attacks by secessionists in South Ossetia , an ethnic enclave whose government had been backed by the Kremlin for more than a decade , Russia launched a full-scale invasion to protect the region .
Russia also bolstered its presence in Abkhazia , another breakaway province .
The crisis , which was preceded by the large-scale issuance of Russian passports to Georgians , foreshadowed the deployment of Russian forces in Crimea under the pretense of protecting Russian citizens .
Rhetorically , the shift was apparent even earlier .
At the 2007 Munich Security Conference , Putin presented a new face , emphasizing the potential of the major emerging economies – Brazil , India , China , and Russia – to provide an alternative to what he viewed as an arbitrary unipolar world order .
Many observers were shocked by his statements , and took the speech as evidence of his insecurity or irrationality .
The next year , the financial crisis struck , convincing Putin that his assessment had been prophetic .
The crisis , in his view , was proof that the days of American global dominance were over .
In fact , before the crisis , Russia had acquiesced to the logic of global capitalism , recognizing the need to cooperate with multinational corporations to modernize and diversify an economy based on raw materials and energy production .
After the crisis , however , there was no longer as much to be gained from global markets – at least not in terms of power .
Instead , Russia ’ s best option was to cooperate with other countries that had adopted a similar model of state-centered capitalism , especially China .
Putin ’ s interpretation of the crisis was underpinned by political developments in America and Europe .
The US elected a president who appeared intent on scaling back America ’ s global commitments .
When the Arab Spring revolutions erupted , the US response was weak and muddled , oscillating between pro-democracy rhetoric and support for anti-Islamist autocrats .
This enabled Putin to project himself , particularly in Syria , as a credible proponent of geopolitical pragmatism .
Europe ’ s debt crisis – and its leaders ’ apparent inability to take coordinated action – gave the Kremlin additional ammunition .
Given that Europe ’ s overall debts and deficits are much lower than those of the US or Japan , the logic went , it should have been able to avoid polarization and paralysis .
More broadly , Putin ’ s belief that the economic crisis was causing the West to disintegrate aligns with traditional Soviet geopolitical thinking .
As Stephen Kotkin shows in his new biography of Stalin , Soviet policy was strictly rational .
The Great Depression convinced Stalin that the different factions of capitalism would go to war ; in 1938-1939 , Nazi aggression seemed to vindicate his analysis .
But Stalin ’ s predictions fell apart after Hitler ’ s defeat , when conflicting interests did not lead to a clash between the US and the United Kingdom .
While Western politicians and economic policymakers were trying to avert Great Depression II , Putin was already working on the assumption that it had arrived .
For the West , managing the resulting geopolitical imbroglio will be even more challenging than repairing its damaged economies .
