Leading By Engaging
WASHINGTON , DC – In his first inaugural address , US President Barack Obama offered an invitation to the world ’ s most closed countries . “ We will extend a hand , ” he said , “ if you are willing to unclench your fist . ”
This statement encapsulated the foreign policy of “ engagement ” that he endorsed during his first term – an approach that , despite some shortcomings , has a lot of merit .
Obama rejected his predecessor George W. Bush ’ s policy of isolating “ rogue states , ” recognizing that America ’ s only hope for influencing isolated countries ’ behavior was to engage directly with them in a bilateral context .
And , as a bilateral strategy , engagement has proved to be astonishingly successful , having led to historic openings , first to Myanmar and now to Cuba , while driving progress toward an enduring nuclear agreement with Iran .
From the beginning , however , the Obama administration has made clear that engagement is not an end in itself , but a means to various goals , both bilateral and regional .
In Myanmar , the bilateral goal was to nudge the government toward greater openness and democracy – something that has unquestionably happened .
The pro-democracy leader and Nobel laureate Aung San Suu Kyi was released from house arrest ; her party won seats in parliament ; and millions of Burmese are now studying their country ’ s constitution and have petitioned for amendments .
To be sure , much remains to be done .
The journalist Martin Woolacott describes Myanmar as a “ halfway house between military and civilian rule , ” observing that the country ’ s generals have been promising to complete the transition to democracy for several years now , yet remain unwilling to allow Suu Kyi to run for President .
But this should not obscure the progress that has been made ; compared to 2009 , when Obama took office , Myanmar and its politics are unrecognizable .
While Obama would likely acknowledge that US policy did not bring about these changes ( which resulted from an internal process of recalculation by the president , General Thein Sein ) , the US was responsive and flexible enough to encourage them .
On the regional front , Obama hoped that an opening with Myanmar would ensure that the country did not become wholly dependent on China , while enabling the US to deepen its relationship with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations .
The resumption of diplomatic relations with Myanmar was a critical feature of the Obama administration ’ s “ rebalancing ” toward Asia .
As for Cuba , Obama ’ s primary goal seems to be to bolster respect for ordinary Cubans ’ human rights , not to bring about regime change .
While it is too soon to assess the opening ’ s impact in terms of reducing repression , the opportunity it presents for Cubans to engage with Americans – first family to family , then business to business – is significant .
In regional terms , Obama ’ s restoration of relations with Cuba merits a place in the history books alongside Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger ’ s opening to China .
As grandiose as that claim may seem , the fact is that crossing the straits to Cuba signals a new , more open , and far more productive approach to relations with all of Latin America .
Over the last decade , US leaders ’ efforts to establish productive frameworks for multilateral cooperation with Latin America – including attempts to reinvigorate the Organization of American States and build up new forums like the Summit of the Americas – have run aground on their continued isolation of Cuba .
Indeed , the 2012 Summit of the Americas in Cartagena became an exercise in America-bashing , with countries threatening to boycott the 2015 summit if Cuba was not invited .
Fortunately , the US stepped up to the challenge , and , with Cuba at the table , the summit was held in Panama this month .
As a result , the Summit of the Americas and other regional organizations are better positioned to address regional crises , like the coming meltdown in Venezuela , and opportunities , such as the establishment of a hemispheric energy , trade , and law-enforcement infrastructure .
A nuclear deal with Iran would have similarly important implications in the Middle East and Southwest Asia – a prospect that largely explains fervent opposition to negotiations by Israel and Saudi Arabia .
While the deal will stand or fall on the extent to which it pulls Iran back from the nuclear brink , it can also open the door to further bilateral negotiations on matters of common interest , from ending the war in Syria to cracking down on drug-running in Afghanistan .
Already , Obama ’ s policy of engagement has led to the most bilateral interaction since the Iranian revolution and hostage crisis in 1979 .
Whatever America ’ s Republican Party tries to claim during the 2016 presidential election campaign , Obama ’ s policy of engagement has worked , enabling the US to shape events in even the most closed countries .
So why do pundits continue to debate America ’ s supposedly declining global influence ?
( Just last week , the topic made the front page of the New York Times , in an article that quoted a former treasury official as saying , “ We ’ re withdrawing from the central place we held on the international stage . ” )
One answer is that domestic political dysfunction has severely handicapped the president in international negotiations .
For example , the US Congress has blocked changes to countries ’ quota allocations at the International Monetary Fund .
And a group of 47 Republican senators wrote a letter to Iran ’ s leaders announcing that the next Congress may not honor whatever nuclear deal they reach with Obama .
Another source of doubt about America ’ s enduring influence lies in the fact that multilateral engagement is still needed , and this is always more difficult than bilateral engagement .
Indeed , multilateral leadership requires not only clearer and bolder rules , but also a demonstrated willingness to bear the costs of those rules , whether by creating safe zones to uphold the “ responsibility to protect ” civilians or taking concrete steps to reduce – and eventually eliminate – nuclear arsenals .
Bilateral engagement will prove to be one of Obama ’ s most important foreign-policy legacies .
But ensuring that the US can continue to lead in the twenty-first century will require a different kind of engagement .
That will be a critical task for America ’ s next president .
