Shards of Europe
PRINCETON – As European leaders struggle after another failed summit , they should think hard about what their continent – and the world – might look like if they continue to produce unsatisfactory solutions to Europe ’ s financial and economic problems .
What would follow the disintegration of the eurozone and – almost certainly with it – that of the European Union ?
The best place to consider that question would not be Brussels , but Tiraspol , the capital of the entity that calls itself the Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic , or Trans-Dniestr .
This territorial sliver with a population of a half-million emerged in the early 1990 ’ s , after the dissolution of the Soviet Union ( population almost 300 million ) , when it broke away from the Republic of Moldova ( population four million ) , which had separated in the 1940 ’ s from Ukraine ( population 50 million ) .
Trans-Dniestr has its own government and parliament , army , constitution , flag , and a rousing Soviet-style national anthem ; of course , its nationhood would be incomplete without its own currency .
This political entity is a precise counterpart in the political world to a well-known physical phenomenon of splintering or fissuring . When stressed , a big surface bifurcates in big chunks , but then the disintegration continues into smaller and smaller fragments .
Of the six larger EU states , only France has a really well-defined centralized political system . & nbsp ;
Poland ’ s centralism comes close , but strong regional differences persist – a legacy of the three large and quite different imperial systems that encompassed today ’ s Poland in the nineteenth century .
Italy and Germany were nineteenth-century amalgamations of a colorful variety of small and medium-size political units .
The United Kingdom looks older and more stable , but Scotland today is controlled by a political party that wants to repeal the 1707 Act of Union , with the future to be determined by a Scottish referendum in 2014 .
Spain after the Franco dictatorship stabilized itself by granting autonomy to its regions , which in many ways now behave like independent units .
In these fragmented political areas , the logic of integration in the past depended on areas that were dissatisfied with political outcomes appealing to new allies in larger units .
Franconians in southern Germany disliked the fact that the Napoleonic Wars subjected them to Bavarian rule ; they saw German nationalism as a way to use Prussia and Berlin as a counterweight to Munich ’ s hegemony .
But , once Germany was united , Bavarians did not like the outcome , and then thought of a united Europe as a counterweight to the German state .
Indeed , Bavaria became adept at using European Community resources to bolster its own political system .
Integration had its own historical momentum ; if and when it goes into reverse , that process will have a counter-momentum .
The argument against European structures depends on hostility to a transfer union that might lead to some redistribution of resources . Why should our money be taken away and given to people in a very different area ?
What sort of claim do those people have ?
Germans thinking about the likelihood of transfers to southern Europe doubtless recall their country ’ s reunification after the collapse of communist East Germany in 1989-1990 .
There were massive transfers , and national resources were devoted to gigantic infrastructure projects .
That was not enough to halt the hollowing out of the eastern Länder , as many of the ablest and most entrepreneurial people left – an experience that put enormous strain on national solidarity .
Problems of transfers in a large political unit are at the heart of federalism .
The United States ’ early history was dominated by a passionate debate about the issue of solidarity .
In 1790 , when Alexander Hamilton argued that the new federal government should assume the states ’ debts from the War of Independence , he encountered fierce hostility .
The only way to sustain such a new political order , James Madison argued in The Federalist Papers , was to ensure that federal powers were few and limited .
Europe is confronting a similar moment of destiny .
It is now mired in an existential crisis more profound than at any point since 1945 .
And , while muddling through is a characteristic response of complex political systems , it is deeply destructive .
If Europe ’ s political center is widely perceived to be arbitrary and overweening , its authority will be rejected and resisted .
While adopting a new treaty may look like an unwieldy process , ill-suited to managing a fast-moving modern financial crisis , it is the only way to generate legitimacy for the institutions that are needed to address that crisis – in particular to provide reassurance that transfers will not be indefinite and unlimited .
If European integration shifts into reverse , the outcome will not be a series of happy and prosperous nation-states , living in a sort of replica of the 1950 ’ s or 1960 ’ s .
Southern Germans would wonder whether they were not transferring too much to the north ’ s old industrial rustbelt ; northern Italians who support the anti-EU Lega Nord in the self-styled unit of “ Padania ” would want to escape from the rule of Rome and the south .
Setting the clock back would thus not simply return Europe to the mid-twentieth century .
The small states of the mid-nineteenth century , with no fiscal transfers out of a relatively limited area , might be recreated .
But the dynamic might go further : the German territories had around 350 independent political entities in the mid-eighteenth century , and more than 3,000 before the middle of the seventeenth century .
