Abe ’ s Safe Bet
TOKYO – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has thrown out the political playbook .
With two years remaining in his term , and with his Liberal Democratic Party enjoying comfortable majorities in the Diet ’ s upper and lower houses , Abe has called a snap general election for December .
Political leaders and pundits worldwide are scratching their heads at Abe ’ s decision to risk his extensive reform agenda with a throw of the electoral dice .
But while Abe may be known for his boldness , he is no reckless gambler .
On the contrary , he would have been reckless to launch the third “ arrow ” of his so-called Abenomics strategy for reviving Japan ’ s economy – supply-side structural reforms – without a clear mandate for reform .
Fortunately , Abe is almost certain to receive that mandate – not least because he lacks credible opponents .
The main opposition party , the Democratic Party of Japan ( DPJ ) , essentially imploded following its previous turn in government , which was characterized by economic malaise and foreign-policy blunders .
And Japan ’ s other political parties have done nothing to convince voters that they deserve to emerge from the political wilderness .
In a sense , Abe is not running against his parliamentary opponents , but against himself .
After the first two arrows of Abenomics – expansionary monetary and fiscal policies – raised expectations that Japan ’ s economy would finally escape stagnation , the country began slipping back into recession in the second quarter of this year .
As any democratic politician will attest , disappointed expectations may well be the toughest electoral opponent of all .
Just ask former French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
Of course , Abe did not face the kind of sky-high expectations that Sarkozy and , for that matter , US President Barack Obama did .
It is not that Abe ’ s 2012 campaign lacked ambition ; he set out a bold economic-reform agenda and promised to boost Japan ’ s global influence .
But , after two decades of leaders who – with the exception of Junichiro Koizumi – promised little and achieved less , Japanese voters had little reason to expect that Abe would follow through on his pledges .
Moreover , Japan ’ s powerful bureaucracy – which has a long history of impeding reform ( and has taken too little of the blame for the country ’ s “ lost decades ” of stagnation ) – was probably not convinced that the election had authorized Abe to push for sweeping change .
Expecting Abe to show the same inertia as the DPJ premiers who preceded him , they behaved in the way they always had – advancing their own interests , instead of faithfully enacting the policies of the elected government .
But Abe was not deterred .
In his first weeks in office , he announced a ¥ 10.3 trillion ( $ 116 billion ) stimulus bill and appointed Haruhiko Kuroda , a determined , dynamic , and bold thinker , to head the Bank of Japan . Kuroda wasted little time in initiating expansionary monetary policies – following in the footsteps of the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England – to help reflate the economy .
The first two arrows of Abenomics began to take effect almost immediately .
Japan experienced sustained inflation for the first time since the early 1990s .
The stock market boomed .
The yen fell to a more realistic level against other currencies .
Consumer confidence rose marginally .
But Abe knows that all of this will be for naught unless and until the third arrow is launched .
Beyond his economic strategy , Abe has also delivered in terms of foreign policy .
He has visited almost all of Japan ’ s Asian neighbors , reinvigorating relationships that the DPJ neglected .
In particular , his personal rapport with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi has galvanized their countries ’ emerging partnership , creating a new strategic center of gravity in Asia .
Moreover , Abe has settled a nettlesome dispute with the United States over its military bases on the island of Okinawa , thereby fortifying Japan ’ s relationship with its main ally .
And , by reinterpreting Article 9 of the constitution to allow Japan to exercise “ collective self-defense ” and provide aid to an ally under attack , Abe has made Japan a far more reliable partner for the US and its Asian allies .
Most important , Abe has initiated a realistic and coherent relationship with Chinese President Xi Jinping .
In recent years , rising tensions with China have stripped Japan of the illusion of friendship and goodwill that led it to inject many hundreds of billions of dollars into the country .
With a more pragmatic approach , however , Asia ’ s two largest economies can find a way to support domestic and regional stability , giving them the space to pursue economic reform at home .
Allowing secondary issues to jeopardize peace and progress would simply be irresponsible .
Unlike in the last election , Japanese voters now know exactly the kind of government Abe intends to lead .
They know that he intends to follow through on his plan to include Japan in the Trans-Pacific Partnership , the US-backed mega-regional free-trade deal currently being negotiated – a move that will require some sacrifices at home .
Abe has proved that reinvigorating the economy is his top priority .
In this sense , his decision to postpone the second round of the consumer-tax hike planned for next year is not fiscally irresponsible ; on the contrary , it reflects his recognition that Japan ’ s economy is not yet strong enough to withstand a sharp tax increase .
Finally , Japan ’ s voters know that Abe is committed to building a durable and consensual regional peace , without which the rest of his plans could not succeed .
There is no doubt about Abe ’ s intentions or policy commitments .
If the Japanese public returns him to office , he will have the mandate he needs to complete his ambitious , pragmatic , and forward-thinking agenda .
It is now up to the Japanese people to give him that mandate , effectively choosing to end two decades of economic malaise and geopolitical irrelevance .
