Rebuilding Libya
BENGHAZI – Six months after Libyan rebels took up arms against the country ’ s leader , Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi , they have finally toppled him . But , while victorious on the battlefield , they have not been triumphant in political and economic terms . If the rebels are to ensure their revolution ’ s long-term success , they will have to overcome the weaknesses that plague them .
In the days following the start of the uprising in February 17 , the rebels formed a political body known as the National Transitional Council ( NTC ) and a cabinet known as the Executive Committee . Though drawn from across Libyan society and staffed by people with technical skills , the groups have been hamstrung by several problems .
Critics have derided the NTC ’ s lack of transparency and complained about its opaque decision-making . They have also questioned the criteria used to select its members .
Libyans say the Council ’ s chairman , Mustafa Abdel-Jalil , favors dissidents who spent time in Qaddafi ’ s prisons over those with the training and skills needed to rebuild the country . If the NTC does not address these concerns , it is difficult to see how it will manage the complex challenges ahead .
It is not only the NTC ’ s policies that could imperil the success of the Libyan uprising . Though admired in parts of eastern Libya under rebel control , Abdel-Jalil is a dour figure who lacks the charisma characteristic of revolutionary leaders . Indeed , he is a provincial player who so far has been unable to communicate a compelling vision of a new Libya .
A shortage of politically savvy leaders plagues the rebel-controlled East . Shortly after assuming the chairmanship of the NTC in March , Abdel-Jalil announced that its members would not run for office in future elections . But there has since been very little activity on the political front . Because activists were reluctant to begin campaigning while rebels were still fighting , they held back on forming political parties . As a result , only two parties have been created in a country that has no experience with pluralist democracy . At this point , there are very few voices consistently advocating the changes needed to secure the transition from an authoritarian to a democratic regime .
Other problems loom for the NTC . In July , their military chief of staff , Abdul Fattah Younis , was killed in murky circumstances after the Council issued an arrest warrant for him . His tribe has demanded answers that the NTC does not have . People close to the case say that senior NTC officials were implicated in Younis ’ s death .
Although the investigation into the murder of Younis has been muted by the rebels ’ recent military successes , his tribe is demanding justice and is prepared to seek retribution if the NTC cannot resolve the matter . Such an outcome could split the rebels ’ ranks and risks plunging Libya into renewed violence at the very moment that hostilities should have ended .
The danger of civil bloodshed imperils a post-Qaddafi Libya more generally . Already , Libyan rebels in the east have exacted revenge on Qaddafi loyalists , many of whom worked for his feared revolutionary committees . In western Libya , human-rights workers have reported that the Qaddafi ’ s supporters have been shot in the hand to mark their treachery . With the NTC unable to impose discipline on its soldiers , such violence is likely to increase as army soldiers and militias evacuate Qaddafi strongholds .
The NTC faces a number of economic dilemmas as well . Before the revolution , Libya produced nearly 1.6 million barrels of oil per day , accounting for 96 % of the country ’ s export earnings . But , since February , the taps have run dry , owing to disruption and damage to the oil infrastructure . In the interim , the NTC has largely survived on international aid and from the unfreezing of Libyan assets by foreign governments .
But these funds have been unable to fuel the economy of rebel-controlled territories . Libyans complain that they have not been paid their monthly salaries . Nightly power outages have left many in the dark in cities like Tobruk , and even the rebel capital of Benghazi has experienced sporadic electricity cuts .
The war ’ s costs extend far beyond repairing oil installations and turning on the electricity . Cities such as Misurata have been ravaged by the fighting and will have to be rebuilt . But Libya lacks the technical capacity to tackle these problems . Short on skilled experts , a post-Qaddafi Libya risks becoming dependent on foreign assistance , much like the Palestinians , who live largely from international aid rather than from their own economic activity .
The fall of Qaddafi and his authoritarian regime holds great promise for a people bereft of freedom for 42 years . But , with the NTC having stumbled so far , it will have to redouble its efforts to ensure that it wins the peace that it fought so hard to secure .
Barak Barfi is a research fellow at the New America Foundation .
