Privatizing Africa ’ s Development
Lagos – There has been considerable progress on achieving the Millennium Development Goals since their inception in 2000 .
But , despite the best efforts of governments , reaching those goals by the 2015 target date still remains a distant prospect for many countries , not the least of in Africa .
Many of us in Africa ’ s private sector are keen to make a difference in meeting these goals .
At the Africa Finance Corporation ( AFC ) , reducing poverty on the African continent through private-sector initiative is our mission .
For , in the end , the private sector is and will be the engine of growth in Africa , and its increasingly active involvement in the development process bodes well for the continent .
Africa ’ s development challenges are well known .
More than 40 % of its population lives on less than a dollar a day .
Over half a billion people live without modern forms of energy , and the continent ’ s share of global trade remains a paltry 3 % .
Lack of basic infrastructure and industrial capacity remains one of Africa ’ s biggest problems , for it sustains poverty and undermines the continent ’ s ability to compete with the rest of the world .
Transport costs for sub-regional trade are double that of other developing regions , and high energy costs contribute significantly to the prohibitive cost of doing business .
Africa needs substantial investments to correct these shortfalls : $ 75 billion to close its 135-gigawatt power deficit by 2015 , and $ 37 billion to improve transport infrastructure .
And , despite Africa ’ s huge natural-resource deposits , heavy manufacturing remains elusive .
As a result , most of the value chain for the fossil fuel and mining sectors continues to be outside the continent .
But these challenges have not dampened optimism about Africa ’ s growth prospects .
The continent ’ s economy , after all , has been experiencing its strongest growth in three decades , with annual GDP up by 6 % in the past three years .
The rebirth of Africa ’ s private sector – a critical missing ingredient in past development efforts – has played a significant role in driving this performance , and it can fill the investment gap while generating returns in the process .
The AFC is promoting such investment , based on a new development-oriented banking style in Africa that involves the proactive creation and management of infrastructure , industrial , and financial assets , including the six leading industrial sectors : power , transport infrastructure , telecoms , oil and gas , mining , and heavy industries .
These areas offer the greatest development impact and the most attractive returns to investors .
An AFC-led consortium is financing a project that will develop Sub-Saharan Africa ’ s first deep-sea container port on the Atlantic coastline area of Olokola , Nigeria .
The completion of this $ 1 billion landmark project is expected to transform Africa ’ s shipping and port capacity dramatically .
Guinea-Bissau is also taking advantage of this new private sector-led development approach .
As a member country of the AFC , it will benefit from a private sector-driven initiative to accelerate economic development and reduce poverty .
The AFC , with its project development subsidiary , Africa Infrastructure , and Chinese equity and technical partners , WEMPCO , is launching a power generation initiative in Bissau .
The investment will lead to a rapid deployment of emergency power using heavy fuel power generation , and will involve the rehabilitation and management of transmission and distribution .
There is a huge window of opportunity for private sector-led development in Africa .
But taking advantage of this opportunity requires a new approach to private financing of Africa ’ s development , in which Africa is the lead investor in its own economic renaissance .
