Pakistan ’ s War with Itself
LAHORE – Pakistan is now a nation caught between its army and the Taliban , fighting a war not of its own making .
Its population lives in fear of bombings and suicide attacks – the next one could be at the local mosque , an internet café , or a roadside restaurant .
Most Pakistanis are now resigned to full-scale army action being extended across the country .
Despite all the stakeholders – Pakistan ’ s army and government , as well as Western countries – knowing the scale of recent army action in Swat and Buner , millions of innocent people were left to fend for themselves as bombs rained down on them from the sky .
They were not evacuated . They were left to walk for miles and days to safety .
The United States and the Pakistani army , meanwhile , evidently believe that their sole responsibility is to keep the Taliban at bay .
Indeed , only when the mass of internally displaced people swelled to 1.5 million – the worst humanitarian disaster since the Rwanda genocide – did foreign countries , including the US , decided to provide emergency aid .
If the government of Pakistan and its friends do not accept that this human suffering was preventable , a chain of similar disasters will take place as army action heats up in Waziristan and other parts of the country .
The US administration is extremely concerned about the Taliban ’ s advances in Pakistan .
So are Pakistan ’ s people .
But the two have different sets of concerns – and herein lie their inherently different perceptions of the situation .
The US media and government focus their rhetoric on the possibility of Pakistan ’ s nuclear arsenal falling into Taliban hands .
The other obvious Western concern – recently expressed by British Prime Minister Gordon Brown – is the threat of a “ crucible of terrorism ” in the border areas of Afghanistan and Pakistan endangering world security .
Pakistanis , on the other hand , are the people actually living with that threat .
The Taliban have brought violence and terror .
The innumerable blasts and attacks all across the country , the killing of Benazir Bhutto , and the routine television images of splatters of blood covered with flies have wrecked their nerves .
Now the Taliban are blasting girls ’ schools and flogging women .
This is not Pakistan .
Had it been Pakistan ’ s ethos , the Taliban in Swat wouldn ’ t have needed to blast schools – people would have happily pulled their daughters from the schools themselves .
Ordinary men and women in Swat believe in education , but the Taliban were terrorizing them out of exercising their legal and constitutional rights .
This illiterate , armed , Wahhabi brand of ideology was imported – as US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton admitted recently before House Appropriations Committee – by the US from Saudi Arabia and other Middle Eastern countries in order to undermine the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan in the 1980 ’ s .
Once the mission was accomplished and the Soviets vanquished , the Wahhabi virus was left to fester in Pakistan ’ s border areas .
In the eight years of General Pervez Musharraf 's dictatorship , the US and Pakistan ’ s army fought against the Taliban in Pakistan ’ s tribal regions .
Only occasionally was the fighting “ officially ” reported .
Access to the area was denied to independent media .
Many locally-based correspondents were killed in suspicious circumstances .
There was a simple reason why Musharraf was the Western media ’ s blue-eyed boy : he delivered .
He and the Pakistani army delivered many of the Al Qaeda members most wanted by the US – Khalid Sheikh Mohammed , Egyptians , Yemenis , Saudis , and so on .
For Pakistanis , however , Musharraf ’ s martial rule emasculated civil liberties , pressured media whenever he disagreed with editorial content , massively increased the intelligence service ’ s meddling in politics , and papered over the genuine grievances of disenfranchised people .
Eight years and many billions of dollars later , the Pakistani Taliban seized control of the Swat region , terrorizing the adjoining district of Buner and raising alarm and consternation through the rest of Pakistan .
Post-Musharraf Pakistan is a rather fragile democracy .
Even today , the government ’ s focus remains killing and bombing .
There is no genuine attempt at politically mainstreaming the troubled areas , no understanding of what democracy entails .
There is not even any money being spent on equipping hospitals in Peshawar and the rest of Pakistan with adequate blood banks and trauma units , despite the regular inflow of bombing victims .
The Pakistani army would rather be seen as the country ’ s savior than own up to its own shortsightedness and make clear whether it has decided to change course by obeying the constitution .
Meanwhile , many worries and concerns remain : Will the internally displaced be able to return home and – despite the countless hastily dug graves that scar their beautiful landscape – reconnect with their old lives ?
Will the political parties finally realize that they must stop looking to the US and start being more responsive to their own people ?
But the most important questions are these : Will the face of the enemy become clear ?
Who is providing the Taliban with guns and money ?
And will army shelling really end the war ?
