A Confederal Solution for Palestine
LONDON – Last month , while in New York City , I happened to be staying in the same hotel as Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu .
To accommodate his security needs , the hotel had been converted into a fortress , much like Israel itself .
Netanyahu was in the United States for yet another round of Middle East peace talks .
The US offered various sweeteners to induce Israel to freeze its West Bank settlement construction for another 90 days .
The Israelis refused ; another impasse was reached .
What , then , might be the prospects of a negotiated peace between two peoples with claims to the same land ?
The answer is : very poor .
All peace efforts since the Oslo accords of 1993 have been based on the “ two-state solution , ” according to which Israel is supposed to turn over the occupied territories to a Palestinian state , the Palestinians are supposed to renounce any claims on the Jewish state , and everyone is supposed to live happily ever after .
A negotiated “ land for peace ” solution still remains official Western doctrine .
As US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton put it in a recent speech , “ a just , lasting , and comprehensive peace ” has to be based on “ two states for two peoples . ”
Meanwhile , the two main parties to the dispute , Palestine and Israel , are searching for unilateral alternatives to the stymied “ peace process . ” The Palestinians are pushing for international recognition of their statehood , while the Israelis are using their settlement policy to preempt a Palestinian state .
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas has said that , if the latest peace talks collapse , he will press for UN recognition of a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders .
This month , Brazil and Argentina recognized “ Palestine , ” and a cascade of Latin American countries is expected to follow .
Abbas is now setting his sights on Europe , and would ask Turkey to serve as a go-between .
The game is to use international recognition of an independent Palestinian state to pressure the US to retreat from its almost unconditional support for Israeli policy .
Israel ’ s main concern continues to be security .
The official Western doctrine is that Israel ’ s long-term security depends on the success of the “ peace process . ”
In practice , Israel has been taking other measures to secure its future .
Media attention has been focused on the “ security wall , ” which has certainly succeeded in reducing the level of violence .
But , to the hawks who now control Israeli politics , the key to Israel ’ s security depends on depth of defense , for which expansion of the settlements is indispensable .
The hawks ’ recipe for survival is threefold : continued military and economic support from the US , defensible frontiers through a strategic settlement program , and the carve-up of the Palestinian West Bank into disconnected bantustans , or subordinate authorities , incapable of concerted opposition to Israeli policy .
Thus , while Abbas seeks to create a new “ fact on the ground ” by drumming up international support for a Palestinian state , Israel aims to trump him by making such a state unviable .
The ideal alternative to both strategies is a peace process that aims not to create two states , but rather to establish the political and economic basis for a single confederal state .
Indeed , the two-state solution was always an illusion .
There was never enough land to satisfy the passionate possessiveness of all those with claims to it .
And , over time , Israeli settler disengagement from the West Bank and East Jerusalem has become just as impossible as any attempt by Israel to expel its remaining Arabs .
Israeli Jews are bound to stay in the West Bank and East Jerusalem , and Israeli Arabs are bound to stay in Israel proper .
These are the “ facts on the ground ” that doom Palestinian hopes for a sovereign Palestinian state no less than Israeli hopes for a wholly Jewish state .
Moreover , land for peace never made sense from an economic point of view .
If compensation for wrongs to the Palestinians was to be the guiding principle , there were always better ways of going about it than to found a rickety , poverty-ridden new country dependent on foreign aid .
Most people have forgotten that the Paris Protocols of April 1994 established a customs union between Israel and the occupied territories , with a joint Economic Council to adjudicate trade disputes .
The free movement of goods , labor , and capital between the two parts could have given a tremendous economic boost to Palestinian GDP .
It could also have been the basis of a confederal state , whose Palestinian part would have benefited from the West Bank settlers ’ productivity and taxes .
But this benign prospect was undermined by the violence needed to maintain the Jewish state and enable the emergence of a Palestinian one .
The official view remains that only an internationally guaranteed two-state settlement will bring about the security needed for the economic revival of the Palestinian territories .
But it is just possible that unilateral Israeli policy , implicitly backed by the US , will create interim conditions of peace that are sufficient for economic growth to cool Palestinian nationalism .
The Palestinian cause is not the overriding preoccupation of even the Arab states , so Netanyahu ’ s strategy of defense in depth stands a better chance of success than Abbas ’ s pursuit of statehood through international recognition .
Netanyahu ’ s project is not moral .
But that doesn ’ t mean that it won ’ t work , at least for a time .
