The Fed in Denial
WASHINGTON , DC – The United States Federal Reserve System is one of the most powerful governmental organizations in the history of the world .
America ’ s central bank has control over the supply of dollars , and currently exerts great influence over interest rates , both for short-term and long-term borrowing .
And , though the Fed was partly responsible for the regulatory failures that led to the global economy ’ s near-meltdown in 2008-2009 , post-crisis reform has left it with even greater authority and more responsibility for overseeing the financial system .
That is a worrying outcome , because senior Fed officials seem to have slipped back into their pre-2008 ways , ignoring concerns about dangerous financial-sector behavior – even when those concerns are expressed by members of the US Senate Banking Committee .
This is not only unfortunate ; it is also dangerous , because the Fed ’ s political position is much more precarious than its leadership seems to realize .
In many countries , people on the right of the political spectrum provide a bastion of support for the central bank .
In northern Europe , for example , the European Central Bank ’ s independence is seen as essential for price stability – and politicians on the right typically attach a higher priority to this goal .
The situation is quite different in the US .
Here , the right , represented by the Republican Party , has long been suspicious of the Fed , reflecting its opposition to a powerful federal government , as well as nostalgia for the days of the gold standard ( particularly the version that operated before the Fed was created in 1913 ) .
The Fed as it currently operates is being protected by the left ( the Democratic Party ) .
For example , I recently testified at a hearing of the House Financial Services Committee on Republican-proposed legislation that would impose on the Fed greater limitations on both monetary policy and regulation .
House Democrats oppose the bill and invited me to the hearing , where I explained that the proposed constraints would , in my view , greatly hamper the Fed ’ s effectiveness – including its ability to help the economy return to full employment and to prevent the financial system from spinning out of control again .
Under current circumstances , the Democrats are strong enough – with control of the Senate and of the presidency – to fend off these assaults .
Consequently , senior Fed and White House officials seem rather confident that nothing dramatic will happen that would undermine the Fed ’ s independence .
I would not be so sure .
The main problem is that the Fed has not moved with alacrity to implement fully key provisions of the Dodd-Frank financial reforms , which were passed in 2010 .
For example , the Dodd-Frank legislation specifies that all large financial institutions should draw up meaningful “ living wills ” – specifying how they could be allowed to fail , unencumbered by any kind of bailout , if they again became insolvent .
Creating such living wills is not an option ; it is a requirement of the law .
Yet , in a recent speech that reviewed the landscape of financial reform , Fed Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer skipped over the requirement almost completely .
Fischer appears to prefer to rely on the resolution powers of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation , which is empowered to takeover failing financial institutions , with the expectation that it will impose losses on creditors in such a way that will not cause global panic .
( I am on the FDIC ’ s systemic resolution advisory committee , but I am not responsible for the agency ’ s plans or potential actions . )
Unfortunately , as currently constructed , these resolution powers are unlikely to work .
They do not apply across borders , there is not enough loss-absorbing capital in large complex financial institutions , and the funding structure of big bank holding companies remains precarious .
Senior Fed officials emphasize that big banks fund themselves with more equity now than they did in the past .
But the Global Capital Index constructed by Thomas Hoenig , the FDIC ’ s vice chairman , indicates that the largest US banks are still 95 % debt-financed .
With that much leverage , it does not take a lot to create fear of insolvency .
Yet , despite repeated and responsible expressions of concern – including from Senate Democrats – the Fed continues to ignore these profound problems .
If anything , in his most recent speech , Fischer seemed to brush aside any such fears – assuring his audience that there is great social value in continuing to have extremely large financial firms that operate with so very little equity capital ( and therefore a great deal of leverage ) .
This is more than disappointing .
It is profoundly dangerous to the economy .
And it imperils the Fed ’ s future ability to take action as needed .
In recent interviews , including with The New Yorker , Fed Chair Janet Yellen has indicated at least general concerns about financial-sector behavior and the vulnerability of big banks .
But unless the Fed acts on such concerns – including by implementing the requirement that large financial institutions adopt meaningful living wills – its independence will come under even greater pressure .
