No Diseases for Old Men
PRINCETON – Pneumonia used to be called “ the old man ’ s friend ” because it often brought a fairly swift and painless end to a life that was already of poor quality and would otherwise have continued to decline .
Now a study of severely demented patients in Boston-area nursing homes shows that the “ friend ” is often being fought with antibiotics .
Such practices raise the obvious question : are we routinely treating illnesses because we can , rather than because we ought to ?
The study , carried out by Erika D ’ Agata and Susan Mitchell and recently published in the Archives of Internal Medicine , showed that over 18 months , two-thirds of 214 severely demented patients were treated with antibiotics .
The mean age of these patients was 85 .
On the Test for Severe Impairment , where scores can range from zero to 24 , three-quarters of these patients scored zero .
Their ability to communicate verbally ranged from non-existent to minimal .
It isn ’ t clear that using antibiotics in these circumstances prolongs life , but even if it did , one would have to ask : what is the point ?
How many people want their lives to be prolonged if they are incontinent , need to be fed by others , can no longer walk , and their mental capacities have irreversibly deteriorated so that they can neither speak nor recognize their children ?
In many cases , the antibiotics were administered intravenously , which can cause discomfort .
The interests of patients should come first , but when it is dubious that continued treatment is in a patient ’ s interests and there is no way to find out what the patients wants , or would have wanted , it is reasonable to consider other factors , including the views of the family and the cost to the community .
Medicare costs for beneficiaries with Alzheimer ’ s disease were $ 91 billion in 2005 , and are expected to increase to $ 160 billion by 2010 .
( For comparison , in 2005 the United States spent $ 27 billion on foreign aid . )
Moreover , D ’ Agata and Mitchell suggest that the use of so many antibiotics by patients with dementia carries a different kind of cost : it exacerbates the growing problem of antibiotic-resistant bacteria , putting other patients at risk .
Pneumonia also has not been able to play its friendly role for 84-year-old Samuel Golubchuk of Winnipeg , Canada , who for years has had limited physical and mental capacities as a result of a brain injury .
Golubchuk ’ s doctors thought it best not to prolong his life , but his children , arguing that discontinuing life-support would violate their Orthodox Jewish beliefs , obtained a court order compelling the doctors to keep their father alive .
So , for the past three months , Golubchuk has had a tube down his throat to help him breathe and another in his stomach to feed him .
He does not speak or get out of bed .
How much awareness he has is in dispute .
His case will now go to trial , and how long that will take is unclear .
Normally , when patients are unable to make decisions about their treatment , the family ’ s wishes should be given great weight .
But a family ’ s wishes should not override doctors ’ ethical responsibility to act in the best interests of their patients .
Golubchuk ’ s children argue that he interacts with them .
But establishing their father ’ s awareness could be a double-edged sword , since it could also mean that keeping him alive is pointless torture , and it is in his best interests to be allowed to die peacefully .
The other important issue raised by Golubchuk ’ s case is how far a publicly-funded health care system such as Canada ’ s has to go to satisfy the family ’ s wishes .
When a family seeks treatment that , in the professional judgment of the physicians , is not in the patient ’ s best interests , the answer should be : not far at all .
If Golubchuk ’ s children can convince the court that their father is not suffering , the court might reasonably order the hospital to grant them custody of their father . They can then decide for themselves , at their own expense , how much further treatment he should have .
What the court should not do is order the hospital to continue to care for Golubchuk against the better judgment of its health care professionals .
Canada ’ s taxpayers are not required to support the religious beliefs held by their fellow-citizens .
