Putin the Poker Player
Perhaps it takes an ex-KGB spy for a Kremlin ruler to play diplomatic poker with skill .
Indeed , President Vladimir Putin shows as much mastery at international diplomacy as he does in handling Russian domestic affairs .
Not since Gustav Stresemann , Weimar Germany 's foreign minister , played the Soviet Union and the West off against each other , has a leader with so weak a hand played his cards so effectively .
Putin 's latest moves in North Korea , and his careful tap-dance over Iraq , are just the latest examples .
Diplomacy , in its traditional form , was never Russia 's strong suit .
Under the Tsars , Russia was often isolated .
Even when part of alliances--the Triple Alliance with Bismarck 's Germany and the Habsburg Empire , or the Entente with France before the First World War--Russia was kept at a distance .
Russian leaders typically dealt with their fear of isolation--and encirclement--by going out of their way to appear threatening .
In the Soviet era , the distances between Russia and its neighbors became unbridgeable chasms , with the USSR ringed either by hostile states or weak , servile ones .
Stalin wasted no time in antagonizing Communist China after Mao 's revolution of 1949 .
Not until Boris Yeltsin did Russia make its first steps to bridge these divides .
But Yeltsin could never get over Russia 's lost superpower status ; his periodic growls to assert Russia 's wounded pride ultimately made him seem unreliable .
True , his democratic Russia was permitted some role in global diplomacy .
In Yugoslavia , former Premier Victor Chernomyrdin joined Finnish President Matti Ahtissari in resolving the Kosovo crisis of 1999 .
But this hardly amounted to recognition of Russia 's indispensability ; after all , NATO troops entered Kosovo without Russian consent .
A realist in his bones , Putin recognizes Russia 's changed status .
But this recognition is not a confession of weakness ; instead , it reflects his clear-sighted analysis of Russia 's current predicament , and of the country 's need to create , recreate , and sustain friendly relations among all of its neighbors if lost influence is to be regained .
Since Putin took the reigns of power in 2000 he has become almost everybody 's best friend--Belarus 's lunatic strongman Aleksander Lukashenko , US President George W. Bush , Germany 's Gerhard Schroeder , Japan 's Junichiro Koizumi , and China 's Jiang Zemin .
Even North Korea 's erratic leader , the hermit Kim Jong Il , who never travels outside his country , has visited Putin twice in recent years .
In fact , North Korea provides a textbook example of Putin 's diplomatic method .
Putin cultivated Kim when other leaders neglected him .
In the summer of 2002 , the North Korean leader visited Russia to learn about " non-intrusive " --that is , not entirely Western--capitalism , while riding in an armored train on the Trans-Siberian railway .
Kim seemed to reason that , while Russia was no longer Soviet , it retained enough socialist overtones to work with his country .
The benefit of this " educational experiment " was that Putin became one of the few people to whom Kim Jong Il listens .
But Putin 's method is to maintain warm relations with everyone .
Even as he hosted Kim in Moscow , Russian diplomats in Pyongyang were helping to protect an American spy in North Korea .
Previously spurned by America in its attempts to use its longstanding contacts in Asia , this assistance appears to have convinced America that Russia can be of real help in its diplomacy with North Korea .
Final negotiations over North Korea 's nuclear ambitions will undoubtedly need to take place between the US and Kim Jong Il .
What Putin may be able to provide is the diplomatic cover the US president needs to maintain his pose of not negotiating directly with the North Koreans .
This will allow President Bush to avoid seeming to surrender to the threat of nuclear blackmail .
As a diplomatic practitioner , Putin has learned history 's lessons and is determined not to see his country ringed by enmity .
Instead of Russia 's borders draining his country 's economy , he envisions Russia as a transit point between east and west , and also as an engine of growth for countries in search of the heavy industrial equipment Russia makes .
A rail link between South Korea and Siberia , to carry Korean and Japanese goods west and Russian resource exports east , may be but one positive result of any successful deal he may broker on the Korean peninsula .
Of course , some of the old suspicions about Russian motives linger in the West , most particularly over Iraq ( where Lukoil , Russia 's biggest oil company , recently signed a new deal to develop Iraqi oil fields ) .
But Putin 's interventions in the UN Security Council over Iraq have been far more moderate than , say , those of France and Germany , two of America 's historic allies .
This is so even though Russia has vital national interests to protect in Iraq , including real fears about regional instability spreading into Russia 's south , with its millions of Muslim citizens .
For too long Russia practiced either the diplomacy of the thug or that of the Byzantine .
The first made potential partners recoil in fear , the second made them shrink in confusion .
But a spy 's stock-in-trade is recruiting and nurturing collaborators .
Those skills are now being put on display by Russia 's spymaster president .
No one is complaining .
