Arab Spring , Western Fall
TEL AVIV – The old vocation of what Rudyard Kipling called the “ White Man ’ s Burden ” – the driving idea behind the West ’ s quest for global hegemony from the days of imperial expansion in the nineteenth century to the current , pathetically inconclusive , Libyan intervention – has clearly run out of steam .
Politically and economically exhausted , and attentive to electorates clamoring for a shift of priorities to urgent domestic concerns , Europe and America are no longer very capable of imposing their values and interests through costly military interventions in faraway lands .
US Secretary of Defense Robert Gates was stating the obvious when he recently lambasted NATO ’ s European members for their lukewarm response to the alliance ’ s missions , and for their poor military capabilities .
( Ten weeks into the fighting in Libya , the Europeans were already running out of munitions . )
He warned that if Europe ’ s attitude to NATO did not change , the Alliance would degenerate into “ collective military irrelevance . ”
Europe ’ s reluctance to participate in military endeavors should not come as a revelation .
The Old Continent has been immersed since World War II in a “ post-historical ” discourse that rules out the use of force as a way to resolve conflicts , let alone to bring about regime change .
And now it is engaged in a fateful struggle to secure the very existence and viability of the European Union . As a result , Europe is retreating into a narrow regional outlook – and assuming that America will carry the burden of major global issues .
But America itself is reconsidering its priorities .
These are trying economic times for the US , largely owing to imperial overstretch financed by Chinese credit .
Admiral Mike Mullen , the US Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , recently defined America ’ s colossal fiscal deficits as the biggest threat to its national security .
Indeed , at a time of painful budget cuts – the US is facing a $ 52 trillion shortfall on public pensions and health care in the coming decades – the US can no longer be expected to maintain its current level of global military engagement .
But the fiscal crisis is not the whole story .
The dire lessons of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan will shape future debate about America ’ s international role in the twenty-first century .
At an address in February to cadets at the US Military Academy at West Point , Gates said that “ any future defense secretary who advises the president to send a big American land army into Asia or into the Middle East or Africa should have his head examined . ”
Gates ’ s recent statements are by no means those of a lonely isolationist in an otherwise interventionist America .
He expressed a widely perceived imperative for strategic reassessment .
In 1947 , in a landmark article , “ The Sources of Soviet Conduct , ” which he signed as “ X , ” George Kennan defined America ’ s foreign-policy strategy for the Cold War as one of containment and deterrence .
It is difficult to imagine a more marked departure from Kennan ’ s concepts than a report recently released by the Pentagon – A National Strategic Narrative – authored by two active-duty military officers who signed as “ Y. ”
The report can be dismissed as just the musings of two senior members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff writing in their “ personal capacity . ”
But its real power stems from the degree to which it reflects America ’ s mood in an era of declining global influence and diminishing expectations regarding the relevance of military power to sustaining US global hegemony .
Just as Kennan ’ s “ X ” article was fully reflective of the mood in America at the time , so the Narrative expresses the current American Zeitgeist .
Thus , the idea that “ Y ” might turn out to be a latter-day “ X ” – defining the nature of America ’ s international role in the twenty-first century – may not be far-fetched .
Conspicuously , there is much in the Narrative that coincides with Europe ’ s emphasis on soft power .
The authors call for a shift from outdated Cold War strategies of “ power and control ” to one of civic engagement and sustainable prosperity .
Security , they maintain , means more than defense .
It means engagement whereby America should not seek “ to bully , intimidate , cajole , or persuade others to accept our unique values or to share our national objectives . ”
America , “ Y ” argues , must first put its own house in order if it is to recover credible global influence as a beacon of prosperity and justice .
This would require improving America ’ s diplomatic capabilities , as well as regaining international competitiveness through greater investment in education and infrastructure at home .
The message emanating now from the US is not one of non-interventionism , but a strategy of restraint that assumes that there are limits to American power and seeks to minimize the risk of entanglement in foreign conflicts .
As Gates put it in his West Point address , the US Army would no longer be “ a Victorian nation-building constabulary designed to chase guerrillas , build schools , or sip tea . ”
The bad news is that Europe ’ s feebleness and America ’ s fatigue might also signal the limits of noble ideas such as the obligation to interfere in order to protect populations being brutalized by their own rulers .
America ’ s reluctance to be drawn into the Libyan quagmire , and the West ’ s failure to intervene in order to stop the Syrian army from massacring civilians , now looks like a sad , and fairly accurate , guide to the future .
