Germany ’ s Economic Mirage
LONDON – For 60 years , successive German governments sought a more European Germany .
But now , Chancellor Angela Merkel ’ s administration wants to reshape Europe ’ s economies in Germany ’ s image .
This is politically unwise and economically dangerous .
Far from being Europe ’ s most successful economy – as German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble and others boast – Germany ’ s economy is dysfunctional .
To be sure , Germany has its strengths : world-renowned companies , low unemployment , and an excellent credit rating .
But it also has stagnant wages , busted banks , inadequate investment , weak productivity gains , dismal demographics , and anemic output growth .
Its “ beggar-thy-neighbor ” economic model – suppressing wages to subsidize exports – should not serve as an example for the rest of the eurozone to follow .
Germany ’ s economy contracted in the second quarter of 2014 , and has grown by a mere 3.6 % since the 2008 global financial crisis – slightly more than France and the United Kingdom , but less than half the rate in Sweden , Switzerland , and the United States .
Since 2000 , GDP growth has averaged just 1.1 % annually , ranking 13th in the 18-member eurozone .
Written off as the “ sick man of Europe ” when the euro was launched in 1999 , Germany responded not by boosting dynamism , but by cutting costs .
Investment has fallen from 22.3 % of GDP in 2000 to 17 % in 2013 .
Infrastructure , such as highways , bridges , and even the Kiel Canal , is crumbling after years of neglect .
The education system is creaking : the number of new apprentices is at a post-reunification low , the country has fewer young graduates ( 29 % ) than Greece ( 34 % ) , and its best universities barely scrape into the global top 50 .
Hobbled by underinvestment , Germany ’ s arthritic economy struggles to adapt .
Despite former Chancellor Gerhard Schröder ’ s labor-market reforms , it is harder to lay off a permanent employee in Germany than anywhere else in the OECD .
Germany languishes in 111th place globally for ease of starting a business , according to the World Bank ’ s Doing Business rankings .
Its largest firms are old and entrenched ; it has produced no equivalent of Google or Facebook ; and the service sector is particularly hidebound .
The government has introduced fewer pro-growth reforms over the past seven years than any other advanced economy , according to the OECD .
Average annual productivity growth over the past decade , at a mere 0.9 % , has been slower even than Portugal ’ s .
The brunt of the stagnation has been borne by German workers .
Though their productivity has risen by 17.8 % over the past 15 years , they now earn less in real terms than in 1999 , when a tripartite agreement among the government , companies , and unions effectively capped wages .
Business owners might cheer , but suppressing wages harms the economy ’ s longer-term prospects by discouraging workers from upgrading skills , and companies from investing in higher-value production .
Wage compression saps domestic demand , while subsidizing exports , on which Germany ’ s growth relies .
The euro , which is undoubtedly much weaker than the Deutschmark would have been , has also helped , by reducing the prices of German goods and preventing France and Italy from pursuing currency depreciation .
Until recently , the euro also provided booming external demand in southern Europe , while China ’ s breakneck industrial development raised demand for Germany ’ s traditional exports .
But , with southern Europe now depressed , and China ’ s economy decelerating and shifting away from investment spending , the German export machine has slowed .
Its share of global exports fell from 9.1 % in 2007 to 8 % in 2013 – as low as in the “ sick man ” era , when Germany was struggling with reunification .
Because cars and other exports “ made in Germany ” now contain many parts produced in central and eastern Europe , Germany ’ s share of global exports is at a record low in value-added terms .
German policymakers pride themselves on the country ’ s vast current-account surplus – € 197 billion ( $ 262 billion ) as of June 2014 – viewing it as a sign of Germany ’ s superior competitiveness .
Why , then , are businesses unwilling to invest more in the country ?
External surpluses are in fact symptomatic of an ailing economy .
Stagnant wages boost corporate surpluses , while subdued spending , a stifled service sector , and stunted start-ups suppress domestic investment , with the resulting surplus savings often squandered overseas .
The Berlin-based DIW institute calculates that from 2006 to 2012 , the value of Germany ’ s foreign portfolio holdings fell by € 600 billion , or 22 % of GDP .
Worse , rather than being an “ anchor of stability ” for the eurozone , as Schäuble claims , Germany spreads instability .
Its banks ’ poor approach to lending their surplus savings inflated asset-price bubbles in the run-up to the financial crisis , and have imposed debt deflation since then .
Nor is Germany a “ growth engine ” for the eurozone .
In fact , its weak domestic demand has dampened growth elsewhere .
As a result , German banks and taxpayers are less likely to recover their bad loans to southern Europe .
Given how bad wage compression has been for Germany ’ s economy , foisting wage cuts on the rest of the eurozone would be disastrous .
Slashing incomes depresses domestic spending and makes debts even less manageable .
With global demand weak , the eurozone as a whole cannot rely on exports to grow out of its debts .
For struggling southern European economies whose traditional exports have been undercut by Chinese and Turkish competition , the solution is to invest in moving up the value chain by producing new and better products .
Germany ’ s economy needs an overhaul .
Policymakers should focus on boosting productivity , not “ competitiveness , ” with workers being paid their due .
The government should take advantage of near-zero interest rates to invest , and encourage businesses – especially start-ups – to do likewise .
Finally , Germany should welcome more dynamic young immigrants to stem its demographic decline .
This would be a better economic model for Germany .
It would also set the right example for the rest of Europe .
