Putinism ’ s Authoritarian Allure
PARIS – A surprising phenomenon is increasingly apparent in Western Europe : far-right parties are moving away from their traditional anti-communist and anti-Russia ideologies , with many expressing admiration – and even outright support – for Russian President Vladimir Putin ’ s regime .
To be sure , several former and current European political leaders have sought to ally themselves with Putin ’ s regime .
Former German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder , for example , joined the board of the Nord Stream gas-pipeline project ( ensuring Germany direct access to Russian supplies via the Baltic Sea ) immediately after leaving office .
Similarly , The Economist described former Czech President Václav Klaus , a prominent Euro-skeptic , as one of Putin ’ s “ warmest admirers abroad . ”
But opportunism is not ideological affinity .
By contrast , Germany ’ s far-right National Democratic Party has demonstrated nostalgia for East German virtues , calling the defunct German Democratic Republic “ a better Germany ” than the Federal Republic .
In 2011 , the NPD officially merged with another far-right party , the German People ’ s Union , which has long been linked to Russia ’ s Liberal Democratic Party ( LDPR ) and its founder and leader , the ultra-nationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky .
While Zhirinovsky has long been a prominent member of Putin ’ s opposition , he has displayed similarly authoritarian tendencies , for example , by promising to establish a police state if elected President .
And his communist links are clear .
Not only was the LDPR ’ s establishment a joint project of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the KGB , but Zhirinovsky has also advocated returning to Germany the eastern territories – including much of Poland and the Baltic region – that it lost in World War II .
In France , the extreme right ’ s shifting allegiances are even more pronounced , exemplified in its budding friendship with the new Russia .
In a 2011 interview , Marine Le Pen , leader of the National Front , conveyed her admiration for Putin , before announcing that , if she were elected President in 2012 , France would leave NATO and seek a trilateral alliance with Germany and Russia .
Moreover , Marion Maréchal-Le Pen , Le Pen ’ s niece and one of the party ’ s two MPs , is a prominent member of the National Front-sponsored France-Europe-Russia group , which advocates a “ multipolar ” – or , more accurately , a less American – world .
Last December , Maréchal-Le Pen allegedly visited Aleksey Pushkov , chairman of the Duma ’ s international affairs committee and a reputed Putinist hardliner .
Given Putinism ’ s uncertain ideological roots , this turn toward Russia might seem puzzling .
After all , Putinism is characterized less by what it endorses than by what it opposes – the West and Western-style democracy , liberalism , communism , and individualism .
In fact , Western Europe ’ s extreme-right parties ’ attraction to Putin ’ s negative agenda can be understood in relation to another authoritarian anti-ideology : Benito Mussolini ’ s fascism .
According to Mussolini ’ s 1932 essay La dottrina del fascismo ( The Doctrine of Fascism ) , written with the philosopher Giovanni Gentile , fascism opposes democracy , socialism , liberalism , and individualism ( in addition to Bolshevism , parliamentarianism , Freemasonry , pacifism , and egalitarianism ) .
But , while Putinism and Italian Fascism share the rare characteristic of rejecting both communist and democratic ideologies , there is an important distinction in their approach to the latter .
While Mussolini formally declared fascism to be anti-democratic , Putin does not openly reject democracy , or explicitly advocate a one-party state .
Rather , he claims to have established a “ managed ” or “ sovereign ” democracy – a system that prevents the alternation of power , thereby establishing a one-party state as a matter of fact , if not of principle .
In this sense , Putinism can serve as a model for extreme-right parties , which , in post-World War II Europe , cannot openly advocate an authoritarian regime or a one-party system .
Indeed , Putinism is demonstrating how to manipulate the rules of parliamentary democracy – by which all of Europe ’ s political parties have been forced to play since WWII ’ s end – to serve authoritarian objectives .
Putin ’ s public image as a strong and virile adventurer , captured in photos depicting him fishing and hunting shirtless , reinforces his appeal as a powerful , charismatic leader .
( Similarly , Mussolini was filmed bare-chested , harvesting corn . )
And a clear parallel exists between Putin ’ s close relationship with the conservative , ultra-nationalist Russian Orthodox Church and the National Front ’ s connection to integrist Catholic circles .
Furthermore , Western Europe ’ s extreme right can learn from Putin ’ s management of his youth organization , Nashi .
Unlike the Soviet Union ’ s Komsomol , which had all but ceased to serve as an ideological tool for the Communist Party by the time the USSR collapsed , Nashi has been accused of harassing diplomats and the regime ’ s opponents – suggesting a closer resemblance to the Hitler Youth or even Mussolini ’ s Blackshirts .
Indeed , while Nashi seems more like a collection of roguish hooligans , its members do receive paramilitary training to complement their ultra-nationalist ideological indoctrination .
Putinism presents a clever and effective model of a right-wing authoritarian regime that can function within modern Europe ’ s sociopolitical constraints – one that Western Europe ’ s extreme right seems keen to emulate .
Let us hope that these forces do not make common cause with Europe ’ s more unscrupulous mainstream political leaders .
