Peace Through Development
New York – American foreign policy has failed in recent years mainly because the United States relied on military force to address problems that demand development assistance and diplomacy .
Young men become fighters in places like Sudan , Somalia , Pakistan , and Afghanistan because they lack gainful employment .
Extreme ideologies influence people when they can ’ t feed their families , and when lack of access to family planning leads to an unwanted population explosion .
President Barack Obama has raised hopes for a new strategy , but so far the forces of continuity in US policy are dominating the forces of change .
The first rule in assessing a government ’ s real strategy is to follow the money .
America vastly overspends on the military compared with other areas of government .
Obama ’ s projected budgets do not change that .
For the coming 2010 fiscal year , Obama ’ s budget calls for $ 755 billion in military spending , an amount that exceeds US budget spending in all other areas except so-called “ mandatory ” spending on social security , health care , interest payments on the national debt , and a few other items .
Indeed , US military spending exceeds the sum of federal budgetary outlays for education , agriculture , climate change , environmental protection , ocean protection , energy systems , homeland security , low-income housing , national parks and national land management , the judicial system , international development , diplomatic operations , highways , public transport , veterans affairs , space exploration and science , civilian research and development , civil engineering for waterways , dams , bridges , sewerage and waste treatment , community development , and many other areas .
This preponderance of military spending applies to all ten years of Obama ’ s medium-term scenario .
By 2019 , total military spending is projected to be $ 8.2 trillion , exceeding by $ 2 trillion the budgeted outlays for all non-mandatory budget spending .
US military spending is equally remarkable when viewed from an international perspective .
According to the Swedish International Peace Research Institute , total military spending in constant 2005 dollars reached roughly $ 1.4 trillion in 2007 .
In other words , the US spends roughly the same amount spent by the rest of the world combined – a pattern that the Obama administration shows no signs of ending .
The policy decisions of recent months offer little more hope for a fundamental change in US foreign policy direction .
While the US has signed an agreement with Iraq to leave by the end of 2011 , there is talk in the Pentagon that US “ non-combat ” troops will remain in the country for years or decades to come .
It is easy to see how the persistence of instability in Iraq , Iranian influence , and al-Qaeda ’ s presence will lead American policymakers to take the “ safe ” route of continued military involvement .
Some opponents of the Iraq War , including me , believe that a fundamental – and deeply misguided – objective of the war from the outset has been to create a long-term military base ( or bases ) in Iraq , ostensibly to protect oil routes and oil concessions .
As the examples of Iran and Saudi Arabia show , however , such a long-term presence sooner or later creates an explosive backlash .
The worries are even worse in Afghanistan and Pakistan .
NATO ’ s war with the Taliban in Afghanistan is going badly , so much so that the commanding US general was sacked this month .
The Taliban are also extending their reach into neighboring Pakistan .
Both Afghanistan and the neighboring provinces of Pakistan are impoverished regions , with vast unemployment , bulging youth populations , prolonged droughts , widespread hunger , and pervasive economic deprivation .
It is easy for the Taliban and al-Qaeda to mobilize fighters under such conditions .
The problem is that a US military response is essentially useless under these conditions , and can easily inflame the situation rather than resolve it .
Among other problems , the US relies heavily on drones and bombers , leading to a high civilian death toll , which is inflaming public attitudes against the US .
After one recent disaster , in which more than 100 civilians died , the Pentagon immediately insisted that such bombing operations would continue .
A recent survey showed overwhelming Pakistani opposition to US military incursions into their country .
Obama is doubling down in Afghanistan , by raising the number of US troops from 38,000 to 68,000 , and perhaps more later .
There are also risks that the US will get involved much more heavily in the fighting in Pakistan .
The new US commanding general in Afghanistan is reportedly a specialist in “ counter-insurgency , ” which could well involve surreptitious engagement by US operatives in Pakistan . If so , the results could prove catastrophic , leading to a spreading war in an unstable country of 180 million people .
What is disconcerting , however , is not only the relentless financing and spread of war , but also the lack of an alternative US strategy .
Obama and his top advisers have spoken regularly about the need to address the underlying sources of conflict , including poverty and unemployment . A few billion dollars has been recommended to fund economic aid for Afghanistan and Pakistan .
But this remains a small amount compared to military outlays , and an overarching framework to support economic development is missing .
Before investing hundreds of billions of dollars more in failing military operations , the Obama administration should re-think its policy and lay out a viable strategy to US citizens and the world .
It ’ s high time for a strategy of peace through sustainable development – including investments in health , education , livelihoods , water and sanitation , and irrigation – in today ’ s hotspots , starting with Afghanistan and Pakistan .
Such a strategy cannot simply emerge as a byproduct of US military campaigns .
Rather , it will have to be developed proactively , with a sense of urgency and in close partnership with the affected countries and the communities within them .
A shift in focus to economic development will save a vast number of lives and convert the unthinkably large economic costs of war into economic benefits through development .
Obama must act before today ’ s crisis explodes into an even larger disaster .
