The Dangerous Rise of Buddhist Chauvinism
TOKYO – The Buddha , Siddhartha Gautama , composed no sutta to religious hatred or racial animus .
And yet Buddhist chauvinism now threatens the democratic process in both Myanmar ( Burma ) and Sri Lanka .
Some of the same Buddhist monks who braved Myanmar ’ s military junta in the “ Saffron Revolution ” of 2007 today incite violence against members of the country ’ s Muslim Rohingya minority .
In Sri Lanka , the ethnic chauvinism of the Buddhist Sinhalese , stirred by a former president determined to reclaim power , mocks the supposed goal of reconciliation with the vanquished Hindu Tamils .
In Myanmar , Buddhist racism is at the root of a virtual civil war in the state of Rakhine and is fueling a humanitarian crisis in which hundreds of thousands of Muslim Rohingya have fled their country by land and sea .
Most ominous for Myanmar ’ s future , given that all genocides are linked to official action , this racial and religious antagonism is in no way spontaneous .
The Rohingya have already been stripped of their Myanmar citizenship , and a raft of new and proposed legislation that would further marginalize Islam seems certain to provoke further violence .
A new marriage law , for example , requires interfaith couples to register their intent to marry with local authorities , who will display a public notice of the engagement ; only if no citizen objects to the union – highly unlikely in the present tense climate – is the couple permitted to wed .
Another bill in the pipeline would forbid anyone under the age of 18 from converting to another religion , and would require even an adult seeking to convert to gain the permission – subject to repeated interrogation – of local officials .
Perhaps most disturbing , a third recent bill would allow for the imposition of Chinese-style population control on any group with a growth rate that is higher than the national average .
Women could be ordered to wait , say , three years after the birth of a child before having another .
Here , too , local governments , which are the most susceptible to popular prejudices , will be empowered to implement a law that seems specifically targeted at the Rohingyas , with their large families .
These laws do not yet amount to an updated version of the Nuremberg laws ( the anti-Jewish legislation enacted by the Nazis in 1935 ) .
But they do reflect the agenda of those seeking to fan Buddhist resentment in order to thwart Myanmar ’ s democratic transition .
That dark ambition has gained urgency , because the country is due to hold its first democratic presidential election since the transition began in 2011 .
The Rohingyas are , of course , the main target of this strategy .
But there is another target as well : Aung San Suu Kyi , the Nobel Peace Prize laureate and opposition leader .
For now , Suu Kyi is precluded from running for President by a cynical constitutional provision that excludes anyone whose spouse or child has a foreign passport ( Suu Kyi ’ s two sons by her late English husband hold British passports ) .
Nonetheless , the regime , still fearing her popularity , is playing the race and religion card in order to discredit her and her party , the National League for Democracy , which won all but one of the parliamentary seats contested in the recent general election ( and swept the annulled 1990 election ) .
By stoking Buddhist violence against the Rohingya , the regime aims to damage Suu Kyi and the NLD ’ s chances of victory in two ways .
If she speaks out for the Rohingya , her appeal among Buddhists , the vast majority of Myanmar ’ s citizens , may be dented enough to preserve the army ’ s grip on power .
If she does not defend the Rohingya , her aura of moral leadership may be dimmed among her own supporters , both at home and abroad .
So far , Suu Kyi has circumvented this booby trap with the verbal evasiveness that one would expect of an ordinary politician , rather than someone of her courage and standing .
But , as the violence grows and the election nears , her room for maneuver will undoubtedly narrow .
Instead of highlighting the country ’ s real needs – serious land reform , an anti-corruption drive , and freeing the economy from oligarchic control – she may instead be drawn into defending an unpopular minority .
A similar political imperative is at the heart of the Sinhalese chauvinism that has made a sudden return to public life in Sri Lanka .
The religious and ethnic passions of the Sinhalese were encouraged during the final , bloody push that ended Sri Lanka ’ s quarter-century of civil war with the Tamil Tigers in 2009 .
But instead of seeking reconciliation with the Tamils following their defeat , then-President Mahinda Rajapaksa continued to play on ethnic hatred as he subverted Sri Lanka ’ s democracy .
Rajapaksa ’ s unexpected defeat by a coalition of Sri Lanka ’ s democrats and Tamil political parties in last January ’ s presidential election – a result that he then sought to annul – should have ended both his career and the politics of race-baiting .
But the former president is now mounting a furious comeback bid and might well win the parliamentary election scheduled for August 17 .
One reason for Rajapaksa ’ s potential victory is his deep pockets ; another is that he can probably count on support from China , having allowed the construction of ports and other facilities for the People ’ s Liberation Army during his presidency .
But the key to his fortunes has been his effort to stoke the fears of the majority Sinhalese .
Rajapaksa is thus placing Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe in the same difficult position faced in Myanmar by Suu Kyi .
So far , Wickremesinghe has succeeded in suggesting that the Sinhalese have more to fear from the return of Rajapaksa than they do from the country ’ s ethnic minorities .
But no one should ever underestimate the power of hatred to undermine a democracy from within .
