The Future of the Captured State
WASHINGTON , DC – Concerns about state capture are nothing new .
Special interests hold undue sway over official decision-makers in many countries , and regulators are always prone to see the world through the eyes of the people whose activities they are supposed to oversee .
But the rise of finance in industrialized countries has cast these issues in a new , much harsher light .
Before 1939 , wages and profits in the financial sector in the United States amounted to less than 1 % of GDP ; now they stand at 7-8 % of GDP .
In recent decades , financial assets have expanded dramatically relative to any measure of economic activity , as life expectancy increased and the post-WWII baby boomers began to think about saving for retirement .
Compared to the size of the US economy , individual banks are now much bigger than they were in the early 1990 ’ s .
( The precise numbers are different in other industrialized countries , but the rise of finance is a general phenomenon . )
The global financial crisis of 2007-2008 and the deep recession that resulted made it plain to see that the financial sector in the US and elsewhere had become too powerful .
Since the 1980 ’ s , a form of “ cognitive capture ” had occurred , with policymakers becoming convinced that innovation and deregulation could only improve the functioning of both financial intermediation and the broader economy .
The crisis proved this view completely wrong , imposing massive costs – measured in terms of jobs lost , lives disrupted , and increased hardship – on millions of people .
Financial regulation entered a new , much more contested phase in 2010 – at least in the US .
Most officials now concede the existence of systemic risk as a form of “ pollution , ” meaning that banks and other financial firms do not necessarily internalize the full costs of their structures and activities .
And these costs can be huge – potentially large enough , despite recent reform attempts , to cause Great Depression II ( or worse ) .
Operating big financial firms with small amounts of equity capital and a lot of debt may be in the interest of their managers , but it is definitely not in the interest of the rest of society .
Moreover , providing large implicit subsidies to firms that are too big to fail should not be an attractive policy , because it encourages such firms to take on excessive risk ( and to become even bigger ) .
And yet debate about these issues has remained wide open .
The question is no longer so much one of beliefs .
Now it is simply about money – particularly campaign contributions , but also the revolving door between Washington and Wall Street , as well as the vast pro-megabank interests that pour millions of dollars into think tanks and other , more shadowy organizations .
The Oscar-winning documentary Inside Job raised some sensitivities and led to increased disclosures by some people , including academics , concerning their involvement with the financial industry .
But there remain profound monetary ties between big banks and people who purport to be independent analysts providing expert opinions .
Some officials remain highly captured .
But there is also good news : Other officials are now much more resistant and inclined to push back against the industry .
Well-informed nonpartisan outsiders are increasingly well organized and influential , particularly when they can work closely with pro-reform officials .
The latest indications from the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve – a crucial piece of this puzzle – are encouraging .
For example , new rules for foreign banks operating in the US essentially require them to fund themselves with as much equity as US banks .
But , on the eve of a new presidential campaign , the struggle over this important precinct of the American state remains far from over .
With the exception of the United Kingdom , the extreme free-market view gained less traction in Europe in recent decades than it did in the US ; nonetheless , the challenge of implementing financial reforms in the eurozone is actually more difficult .
Governments regard domestic banks as important buyers of sovereign debt .
The banks argue that more effective regulation would limit credit and slow the pace of economic recovery .
As a result , the authorities in Germany and France ( as well as Japan ) have consistently resisted increasing capital requirements , despite widespread agreement that doing so is an essential part of effective re-regulation .
Their opposition has undermined international efforts to build a more resilient system – and it will likely hamper efforts to put the European economy on a sounder footing .
In other words , key European states remain just as captured by financial interests as the American state ever was .
And the big American banks now want to use the slow pace of change in Europe as a brake on US policy ( for example , through the ongoing free-trade negotiations between the European Union and the US ) .
If the US is to escape the consequences of government capture by big Wall Street banks , it cannot wait for Europe to catch up on regulation , including capital requirements .
