Obama Versus the Islamic State
WASHINGTON , DC – US President Barack Obama has laid out a detailed strategy for how his administration plans to combat the Islamic State , which controls a substantial portion of Syria and Iraq .
Though I have been harshly critical of Obama ’ s policy toward Syria for two and a half years , his new strategy reflects a mature and coherent foreign policy – albeit one that does not fully live up to his proclaimed values .
That omission may yet defeat his plan .
Obama ’ s approach is praiseworthy for three reasons .
First , it combines force and diplomacy .
Second , it attaches careful conditions to the type and scope of American military action .
Third , it ties the fate of these efforts to the existence and effectiveness of a broad Middle East coalition , making clear that though the United States is prepared to lead , it cannot and will not assume the role of global policeman .
In the Middle East game of thrones , Obama is playing his hand as well as he can .
He knows that a US-led military effort can significantly weaken the Islamic State , but that only a combined military-political effort can defeat it .
He created political leverage for himself by drawing a clear line , announcing that the US would “ expand our efforts beyond protecting our own people and humanitarian missions ” only together with the newly-formed Iraqi government .
If that government makes good on its promises of political inclusion , the US will help it get its country back ; if not , not .
Equally important , but less evident , is the leverage that this position provides with respect to Iran .
Obama never mentioned Iran during his speech ; but commentators have speculated about whether his strategy gives Iran greater leverage over the US , on the theory that Iranian-backed fighters are critical to the success on the ground in the fight against the Islamic State .
But Iraq ’ s Shia government is one of Iran ’ s major strategic anchors in the region ; before the US began airstrikes against the Islamic State , it was far from certain that the Iraqi government would survive .
Iran needs US airpower at least as much as the US needs Iranian-backed ground troops .
The US emphasis on a regional coalition to fight the Islamic State is also deft diplomacy .
Secretary of State John Kerry has made it & nbsp ; clear that for now Iran is not a welcome member .
Iran , without which the coalition essentially becomes a Sunni front , can have a place at the table – and play a large and overt role in resolving the Syrian civil war – but only if it is willing to reach a deal to rein in its nuclear program .
There has never been a better time to do so .
Where Obama ’ s strategy is weakest is in reaching ordinary people : the networked web of human relationships that transmits rage , hatred , and despair or hope , trust , and loyalty .
His doctrine that the US will use force to defend its “ core interests , ” but will mobilize others “ to address broader challenges to international order , ” is sound logic and good politics in a war-weary US .
But , as a Syrian tweeted to me , what the world hears Obama saying is that the US will use force to avenge the deaths of two American journalists , but will stand by while 200,000 Syrians are slaughtered .
Unless US military action is seen as actually protecting the lives and property of the Iraqi and Syrian people , the US will quickly lose the propaganda war to the Islamic state .
As many experts warn , the first time a drone strike kills a woman or child , a video of the scene and the funeral will be posted for the Muslim world to see .
Even if that video does not actually increase support for the Islamic State , it will convince millions of Muslims that the US is up to its old military tricks : bombing for oil , or for Israel , or simply to crush all Muslims .
Those anti-American attitudes , newly hardened once again , will make it much more difficult to get the necessary intelligence against the Islamic State on the ground and to deprive them of the support of other Sunni militias .
That will not just hurt the US in Syria and Iraq . It will shape popular views in other Arab states , limiting their governments ’ ability to work with the US .
Most damaging of all , a purely strategic justification for military action – in defense of core US interests – leaves no room to do what actually needs to be done in Syria .
The only way to bring Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to the negotiating table is to weaken him and the Islamic State simultaneously .
And the only legal or moral justification for striking his air force , ammunition dumps , or heavy weaponry is the international responsibility to protect his people from him – just as the US helped to protect the Yezidis from the Islamic State .
For , contrary to Obama ’ s claim , the brutality of the Islamic State is not “ unique . ”
Assad has killed more than 200,000 people , mostly civilians , in a conflict that started with his government ’ s torture of children .
Simply talking about the responsibility to protect , as Obama once did , accompanied by even limited strikes – perhaps as punishment for Assad ’ s reported recent use of chlorine gas against civilians – would change the game quickly .
Iran would understand that America ’ s restraint in Syria is not indefinite ; Sunni governments could be shamed in the eyes of their own people for not doing more ; and the Islamic State ’ s narrative of brutality would collide with a narrative of humanity .
The fate of peasants has a direct and important impact on that of kings .
Obama ’ s policy wavers between geopolitical calculations based on national interest and the rhetoric of universal values , of standing for “ our common security and common humanity . ”
Making that rhetoric real would buy him the room for maneuver that is needed to pursue his policy ’ s geopolitical goals .
