Taming Russia \ u0027s Presidency
MOSCOW : The good news is that Russia 's parliamentary elections took place .
Just three or four months ago it seemed that they would be postponed or cancelled .
Russia 's legislature – the Duma – has now gained power and a new legitimacy , even if only theoretically .
Now it is time for curtailing the vast powers of the presidency .
If this can take place without nullification ( a big if ) , legitimately and in time , Russians can hope that today 's ineffective , corrupt regime , rejected by almost the entire Russian population , will leave office .
Only then will there will be a chance to construct a more effective government , to start rebuilding the state .
Of the elections , they were conducted ( and ended ) rather strangely .
Never before either in Russia or in any other state , insofar as I know , was an election campaign so utterly dirty , with countless formal and factual violations of Russian laws and infringements of democratic norms .
Two out of the three most important TV channels ( state channels from the formal point of view but are really controlled by the " family " around President Yeltsin , including the family oligarchs like Boris Berezovsky ) , transmitting across all Russia , almost completely prevented the two main opposition parties -- the Primakov and Luzhkov " Fatherland-All Russia ” ( OVR ) and Yavlinskiy 's " Yabloko " from getting their message broadcast .
OVR and its leaders were constantly slandered by these channels .
No one bothered about the truth .
Primakov was attacked for supposedly taking brides from Saddam Hussein as well as for conspiring with America to overthrow Prime Minister Putin 's government .
The claims against Luzhkov were even more monstrous .
They followed the rule of the BIG LIE : the more preposterous the lie , the more people will believe it .
With frankness and brute force the Kremlin supported three parties : The “ Union of Right Forces " led by Boris Nemtzov , Sergei Kiriyenko , and Anatoly Chubais ; the ever obedient to the Kremlin mob of Vladimir Zhirinovsky ; and " Edinstvo ” ( meaning Unity or Bear ) , specially created for the election by Yeltsin 's administration .
The Kremlin did not criticise the Communist Party this time , as it poses no threat today -- though the idea of a communist threat could be held in reserve just in case the presidential elections go wrong next summer .
" Unity " proved a godsend for Yeltsin and his family .
Disoriented by the Kremlin 's massive black propaganda , voters , especially the less educated and economically wounded , cast their votes for it , a political bloc without a recognizable face or program .
Government interference in the election process was another characteristic of the elections , though this is something certainly old hat here .
Prime Minister Putin used the popularity he gained through his prosecution of the Chechen war to support Unity and the Union of Right Forces .
Regional governors , ministers and other federal authorities were instructed to support these parties during the election campaigns as well as when counting the votes .
One additional dark feature of this election was the use of anti-western rhetoric by Kremlin supporters who were previously seen as pro-west .
Freedom of speech in Russia was perhaps the most important victim of these elections .
The first hints of the usefulness in politics of such an assault were seen during the presidential elections of 1996 , when journalists became closely tied to the presidential family , sometimes for a fee but mostly because they remained afraid of the communists .
Now we are paying for this self-censorship and contempt for professional ethics , as all media abandoned the truth in order to curry favor with the Kremlin .
Formal freedom of the mass media still exists , but only for trivial matters .
Touch something important to the rulers , and press freedom evaporates .
Given the unprincipled nature of the elections , no mandate exists upon which the Duma can act .
Moreover , because the elected deputies from Unity joined the party for no other purpose but election , their discipline is likely to be scant .
It is doubtful that this Duma will be able to pass necessary constitutional reforms aimed at restricting the President 's power and making Parliament and the President more accountable .
The majority needed for overcoming a presidential veto will be difficult to find , particularly as President Yeltsin ( as well as his likely successor ) will fight hard to block any restriction of presidential power .
The current lame duck Duma , despite being dominated by communists , became more effective near the end of its tenure .
The financial panic of two years ago taught even its most unreconstructed communist members some realism .
Now , new and untested men will assemble .
We may be back to square one insofar as the Duma is concerned .
Personally , I was among the figures under attack from the Kremlin during the elections . I worked with OVR , the bloc of Primakov and Luzhkov .
Perhaps that is why my presentation of the results seems so dismal , where others see the reality as much more optimistic .
I wished I could believe in their optimism .
But , sad to say , the only hope that I can see is something vaguely Leninist : in Lenin 's terminology , if we made two steps backwards , one step was nevertheless made forward .
Democracy in Russia has taken a beating .
Still , our democracy is alive ; it lives on .
Given our history in this century , that is a victory .
