Ping-Pong and Political Economy
PRINCETON – For the last century , economic-policy debate has been locked in orbit around the respective roles and virtues of the state and the market .
Does the market control the state , in the sense that it sets a limit on governments ’ ability to borrow ?
Or does the state take charge when the market fails to perform socially necessary functions – such as fighting wars or maintaining full employment ?
This old debate is at the core of today ’ s profound divisions over how Europe should respond to its debt crisis .
The same question is dividing American politics in the lead-up to November ’ s presidential and congressional elections .
During the two decades prior to the financial crisis , most people – including most politicians – assumed that the market was supreme .
Now the intellectual pendulum may be swinging back to the belief that state action can mop up markets ’ messes – just as veneration of the state in the 1930 ’ s followed market worship in the 1920 ’ s .
Two decades ago , judicious European politicians looked for a “ third way , ” steering a zigzag course between the importance of market mechanisms and that of other social priorities , according to which the market needed to be directed .
For example , when the Delors Committee prepared its report in 1988-1989 on how a monetary union could be established in Europe , experts devoted considerable attention to the issue of whether market pressure would suffice to discipline states .
Many warned that it would not – that bond yields might converge at the outset , permitting spendthrift countries to borrow more cheaply than they otherwise could .
The result of the debates of the early 1990 ’ s was a set of rough and ready rules on deficits and debt levels that was never taken quite seriously .
Economists mocked them and Romano Prodi , the president of the European Commission at the time , called them “ stupid . ”
Until the second half of 2008 , Europe seemed to have reached fiscal Paradise : the market did not differentiate between eurozone governments ’ bonds .
Some assumed an implicit debt guarantee , but that was always implausible , given that the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union explicitly ruled it out .
Rather , investors ’ undivided confidence in all eurozone borrowers reflected something else – a general belief in the capacity of rich countries ’ governments .
According to this view , advanced countries have a greater degree of fiscal sophistication .
They are always able to raise tax rates in order to service their debt .
In poor countries , by contrast , powerful vested interests often resist higher taxes on the wealthy , and widespread poverty makes it difficult to impose universal consumption taxes on the poor .
That lesson was reinforced by the experience of countless debt crises in peripheral countries , the most destructive of which hit Latin America exactly 30 years ago , after ecstatic borrowing fueled economic booms .
Sometimes these were simply consumption booms – whether for households or for military outlays and presidential palaces – and sometimes they were investment booms , though much of the investment had been misallocated as a result of political priorities .
The novelty of the world since 2008 is that , for the first time in more than a generation , advanced countries are experiencing debt crises – and starting to look like poor countries with weak institutions .
Was this just a peculiarity of the eurozone , in which sovereign countries did not control their own currencies ?
Europe ’ s debt crisis has produced a profound division of political – and also economic – opinion .
Those who emphasize the historical uniqueness of Europe ’ s monetary solution insist that other countries – which control their own monies – could not possibly fall into such a predicament .
Here the statist thesis is reflected in its boldest form : there cannot be a bond strike in the United States or the United Kingdom , because their central banks have at their disposal the full panoply of policy tools – including unconventional operations – needed to ensure that debt is monetized .
That theory runs counter to much historical experience , as well as to the prevailing approach to central banking that emerged in the 1990 ’ s .
According to that view , investors punish profligate states by demanding higher interest rates to hedge against the likelihood of inflation ; so the best way to ensure low borrowing costs is to give central banks as much independence from politicians as possible , and then make price stability their primary mandate .
The European Central Bank is probably the most perfect expression of this philosophy .
Its independence was secured not only by national legislation within the member states , but also by a treaty between them .
Treaties are more binding than national legislation , because they are more difficult to revoke , amend , or repeal .
Because the debts of the large industrial borrowers – the UK and the US – are externally financed , the argument that their governments can always monetize debt is not convincing .
A moment may come when foreign investors do not believe that their sterling or dollar assets are protected against inflation , and at that point their willingness to hold low-yield sterling and dollar assets will end .
The thinking behind the 1990 ’ s approach to monetary policy is still fundamentally valid , but it requires institutional strengthening .
It would be better to stop the twentieth-century ideological pendulum and return to some older precepts .
Both states and markets work well only when adequately enforced legal rules provide the necessary certainty .
