The Achievement Myth
NEW YORK – In late September , the American press was filled with data on women ’ s happiness .
Marcus Buckingham , a business consultant , made the case that the data showed that women have become less happy over the past 40 years .
Blogs , newsmagazines , and daytime talk shows agonized over the notion that feminism – all that freedom , all those choices – was actually making women sadder .
In fact , the women had told the researchers whom Buckingham cited that they were ‘ not satisfied ’ with many areas of their lives .
If Western women have learned anything in the past 40 years , it is how to be unsatisfied with the status quo – an important insight for the rest of the world , as we seek to export Western-style feminism .
There is truth , for good and for ill , to the idea that Western-style “ consciousness-raising ” is also about teaching women how to be dissatisfied .
The contemporary Western women ’ s movement announced itself in 1963 , with Betty Friedan ’ s The Feminine Mystique and that book ’ s permission to complain – to identify in many ways “ the problem that has no name . ”
Waves of discourse followed , helping Western women see what was “ not enough ” in many aspects of their lives , such as the low-paying jobs in which men took credit for their work – and pinched their bottoms .
The movement also raised the bar sexually : Shere Hite let women know in 1973 that if they could not reach orgasm through intercourse alone , they weren ’ t aberrant – they could ask for more and subtler sexual attention .
Do you want to run your own business ?
Go , girl !
Do you dream of equal parenting , or of being a Supreme Court Justice ?
Right on , sister !
In every area of their lives , those who articulated Western feminism invited women to demand more .
But the downside of this aspirational language and philosophy can be a perpetual , personal restlessness .
Many men and women in the rest of the world – especially in the developing world – observe this in us and are ambivalent about it .
Indeed , the definition of Western feminism as “ always more ” has led to a paradox .
Our girls and young women are unable to relax .
New data in the West reveal that we have not necessarily raised a generation of daughters who are exuding self-respect and self-esteem .
We are raising a generation of girls who are extremely hard on themselves – who set their own personal standards incredibly , even punishingly high – and who don ’ t give themselves a chance to rest and think , “ that ’ s enough . ”
What if we in the West , by letting feminism be defined as always doing more , doing it better , and outdoing others , have failed to give our daughters a definition of success that sometimes simply lets them be ?
Unfortunately for us in the West , Second Wave feminism was articulated by ambitious , highly educated women who went to elite colleges and viewed professional accomplishment as the apex of overall accomplishment .
Not much space was given to other forms of achievement , such as caring for elderly parents , being a nurturing member of the community , or – how very un-Western ! – attaining a certain inner wisdom , insight , or peace .
What if we have externalized the feminist ideal primarily as a set of accomplishments and rigors , rather than embracing it as an expansion of all kinds of freedom – which can also sometimes include freedom from eternal aspiration ?
The redefinition of feminism as “ always seeking more ” fulfills the requirements of consumer capitalism and a post-industrial work ethic .
It is not necessarily a victory for women – or men – that , 40 years on , professional women are just as exhausted as professional men traditionally have been .
When children of working mothers were asked in one recent survey what they wanted to change in their life situation , they did not say that they wanted to spend more time with their mothers .
They said that they wished their mothers could be less exhausted and stressed .
My aunt Anasuya , who is one of my most important role models , delayed conventionally defined achievements in the professional world as she focused on raising a family .
Now , with her children grown , she has gone off to Tibet for months to realize her dream of becoming a practitioner of Tibetan medicine .
Feminism certainly opened the way for her to have a life of choices , and now to reach for this unusual goal .
But I don ’ t know that feminism made space explicitly to honor what I admire most about her : her open door .
She is continually taking in students who need a home , or refugee single mothers in economic need , or simply making one more place at the table for teenagers whose parents are struggling with issues of their own .
In terms of the way she amplifies the lives of others , hers is one of the most successful “ careers ” I know – and one pursued while exuding calm , serenity , and peace .
Should Western feminism deepen its definition of a successful woman ’ s life , so that more than credentials can demonstrate well-made choices ?
I believe the time is right to do so .
As markets collapse , unemployment skyrockets , and the foundations of our institutions shift in seismic ways , this could be a moment of great opportunity for women and those for whom they care .
Perhaps seeing how futile it is to rest one ’ s sense of self on externalized , professionalized achievement is a wake-up call – and a first step to a deeper freedom , and an even deeper sense of feminine destiny .
