A New Approach to North Korea
SEOUL – The long-delayed meeting of North Korea ’ s ruling Worker ’ s Party is now underway , and comes at a time of severe tension between North Korea and the international community .
It is widely expected that Kim Jong-il ’ s third son , Kim Jong-eun , will be appointed to a key position and be publicly announced as his father ’ s successor .
There are also hints that a reshuffling of important positions within the Party will take place , allowing the presumed heir to form a new power base .
Whatever happens , and whoever turns out to be the new leader , North Korea most likely faces an unstable future .
The cost of maintaining internal order will continue to rise as the system ’ s fundamental defects force the new leader to confront stark new challenges .
Moreover , responsibility for managing that potential instability extends far beyond the leadership in Pyongyang .
North Korea ’ s fragility is suggested by the fact that even such an important political event as the Worker ’ s Party conference , held for the first time in three decades , was abruptly postponed earlier in September .
One cause for the delay could be a schism within the ruling elite , a group that “ Dear Leader ” Kim Jong-il himself cannot control as effectively as before .
Moreover , Kim ’ s health problems might have worsened much faster than outsiders guess , further complicating matters .
“ Enough is enough , ” a mid-level North Korean government official recently uttered in a private conversation with a South Korean visitor to Pyongyang regarding Kim Jong-eun ’ s likely succession .
Ordinary North Koreans , too , evidently seem to view this succession differently from that of Kim Jong-il ’ s inheritance of power from his father , Kim Il-sung .
Moreover , there is no hope that any new leader , whoever it may be , will get any breathing space to establish unquestioned control , given the economy ’ s utter state of decay , as last year ’ s failed bid to reform the currency demonstrated .
The regime is under growing pressure from those at the bottom of North Korean society , and recognizes its own inability to handle the situation .
For example , for the first time , North Korea ’ s prime minister publicly apologized for a policy error – the failure of the currency redenomination .
For the dynamics of the relationship between North Korea ’ s people and its rulers seems to be changing fundamentally .
One troubling aspect of this change is that the new leader may feel the need to resort to brute force more frequently in order to suppress popular resistance .
And , at a time of domestic hardship and diplomatic isolation , North Korea ’ s leaders , their confidence boosted by their possession of nuclear weapons , might try to distract their public through audacious , and possibly destructive , acts abroad .
The attack on the South Korean naval ship Cheonan earlier this year may be a grim sign of things to come .
Indeed , the North Korean threat nowadays derives more from the regime ’ s internal weaknesses than from its aggressive external posture – the latter being the authorities ’ fearful response to the former .
Unfortunately , however , most international efforts have sought to ameliorate the symptoms rather than cure the underlying disease .
Of course , in order to pressure North Korea ’ s government to give up its nuclear option , the current international economic sanctions , which target WMD-related products and luxury goods , probably should continue .
But , at the same time , the international community should place greater emphasis on policies aimed at inducing North Korea to launch serious economic reform .
At a time of increased tension between North Korea , South Korea , and the United States such a policy may seem impossible to undertake .
Yet a road map for a peaceful transition can be designed .
If , say , North Korea is willing to respect international standards of economic behavior , it could be invited to join the International Monetary Fund .
Western governments also could permit charitable foundations to provide North Korean officials or students with scholarships to study abroad and learn how to run a market economy .
Of course , any assistance to North Korea would have to be monitored closely to prevent it from being diverted for military or other political purposes .
The international community would lose nothing by trying this approach and testing the regime ’ s will to reform .
In fact , following the recent currency fiasco , North Korean leaders may have become more open to economic reform than ever before .
Such an approach is also compatible with Chinese policy , which has been to pressure North Korea to adopt its model of economic reform .
To be sure , North Korea ’ s regime is not the only obstacle to international engagement .
Conservatives in both the United States and South Korea may argue that North Korea must first move toward denuclearization before any kind of economic assistance is offered .
But there is no reason why international efforts to ensure North Korea ’ s denuclearization must preclude policies aimed at bringing about domestic reform .
We need not assume that these goals cannot be pursued simultaneously .
On the contrary , it may be impossible to win North Korea ’ s assent to denuclearization in the absence of far-reaching domestic change .
The past two decades have shown that “ politically correct ” decisions do not produce the “ right ” results , even in the long run .
As North Korea grooms a new leader , the world needs to groom a new policy for North Korea .
