Rattling the Renminbi
BEIJING – From July 2005 until this past December , China ’ s renminbi ( RMB ) appreciated steadily .
But then the RMB fell unexpectedly , hitting the bottom of the daily trading band set by the Peoples ’ Bank of China ( PBoC ) for 11 sessions in a row .
Though the RMB has since returned to its previous trajectory of slow appreciation , the episode may have signaled a permanent change in the pattern of the exchange rate ’ s movement .
As long as China was running a trade surplus and receiving net inflows of foreign direct investment , the RMB remained under upward pressure .
Short-term capital flows had little impact on the direction of the RMB ’ s exchange rate .
There were two reasons for this .
First , thanks to an effective – albeit porous – capital-control regime in China , short-term “ hot money ” ( capital coming into China aimed at arbitrage , rent-seeking , and speculation ) could not enter ( and then leave ) freely and swiftly .
Second , short-term capital flows usually would strengthen rather than weaken upward pressure on the RMB ’ s exchange rate , because speculators , persuaded by China ’ s gradual approach to revaluation , bet on appreciation .
So why , if China was still running a decent current-account surplus and a long-term capital surplus , did the RMB suddenly depreciate , forcing the PBoC to intervene ( though not very vigorously ) to prevent it from falling further ?
Many economists outside of China have argued that the December depreciation resulted from betting by investors that Chinese policymakers , facing the prospect of a hard landing for the economy , would slow or halt currency appreciation .
But if that were true , we would now be seeing significant long-term capital outflows and heavy selling of RMB for dollars in China ’ s foreign-exchange market .
We see neither reaction .
More importantly , the RMB ’ s slow appreciation resumed fairly promptly after December ’ s dip , while investors ’ bearish sentiments about China ’ s economy remain consistent .
In fact , the RMB ’ s sudden fall in December reflects China ’ s liberalization of cross-border capital flows .
That process began in April 2009 , when China launched the pilot RMB Trade Settlement Scheme ( RTSS ) , which enables enterprises , especially larger ones , to channel their funds between Mainland China and Hong Kong .
As a result , an offshore RMB market , known as the CNH market , was created in Hong Kong alongside the onshore market , now dubbed the CNY market .
But , in contrast to the CNY , the CNH is a free market .
Given expectations of RMB appreciation and a positive interest-rate spread between Mainland China and Hong Kong , the RMB had a higher value in dollar terms on the CNH than on the CNY market .
That difference led to active exchange-rate arbitrage by mainland importers and multinational firms – one form of capital inflows from Hong Kong to the mainland .
Correspondingly , RMB liabilities owed by mainland Chinese and multinationals increased , as did RMB assets held by Hong Kong residents .
Exchange-rate arbitrage by mainland importers and multinationals creates upward pressure on the CNY and downward pressure on the CNH .
In an economy with flexible interest and exchange rates , arbitrage eliminates the exchange-rate spread quickly .
But , because China ’ s exchange rate and interest rates are inflexible , the CNH-CNY spread persists , and arbitragers are able to reap fat profits at the economy ’ s expense .
Last September , however , financial conditions changed suddenly in Hong Kong .
The liquidity shortage caused by the European sovereign debt-crisis led developed countries ’ banks – especially European banks with exposure in Hong Kong – to withdraw their funds , taking dollars with them .
As a result , the CNH fell against the dollar .
At the same time , the shortage of dollars had not yet affected the CNY , which remained relatively stable .
The CNH therefore became cheaper than the CNY .
Consequently , mainland importers and multinationals stopped buying dollars from the CNH market and returned to the CNY market . & # 160 ; At the same time , mainland exporters stopped selling dollars in the CNY market and turned to the CNH market .
The dollar shortage created depreciation pressures on the CNY , which the PBoC declined to offset .
The CNY was thus bound to fall , which it did last September .
Reverse arbitrage meant capital outflows from the Chinese mainland .
Correspondingly , RMB liabilities owed by mainlanders and multinationals decreased , as did RMB assets held in Hong Kong .
In fact , increases in financing costs and uncertainty about RMB appreciation prompted a partial sell-off of RMB assets by Hong Kong residents .
In short , because the RTSS made cross-border capital movements much easier , short-term flows have become a major factor in determining the RMB ’ s exchange rate .
External shocks affect the offshore exchange rate first , and then feed through to the onshore exchange rate .
The RMB will continue to appreciate in the near future , owing to strong economic fundamentals , but the inherent instability of short-term capital flows will make its exchange rate more volatile .
This change is bound to pose new challenges for decision makers in the United States and China , particularly as they engage in a fresh round of debate about China ’ s exchange-rate policy .
