Terror Or Reform In The Greater Middle East
Last week 's brutal bombing in Madrid is part of a wave of terror that has made victims of Christians as well as Muslims .
Everywhere debate is focused on the best way to combat this form of terrorism and on the importance , in this context , of the Greater Middle East initiative that the United States wants the G8 and NATO to approve in June .
Agreement is uncertain .
Unlike European leaders such as Joschka Fischer , Germany 's Foreign Minister , the US excludes the Israeli-Arab conflict from the initiative , and wants to concentrate solely on the social and economic problems that feed extremism and terrorism in the Islamic world .
Concern with the region did not begin with the attacks in the US in September 2001 or with the Madrid bombings .
Already in the 1980 's and 1990 's , Europe had launched the " Barcelona Process " to promote democracy , security and development in the region .
Then , as now , fears about regional instability , economic stagnation , and social backwardness abounded .
There were anxieties , too , that the increasing loss of legitimacy of Arab nationalist regimes would benefit radical Islamists - fears confirmed by Algeria 's bloody civil war of the 1990 's .
But if defending the status quo no longer seems possible , regime change incites its own fears .
Many suspect that Islamist radicals will be the big winners in any democratic opening .
This led some to support the Algerian government 's military crackdown after Islamists won the first round of 1991 legislative elections .
But the stubborn inertia of authoritarian regimes only encourages radicalization , so there is a clear need for a gradual process of liberalization .
This dilemma underscores the difficulty in crafting a democratization strategy for so vast a region as " the Greater Middle East , " which stretches from Mauritania to Pakistan .
After all , any such strategy must , by definition , ignore local specificities and regional realities .
What is needed instead are policies that reflect particular circumstances in different states and regions , together with an awareness that democracy is , above all , a statement about national realities and depends primarily on domestic factors .
If imposing a single strategy is unviable , what should the European option be , and what policy should the G8 and NATO adopt ?
Any truly viable policy must get eight things right :
It is not only Middle East governments that should be involved . Civil society and public opinion must also be included .
· Support democratic transition . Incumbent leaders must have the proper incentives to initiate gradual processes of reform .
Each positive initiative , whether it comes from governments or civil societies , should be supported .
The historical parallel here is not , as is often suggested , with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe , but with the Marshall Plan , which provided real incentives , not lofty rhetoric and hortatory appeals , for integration and democratic consolidation .
· Reinforce anti-terrorist cooperation . The fight against terrorism , which requires short-term successes , must be differentiated from the long-term process of reform .
The priority in fighting terrorism should be police and intelligence service cooperation , which produces much faster results and limits the capacity of extremists to mobilize .
· Be coherent and consistent . Human rights cannot be defended if antiterrorism activities fail to respect the rule of law .
Nor can democracy be advanced if authoritarian regimes are supported simultaneously merely because - like Saddam Hussein 's Iraq - they are secular and anti-Islamist .
· Sustain long-term commitments . Initiatives such as the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership and the European Neighborhood Policy need sustained political engagement and resources if they are to work .
NATO 's attempt to change public perceptions of its objectives and operations is also in effect a long-term effort .
Larger projects , such as the Greater Middle East initiative , are much less sustainable than targeted initiatives and are more susceptible to the exigencies of electoral campaigns .
· Get America 's role right . As with postwar European integration , America has a crucial role to play .
It must contribute in its own unique way to resolving conflicts that hinder inclusion and feed radicalism .
The main US focus must be on finding a fair solution to the Israeli-Palestinian question and to the Iraq crisis .
Of course , America 's economic support for political reform would be welcome .
· Capitalize on institutional diversity . Because NATO and the EU share complementary priorities , both can develop mechanisms for inclusive security cooperation in peacekeeping operations .
· Address the question of political Islam . None of these tasks can be achieved without serious reflection about political Islam .
Its diversity must be recognized , so that groups that resort to violence can be differentiated from those that do not .
There can be no democratic transition if Islamic currents that reject violence and accept democracy 's ground rules are not integrated into the public arena .
A key factor in the success of any EU Middle East initiative will be the millions of European citizens of North African origin , who have a political , cultural , and economic role to play .
That is why the current French debate on the headscarf is so important , for it concerns the rights of Muslim women in European societies and the protection of diversity .
Democracies can deal with political Islam and respect fundamental rights .
They can fight obscurantism and respect diversity .
Indeed , the main lesson of recent years is that their own security requires that they support democratic openings elsewhere .
