Shinzo Abe ’ s Grand Arrival
Japan ’ s new prime minister , Shinzo Abe , has wasted little time in making his mark , particularly in foreign policy .
His official visits to China and South Korea – two key countries with which relations suffered under the administration of Junichiro Koizumi – came within a week of his taking office and at a moment of crisis , with North Korea setting off an underground nuclear blast .
That Prime Minister Abe and Chinese President Hu Jintao agreed that a North Korean nuclear test “ cannot be tolerated ” suggests that this new activism may help to stabilize Asian security .
As Abe made clear when he delivered the prime minister ’ s general policy speech late last month , his focus on foreign policy is set to intensify .
But , while Abe ’ s commitment to what he describes as “ future-oriented ” relations with China and South Korea represents a welcome departure from the Koizumi government ’ s record , his policy agenda in fact implies considerable continuity with Japan ’ s heightened focus on diplomacy and security issues .
In particular , emphasizing a “ shift to more assertive diplomacy , ” Abe ’ s policy speech cited Japan ’ s initiative in proposing sanctions against North Korea to the United Nations Security Council , and its success in overseeing – through close coordination with the United States and other countries – the resolution ’ s unanimous adoption .
At the same time , he indicated his intention to advance diplomacy aimed at strengthening the solidarity among Asian nations , founded on “ the Japan-US alliance for the world and for Asia . ”
Abe also stressed his intention to boost ties with Russia , promote cooperation with the ASEAN countries , and develop a strategic dialogue with Australia and India .
Likewise , under Abe , Japan will develop its official development assistance , seek to secure stable energy supplies , and pursue permanent membership of the UN Security Council .
Toward North Korea , on the other hand , continuity will prevail , with Abe re-emphasizing the principle that normalization of relations requires resolution of abduction cases – some dating to the 1970 ’ s – involving Japanese citizens who were seized from coastal towns .
At the same time , Japan will remain committed to the six-party talks on North Korea ’ s nuclear program .
Abe recognizes the new challenges posed by proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and terrorism , and has acknowledged the rising expectation , at home and abroad , that Japan ’ s contribution to international security must grow .
Most importantly , he has proposed exercising the right collective self-defense on a case-by-case basis - thus far barred by the article 9 of Japan ’ s constitution – in order to maintain peace and promote effective functioning of the Japan-US alliance .
Abe says that he would “ expect ” the early adoption of the referendum law needed to amend the constitution .
Abe ’ s choice of personnel clearly reflects his focus on diplomatic and security issues .
Yasuhisa Shiozaki , who occupies the key position of cabinet secretary , is a long-time ally , while the foreign minister , Taro Aso , though a rival within the Liberal Democratic Party ( LDP ) , shares Abe ’ s policy priorities .
Akio Kyuma , the Director-General of the Defense Agency , which is expected to be transformed into the Ministry of Defense , was instrumental in preventing Aso ’ s ally , Fukushiro Nukaga , from running for LDP president .
Furthermore , Abe will seek to reorganize the prime minister ’ s office to reinforce its ability to function as a political headquarters that can make quick decisions on national strategy concerning diplomatic and security issues .
Thus , the prime minister ’ s office will more closely resemble the US White House , which he hopes will enable both countries to communicate their intentions continuously and reliably .
Based on his previous experience as cabinet secretary , Abe wants to create and operate a Japanese version of America ’ s National Security Council .
For this , he has appointed Yuriko Koike , a former cabinet member , as one of his five assistants , while one of the other four , Kyoko Nakayama , is responsible solely for the abduction issue .
Moreover , although the current assistants ’ authority is limited , Abe plans to submit legislation aimed at strengthening the prime minister ’ s office , including an amendment of the cabinet law .
This would enable the prime minister ’ s assistants to “ command and instruct ” the relevant ministries and agencies .
Abe ’ s government may also review to increase the number of staff to which the assistants are entitled .
All of this has given rise to depictions of the Abe administration as a “ cabinet of hawks ” or “ the buddy club ” Nevertheless , its popular support is the third highest since the end of World War II ( 63 % according to Asahi Shimbun , and 70 % according to Yomiuri Shimbun ) .
This implies that Abe enjoys a strong mandate to implement his government ’ s policies .
But high expectations , both domestically and internationally , can lead to huge disappointments .
If Abe is to create the “ beautiful country ” that he promised in his policy speech , he must not lose momentum in exercising strong leadership .
