Syria ’ s Dangerous Liaisons
All eyes turned to Syria following the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri .
Opposition groups in Lebanon , as well as Hariri supporters , openly accused Syrian President Bashar Assad ’ s regime of being responsible for the killing .
The Bush administration , while not formally blaming Syria , virtually did so and recalled its ambassador to Damascus .
The US is said to be extremely angry at Syria ’ s refusal to withdraw its forces from Lebanon in line with a United Nations resolution .
Growing opposition to Syrian hegemony in Lebanon is but one of four related problems Syria faces , all of which it has addressed inadequately .
The other three are Syria ’ s behavior in Iraq , its relations with the US , and the need for domestic reform .
While corrosive immobility is a trademark of the Syrian regime , these challenges threaten to reinforce each other and marginalize Syria internationally even more so than today .
In Lebanon , the Syrians have repeatedly misread the Bush administration ’ s intentions .
Last September , the US , together with France , sponsored UN Security Council Resolution 1559 demanding a Syrian pullout and the disarming of militias – mainly Hezbollah .
This came after Assad last September imposed an unconstitutional extension of Lebanese President Emile Lahoud ’ s mandate , despite French and American warnings .
Yet to this day , Syrian officials privately say that they don ’ t think the US is serious about a withdrawal .
Syria ’ s leaders also continue to dismiss demands from within Lebanon for an end to Syria ’ s 28-year military presence .
Such demands escalated dramatically after Hariri ’ s death , as tens of thousands of the former prime minister ’ s partisans , who previously sat on the fence when it came to Syria , shouted “ Syria out . ”
Indeed , a broad multi-communal opposition front has formed in Beirut to demand Syria ’ s departure .
Yet rather than address the front ’ s demands and shape a healthy bilateral relationship between equal countries , Syria has sought to divide the opposition and reassert control .
Hariri ’ s assassination makes that far more difficult , and Syria must prepare for a strong backlash from the US and France .
In Iraq , since the fall of Baghdad on April 9 , 2003 , Damascus has shown undue nostalgia for the old system .
Though the Syrian and Iraqi Baath parties were bitter foes , there was consolation in that both were members of a confederacy of despotisms .
For the Syrians , a democratic Iraq friendly to the US was always far worse than Saddam Hussein , the enemy they knew – and later profitably traded with – during the years of international sanctions against Iraq .
Syria ’ s suspected support for Iraqi Baathist exiles threatens to damage relations with the new Iraq .
Baghdad has repeatedly accused the Assad regime of allowing Iraqi funds to be channeled to insurgents , and recently notified the Syrians that the photograph of a senior Syrian intelligence official taken with an Islamist combatant was found on the latter ’ s body in Falluja .
As a legitimate Iraqi authority emerges following the elections , the Syrians will have to show foresight in jettisoning their pro-Saddam acquaintances .
The Bush administration ’ s growing impatience with Syrian involvement in the Iraqi insurgency is a major reason for Syria ’ s deteriorating relationship with the US .
Indeed , there is palpable disdain for Syria in Washington .
That is why Syria ’ s denials that it is playing a spoiler role in Iraq are rarely taken seriously , and why Assad has not gained American support for renewed negotiations with Israel over the Golan Heights .
There are signs that the Syrians are unable to gauge American intentions on other issues as well .
For example , Assad apparently still does not realize how much the Bush administration associates his regime with terrorism .
Syrian officials believe that because the Baath Party is secular , the US will invariably support it against an Islamist resurgence .
They fail to see that American officials regard Syria as complicit in the activities of Islamist terrorist groups in the Palestinian territories , Iraq , and Lebanon .
At home , Assad ’ s regime also finds itself in a bind .
Political and economic reform , when it advances , does so at a glacial pace .
A major item of discussion in Syria is the revival of Islam as an alternative to a political and economic system offering few incentives except to regime grandees .
France ’ s opposition to Syria ’ s presence in Lebanon was at least partly a reflection of disenchantment with Assad ’ s reformist ambitions , and the European Union has expressed similar reservations .
Assad is now in a consolidation phase , leaving little room for reform .
Indeed , his new interior minister , Ghazi Kanaan , an old-school hardliner , spearheaded a crackdown on reformers and Kurds in the past year or so .
The reshuffle last November that brought Kanaan and others into the cabinet was seen to reflect Assad ’ s preferences .
In the coming month , several rounds of retirements should allow the president to place more of his people in positions of power .
Consolidation , however , is not reform .
Assad must show that his enhanced authority can lead to genuine transformation .
Until now , the president has toed a hard line on Iraq , on Lebanon , and in domestic affairs .
If he ’ s a reformer , few are convinced .
Syria may pay a heavy price for that ambiguity .
