Preserving the Ottoman Mosaic
LONDON – The roots of the Middle East ’ s many conflicts lie in the unraveling of the Ottoman Empire at the beginning of the twentieth century and the failure since then to forge a stable regional order .
As the international community works toward securing a durable peace in the region , its leaders would be wise to remember the lessons of history .
The Ottoman Empire – which once stretched from Bihać in today ’ s Bosnia to Basra in Iraq – was a rich mosaic of intermingled cultures , traditions , and languages under the ultimate authority of the Sultan in Istanbul .
It was remarkably stable , providing the region with a peaceful foundation for hundreds of years .
But as it started to come apart , it did so violently .
It was in the Balkans that the process of carving out nation-states from the Ottoman mosaic began .
And it was a process that kicked off two decades of devastating wars – the first at the beginning of the twentieth century , the second in the 1990s .
Meanwhile , in Mesopotamia and the Levant , a new crop of countries emerged as outside powers redrew the Ottoman map .
Syria and Iraq were the outcome of negotiations over competing French and British interests .
The Greeks made an ill-fated attempt to conquer western Anatolia – eventually triggering the revolution that led to the creation of modern Turkey .
And the 1917 Balfour Declaration – a British pledge to establish a Jewish state in Palestine – laid the groundwork for the creation of Israel in 1948 , followed by decades of conflict and negotiations .
Finding a home for the Ottoman province of Mosul proved to be a particularly tricky part of the game , as it was claimed by the new governments in both Turkey and Iraq .
A commission set up by the League of Nations and headed by a Swedish diplomat crisscrossed the region in search of a fair solution , but ultimately failed to find a neat dividing line .
Eventually , the commission recommended that the province be given to Iraq , but only because Iraq was supposed to remain under a League mandate for decades .
Since then , through successive wars and revolutions , one truth has remained paramount : The Ottoman mosaic provided no clear dividing lines that would permit a smooth reordering of the region into states or entities with homogenous ethnic , national , or religious identities .
Recognizing this truth is highly consequential : The regional order created in the wake of the empire ’ s post-World War I collapse may well be arbitrary , but any attempt to change it is likely to lead to even more bloodshed .
Dividing Iraq into separate Sunni and Shia states , for example , could easily result in Mesopotamia ’ s version of the Indian subcontinent ’ s tragedy in 1947 , when millions of people died fleeing to Pakistan or India after the partition .
Indeed , the conflict between Arabs and Kurds that would follow any partition of Iraq would likely be both bloody and long , and would have profound ramifications in Iran , Turkey , and Syria , with their large Kurdish populations .
The battle for control of Baghdad would be similarly severe .
Finding a solution to the conflict in Syria is no easier .
A Russian-protected Alawite state along the coast might be sustainable , but power in Damascus would remain highly contested .
Syria ’ s Christian minority would also be a victim of such an effort .
The country is host to some of the world ’ s oldest Christian communities , which , though much smaller than they once were , retain undisputed historic rights to the region .
They are part of the small patch in the Ottoman mosaic that was preserved in modern Syria ; but they would perish if it were to disappear .
To be sure , the Ottoman mosaic is badly damaged and in the process of slowly disintegrating .
But while the old multicultural trading cities of Aleppo and Mosul might never truly recover and blossom again , that should not be used as an excuse to carve up the region along new lines , at the cost of rivers of blood .
As the international community strives to end the chaos and conflict wracking the Middle East and establish a regional order than can sustain peace and stability , its leaders should strive to work within the existing framework .
Armchair strategists in faraway countries are deluding themselves if they think attempts to impose neat new borders on these ancient lands would not founder against modern reality .
