Putin Made Simple
MOSCOW – Three weeks before Russian President Vladimir Putin ’ s first election victory , in March 2000 , his campaign released a book , First Person : Conversations with Vladimir Putin , based on 24 hours of interviews with three journalists .
With quotes like “ Life is such a simple thing , really , ” the book revealed a key belief that would underlie Putin ’ s leadership style : Simplicity can and must be imposed on a complex world .
This worldview , which today pervades the Russian establishment , was not developed by Putin himself ; it was introduced by a think tank established in December 1999 and headed by German Gref , who would later become Economic Development and Trade Minister under Putin .
In anticipation of Putin ’ s victory , Gref ’ s Center for Strategic Research invited experts to develop two programs – one focused on the economy and the other on public administration reform – based on one fundamental directive : Don ’ t complicate things .
Fifteen years later , Putin ’ s ideology , policies , and activities all reflect this obsession with simplification of systems and structures .
The separation of powers in government is too inefficient , so the presidency must dominate all other branches .
The large number of political parties , each with its own platform , is too complicated , so it must be replaced by a short list of a few accepted parties , with one main ( and permanent ) representation of power .
Freedom of expression facilitates an unproductive cacophony of outrage , so the media must receive clear directives to guide their reporting .
There were also , according to Putin ’ s regime , too many public institutions performing too many activities with insufficient oversight , so they were made smaller and given specific tasks from a short centralized list of priorities .
Multiple higher courts were too difficult to maintain , so a single court replaced them .
Like systems and institutions , problem-solving was also simplified .
Instead of developing a nuanced solution to a multifaceted problem – an approach that would involve careful thought , not to mention mistakes and adjustments – every issue , from official corruption to business management , was viewed as one-dimensional .
The Putin regime ’ s aversion to complexity has intensified over time , moving from the relatively innocuous belief that simplicity translates into clarity , manageability , predictability , and safety , to the dangerous conclusion that complexity itself – inherently unpredictable and often impenetrable – is a threat .
Complex or convoluted ideas and institutions , viewed as a product of forceful punditry , deliberately produced by the enemy to baffle and hurt Russia , are to be quashed at all costs .
This black-and-white perspective may seem like a continuation of the Soviet-era worldview .
But , in the 1990s , Russia had made significant progress toward modernization – and not just because it began to adopt Western-style state institutions .
In fact , the main driver of Russia ’ s modernization was the formation of a new social order based on freedom , diversity , and a recognition that the modern world was rich in opportunities for self-actualization , whether in the arts , business , science , or politics .
But , before a modern open society was fully established or the associated mindset entrenched , it was overtaken by Putin ’ s “ simple is better ” approach . The view that individual opportunity and heterodoxy should be subordinated to overall predictability empowered the political elite to claim omniscience and cite outside interference as the main threat to Russia ’ s future .
Driven by these beliefs , a union of “ liberals ” attempted to bring about a kind of bureaucratic modernization , having convinced themselves that liberal political outcomes could somehow be orchestrated by corrupt bureaucracy through limited democratic institutions .
Not surprisingly , they failed .
Within just a few years , it became clear not only that , in an inescapably complex world , “ simple ” solutions do not yield results , but also that restrictions on democracy , together with top-down bureaucratic control , create ideal conditions for personal enrichment .
The destruction of democratic institutions was now being driven both by the desire for simplicity and by pure greed .
The Russian proverb “ Simplicity is worse than theft ” proved oddly prescient .
The latest victim in the Putin regime ’ s quest for simplicity is science .
While science was not initially deemed a threat , within today ’ s tightly restricted social and political order , it has emerged as a symbol of autonomy and diversity .
That is why , after being elected for his third ( illegal ) term as president , Putin asserted full control over the Russian Academy of Sciences .
More recently , the Ministry of Justice added the Dynasty Foundation , established in 2002 by the well-known scientist and telecommunications mogul Dmitry Zimin , to its list of “ foreign agents , ” most likely with the goal of stifling the organization ’ s efforts to build a modern scientific community .
( The “ foreign funding ” that the foundation receives – the reason it was flagged – comes , according to Zimin , from his own bank accounts . )
This repression has had a serious impact on the scientific community , with Russia ’ s top scientific minds – unwilling to remain in an environment where greed and corruption stifle creativity and exploration – joining investors and capital in fleeing the country .
From 1990 to 2010 , around 70 % of Russia ’ s leading mathematicians and half of its theoretical physicists left the country for good . Biologists , chemists , engineers , and other experts have also been emigrating in search of better opportunities .
These trends will only accelerate as Putin ’ s regime intensifies its assault on the field .
The oppressive atmosphere of gray , government-imposed simplicity has finally insinuated itself into every sphere of Russian life .
One hopes that when Putin ’ s reign ends – as it inevitably will , perhaps even soon – Russians will understand that the path toward an open , modern society is never a simple one .
