Russia \ u0027s Manipulative Media
MOSCOW : Today , there are no political parties in Russia , only mass media .
This is the little noticed result of the last parliamentary and presidential elections .
To be sure , the press is powerful in most democracies and often influences the ways in which political messages are read by the public .
But in more developed systems , political programs and ideas are ultimately the work of political parties and politicians – what people ultimately vote for or against .
In Russia , the media don 't " mediate " ; they are the very source of Russia 's political ideas .
Russian voters vote don 't vote a party line , they vote the mass media line .
Last summer there was little doubt that the coming parliamentary elections would make the Luzhkov / Primakov Fatherland-All Russia party ( OVR ) the biggest fraction in the Duma .
After the vote on December 19 , OVR was not even runner up : it came third , with 13 % of the vote and 46 out of 450 seats in the Duma .
Similarly , no one doubted last July that the next President would be either ex-prime minister Primakov or Moscow 's mayor Luzhkov .
All that was left to guessing was which of the two would agree to be prime-minister in the other 's presidential administration .
When the presidential election occurred , however , neither man was anywhere to be seen .
What happened to OVR , supposedly the new party of power ?
What happened to Primakov and Luzhkov ?
Did they change their political positions ?
Did OVR commit some huge political blunder that finished them off ?
They were destroyed , not by themselves or their unpopularity with voters , but by the mass media .
That same mass media also created a new idol who has now swept all before him .
A new inter-regional movement , Unity , founded only in September ‘ 99 , dominated the parliamentary elections last December on a platform that could be summarized in two words : Vladimir Putin .
From then on the presidential election was a yawn : the only ( not very exciting ) question was whether Putin would need one or two rounds to switch from being the " acting " to the " elected " holder of the highest office .
In the wake of Putin 's personal juggernaut , Unity also lapsed into desuetude .
To understand what happened , we need to look beyond politics and into the psychological makeup of Russian voters .
Only two groups of Russians today show some resistance to the all-powerful sway of the media .
The first – around 30 % of the voting population – is made up of political extremes , mostly hard core communist supporters for whom " party discipline " and unqualified hatred of everything since the Soviet Union 's collapse trumps all other considerations .
Included in this 30 % is a also sprinkling of right-wing nationalists who look at post-1991 history as a vast anti-Russian conspiracy .
The other group less subject to informational hypnosis are young people .
By and large , the new generation , grown to adulthood after 1991 , has its own mind and does not look at every published word as if it was revealed truth .
But in what is perhaps the most damning failure of democracy in Russia , the young are politically apathetic and refuse to vote or actively participate in politics .
The rest of the Russian public is held in thrall by TV and the press .
How ?
After all , the Russian media do not seem more trustworthy , better informed , or more professionally run than in most countries ; quite to the contrary , they are owned by a few oligarchs , and their bias and manipulation are both transparent and crude .
The answer lies in the most insidious Soviet heritage .
More than 62 million Russians who are over 40 today were formed by the Soviet system .
Although many do not have much sympathy for the old regime , most have been conditioned to view any published word , or anything they see on TV , as a type of gospel truth not subject critical assessment .
Such atrophy of critical thinking and unprecedented information naivete make it possible for a politically and financially motivated press to manipulate a good half of the voters .
The abnormal power of the media also means that they are not run as normal businesses .
Since owning the media allows powerful interests to achieve their coveted political or economic objectives , political influence , not profit , drives media behavior .
Just look at who stands behind the most important newspapers and TV stations in Russia .
The largest players are the state and business empires for which the media is not a significant profit center .
The list of major owners , in addition to the federal government and the usually mentioned moguls , such as Berezovsky and Gusinsky , includes the oil giant Lukoil , the gas empire Gazprom , the financial group Oneksimbank , the Moscow government , and others .
Of these , only the Gusinsky group derives its profits primarily from the media .
Another peculiarity of Russia 's media market , stemming from the absence of the profit motive , is a chronic overproduction of titles .
New players are forever trying to gain a foothold of political influence .
17 daily newspapers are published in Moscow , 10 of which call themselves " national . "
Some 5,000 newspapers appear in Russia .
Their total combined circulation is of similar size to total newspaper circulation in Germany , but there fewer than 500 titles do the job .
All the while , the total volume of advertisements during the best of times ( before the 1998 crisis ) did not exceed $ 2.5billion , as compared with more than $ 20 billion in Germany and more than $ 117 billion in America .
The power to think critically develops only slowly .
So Russia must wait before Russian politics asserts its independence and the media learns to report , rather than create .
The hope that this may one day happen lies in the fact that , despite its corruption , the media is free – one of the great legacies of Yeltsin 's presidency .
