Hope Amid the Middle East ’ s Turmoil
LONDON – Syria is a living nightmare .
Egypt hovers on the brink .
But , as the opening of peace talks between Israel and the Palestinian Authority shows , there are signs of hope .
And , though it may seem counter-intuitive , the region ’ s turmoil is finally bringing to the surface its fundamental problems in a way that allows them to be confronted and overcome .
Now is a time not for despair , but for active engagement .
No one put the chances of reviving the Israel-Palestine peace process at more than minimal .
Yet it has happened .
And these are not talks about talks , but a full-blown revival of final-status negotiations , with an undertaking by both parties to remain in the process for at least nine months .
To those of us who have toiled , often fruitlessly , on this issue in the past , it is a huge achievement brought about by US Secretary of State John Kerry ’ s sheer dogged determination and the willingness of Israel ’ s Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas to take political risks with their domestic public opinion .
Much less noted was the visit of Yemen ’ s president , Abd Rabbuh Mansur Hadi , to Washington , DC .
Against all the odds , Yemen is undergoing a process of political transformation , with 500 delegates from all parts of society working on plans for democracy , justice , and equality .
In Iraq , after years of declining sectarian violence , the casualty figures are up again , in part owing to the war in neighboring Syria .
Yet , even in Iraq , Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani , the country ’ s most influential Shia cleric , recently issued a seminal statement proclaiming the need for a civil , not religious state , with equal freedom for all to participate .
Sistani also expressed disagreement with those close to Iran who want Shia to go to Syria to fight for Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime alongside Hezbollah .
Similarly , at the start of Ramadan , King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia , who is also the custodian of the two holy mosques , made a powerful statement reclaiming the faith of Islam from those who would pervert it in the name of politics .
Libya and Tunisia are far from settled , as the recent assassination of Tunisia ’ s leading opposition politician and the presence of unrestrained militia in Libyan towns show .
But the democrats are not giving up .
Across the northern part of Sub-Saharan Africa , there are now huge challenges from well-armed and well-financed terrorist groups that have imported toxic Islamist ideology from the Middle East .
Countries such as Nigeria , for example , have suffered horribly from terrorism based on a brand of religious extremism that is alien to their society .
But , again , despite it all , the country is experiencing rapid economic growth and has just implemented a major reform – widely considered impossible until recently – of the power sector .
Meanwhile , with a genuinely inclusive and objectively administered constitution , Egypt could pivot back toward democracy .
Elections by early 2014 have been promised , and all parties , including the Muslim Brotherhood , could take part .
Or Egypt could become paralyzed and unable to rectify its dire economic situation and restore order , without which no progress is possible .
But Egypt ’ s internal divisions reveal a deeper awakening in the region that has its own significance .
Lessons about government , governance , and democracy that took the West centuries to learn are being taken in at extraordinary speed .
It is now clear that the status quo in the region will not hold .
The idea of “ strong man ” government – a regime that maintains order , and that the rest of the world likes to deal with because it is predictable – has gone .
It doesn ’ t matter whether the “ strong man ” is a psychopath , like Saddam Hussein , or a moderate , like Hosni Mubarak , who kept peace in the region . This is the twenty-first century , and ordinary people want to shape their country ’ s politics .
The choice is between evolution and revolution .
Evolution , if attainable , is clearly preferable .
Frankly , Syria would have been better for it .
People have had a taste of politics conducted by firestorm .
Across the region , there is fatigue with the wildness and disorder that politics conducted by firestorm brings .
There is growing recognition that change is best accompanied by stability , and that democracy works only if debate is conducted in an atmosphere in which arguments can be bold , even harsh , but not inflammatory .
There is also a burgeoning acceptance that religious freedom is a necessary part of free and open societies .
The discussion about religion ’ s role in government and society is now out in the open .
This is enormously important and healthy .
For the first time , there is lively and intelligent debate around this issue , which is at the core of the Middle East ’ s problems .
Open societies are incompatible with closed economies .
A functioning private sector that creates adequate jobs , and schools that educate the large young population for today ’ s inter-connected world , are prerequisites of progress .
The Israeli-Palestinian issue is crucial for all the obvious reasons .
But it is also a test of the region ’ s capacity to forge a different and better future .
If these two peoples can find common ground to create two states , both democratic and free , after decades of bitterness and bloodshed , the region would have an enormously powerful model of hope .
But the opening of the peace talks in Washington , DC , would not have happened without the full engagement of the US and other international partners .
This is the lesson that we should bear in mind as Syria disintegrates before our eyes .
However much we may wish to look away , the consequences of allowing the bloodbath in Syria to take its own course may well be disastrous for the region and for the West ’ s security .
Surely we can begin to see certain common threads running through the terror attacks of September 11 , 2001 , Afghanistan , Iraq , the Arab revolutions , Iran , Syria , Egypt , and the spread of terror based on religious extremism .
One concerns how states emerge from years of repression to build institutions capable of responding to the needs of the modern world .
Another – plainly linked – is Muslim-majority countries ’ efforts to define the relationship between religion and politics .
The entire world has a massive interest in where these threads lead .
