Putin ’ s Year of Living Dangerously
MOSCOW – In the spring of 2008 , Russian President Vladimir Putin was on top of the world .
Oil and gas prices were sky high , with export revenues flooding the Kremlin ’ s coffers .
The country ’ s once powerful military , which collapsed with the demise of communism in 1991 , was being rebuilt .
And Putin ’ s handpicked successor , Dmitri Medvedev , had been eased into power , while Putin downshifted into the premiership .
The United States , moreover , remained a perfect foil for a leader with pretensions to global leadership .
The Bush administration ’ s incoherent foreign policy included a plan to build a missile defense shield in Poland and the Czech Republic , which allowed Putin to revive the Old Europe / New Europe divisions that began with the Iraq war , with this split appearing to enhance Russian influence on the continent .
Russia ’ s seeming military revival also played a part in boosting the domestic economy .
Arms sales , worth close to $ 8 billion , were again competing globally with Great Britain and the US , going to nearly 80 countries , including Venezuela , China , India , Algeria , Iran , Malaysia , and Serbia .
And those arms sales were often closely tied to Putin ’ s foreign assertiveness , with the Russian army training and holding exercises in many places for the first time , including Venezuela , as if in preparation for another Cuban Missile Crisis , with Hugo Chávez assuming the role of Fidel Castro .
So good did things seem that Russia suddenly discovered that , perhaps for the first time since the early days of the Soviet era , the country actually had some “ soft power . ”
This first became apparent when the International Olympic Committee awarded the 2014 Winter Games to the Black Sea resort of Sochi .
In 2007 , Putin addressed the Olympic Committee ( in English ) , and persuasively argued that the Games will “ play a major role in Russia ’ s future .
They will help Russia ’ s transition as a young democracy . ”
In May 2008 , Russia won the world hockey championship , beating Canada .
In June , it almost won the Euro 2008 football championship , losing in the semi-finals to Spain .
Next came the Eurovision Song Contest , an annual competition of pop ( rarely first class ) European singers , at which Russia ’ s Dima Bilan gained first prize for his musical clip “ Believe . ”
That , too , helped rekindle a sense of national pride , extending from the Kremlin to the streets .
Russians habitually respond with black humor to events both good and bad , and the events of 2008 were no exception .
One joke nicely encapsulates the hubris that Putin and his Kremlin allies felt : Putin and Medvedev discuss their newly found invincibility .
“ Indeed , time to initiate World War III , ” enthuses Putin .
But , as usual , pride precedes a fall .
The fall began with an event that Putin perceived as a mighty triumph – his blitzkrieg in August against Georgia .
Yes , the Kremlin was able to smack down the uppity Mikheil Saakashvili ’ s hope of reuniting his country by force .
But the world saw in Russia ’ s onslaught against so puny an antagonist a thuggish state determined to recapture its lost empire .
All the post-Cold War certainties in Europe melted away , and with them went Putin ’ s reputation as a reliable manager of Russia ’ s economy .
Capital began to flee the country , which may not have mattered had the world economy not tanked in September .
But tank it did , taking Russia ’ s economy with it .
The reserves that Russia accumulated during the oil boom years are steadily being drained away . With oil prices collapsing , this pool of resources won ’ t be refilled quickly .
That could prove to be devastating , because all of Russia ’ s fiscal assumptions were based upon high oil prices continuing for years to come .
Nevertheless , Putin is trying to spend his way out of the crisis .
But such efforts are unlikely to be enough , because the heavy-handed state-dominated economy – with ex-KGB agents now embedded at the top of most state companies – lacks both the nimbleness and the diversification to recover speedily .
Moreover , with animosity between East and West at their highest since the Cold War ’ s end , Russia ’ s trading partners are anxiously looking for other options , which may mean that Putin has damaged Russia ’ s long-term prospects for an export-led recovery as well .
Indeed , the Georgian war antagonized not only the west , but also China , which has a vital strategic interest in maintaining the post-Cold War geo-strategic settlement .
China , after all , has no desire to see a “ Soviet Reunion ” on its border .
Besides antagonizing China , the Georgian war also exposed the hollowness of Russia ’ s military re-armament .
Yes , the Russian army could smash Georgia and most of its ex-Soviet neighbors , but its performance in Georgia shows that it remains the same lumbering , badly motivated outfit that it was in the 1990 ’ s .
Now that America is no longer saddled with a president loathed around the world , Putin has lost one of the key tools that had helped him boost Russia ’ s international standing .
Poking Bush in the eye was a fine thing to do in the eyes of many people , particularly in Europe .
But to greet the elegant and popular President-elect Barack Obama with threats to station missiles on Europe ’ s borders , as Medvedev did the day after America ’ s presidential election , exposed before the world the Kremlin ’ s ham-handed ways once again .
