Outsourcing in Africa
In the past 40 years , advanced computers and communications have transformed one part of the world after another - first , the US and Europe , then Japan , Korea , and Taiwan , and most recently , India , China , and Eastern Europe .
Is Africa next ?
Despite civil wars , malnutrition , and the anguish of the AIDS epidemic , something remarkable is happening in black Africa : the stealthy rise of a high-technology sector .
If not quite representing an African " Silicon Valley , " these shoots of high-tech industry nonetheless can and must be nurtured if Africa is to thrive .
Consider what is happening on several floors of a single high-rise office building in Accra , Ghana 's capital .
There some 1,500 Africans process American health-insurance claims - working around the clock , in three shifts .
The Africans speak English , type at least 50 words a minute on a computer , take data from paper claim forms supplied by US health insurers via satellite in electronic form , put it into new digital forms , and ship them back to the US .
So connected are these Africans that their forms can be reviewed - as they fill them in - by an American supervisor 8,000 miles away .
Ghana is best known for producing cocoa and gold , but today Affiliated Computer Services ( ACS ) , a Texas company that runs the outsourcing operation , is the country 's largest private employer .
African " key punchers " earn $ 4 to $ 5 a day - four times the legal minimum wage - and receive health insurance , meals , and subsidized transport .
A small number of African engineers and professionals earn much more , and receive periodic training in advanced technologies .
ACS 's employees are but the first Africans to benefit from the hottest trend in the global economy : outsourcing , or the shift of service jobs from high-wage to low-wage countries .
To be sure , the number of jobs moving to Africa is tiny compared to those going to Asia , Latin America , and Eastern Europe .
But the big news is that Africa is finally competing in the economic contest that is reshaping the world economy .
Still , Africa remains burdened by severe disadvantages , not the least of which is a terrible image . " Big corporations don 't even have Africa on the map when they consider outsourcing locations , " says Sambou Makalou , a native of Mali who tries to persuade US employers to shift service jobs to Africa .
African governments also must be willing to start small : expend a lot of effort to attract pilot projects in the hope of larger employment in the future .
With sensible reforms , many barriers can be removed or at least eased .
Start with the following :
· Better Governance : African governments often boast when they simply stop the corrosive effects of corruption and irrational business regulation .
But little attention is given to the high cost of telecommunications , unreliable electrical-power systems , and the poor transport infrastructure .
• Greater Competitiveness : African leaders have been slow to realize that they must woo foreign corporations with special services , training programs for workers , and even subsidized offices .
Asian countries attract many jobs by creating " industrial parks , " with more reliable services , including ultra-reliable communications networks , offered at competitive prices .
By restructuring their secondary schools and universities to train graduates with skills demanded by multinational corporations , Asian countries also create more competitive workforces .
To be sure , Africa is a far better place to do business than five years ago .
The spread of mobile telephony has revolutionized ordinary life in a continent with the world 's lowest penetration of fixed-line telephones .
Satellite links have vastly improved Internet access , and a new undersea cable that runs along the coast of Africa ( SAT-3 ) promises to improve and reduce the cost of all types of communications .
The problem is that , although Africa 's economic appeal is increasing , India and China are improving more quickly , widening the gap .
African cities are increasingly finding their way onto the short lists of corporate location experts , only to lose out to Asian cities .
Africans can start winning only if they move faster .
Surprisingly , wage competitiveness is a problem .
Although Africa is the world 's poorest region on average , wages in the formal economy generally exceed those paid in China and India , where government keeps basic food , housing , and transport costs relatively low through subsidies and controls .
In urban Africa , costs - for food and transport in particular - are relatively high , which forces wages up .
The supply of African professionals and skilled workers , meanwhile , is tight ; shortages also drive up wages .
Indeed , an Indian software programmer typically earns less than a comparable African programmer .
Even wages for routine data-entry tasks in Africa are usually no less than those paid in south Asia .
The odds that Africa one day will receive a fair share of outsourcing jobs are improving .
But there is a risk that the region will fall further behind .
When ACS decided to expand recently , it opened a new operation in India rather than in Ghana or another African country .
The message was sobering .
Even as hundreds of similar outsourcing centers spring up in Asia , Eastern Europe , and Latin America , the Accra center remains a rarity in Africa .
That is a shame , but it need not be Africa 's fate .
