Sinai ’ s Second-String Security
SHARM EL-SHEIKH – In the wake of an attack that killed 16 security officers in the Sinai Peninsula in August , the Egyptian military has ratcheted up the pressure against jihadis there .
Generals have promised an extended campaign to extinguish the terrorist threat , bringing in heavy armor and firing missiles at training camps to back up their pledge .
But , if past performance is indicative of future returns , the offensive is likely to be a fleeting affair .
The armed forces have never shown much interest in stabilizing Sinai , and previous operations to clear out jihadis have not prevented them from returning .
Egyptians blame the strictures of the 1979 Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty for their military ’ s inability to police Sinai .
The bilateral accord stipulates that Egypt can station only 22,000 troops in the western part of the peninsula , known as Zone A. In the eastern section bordering Israel , known as Zone C , the Egyptian presence is restricted to Central Security Forces personnel .
Composed of poorly trained cadets , the CSF is limited to carrying out “ normal police functions , ” according to the agreement ’ s security annex .
Jihadis have exploited the security void created by last year ’ s revolution to reinforce their presence in Sinai .
As the threat has mounted , Israel has allowed Egypt to increase troop levels in the peninsula beyond those stipulated in the peace accords .
But Egypt has not taken advantage of the offer .
Last August , the Israelis permitted an additional seven battalions and 20 tanks in Zone C. But the Egyptian armed forces never brought in the full number of additional troops , and did not even bother to transport the tanks across the Suez Canal .
Egypt ’ s approach toward Sinai troop deployments reflects its traditional neglect of the peninsula .
Historically , it has deployed only 70-80 % of the 22,000 soldiers that the treaty allows in Zone A. And the military has never established a regional command in Sinai , preferring to allow units temporarily stationed there to report to their superiors scattered around Cairo and its environs .
Egypt ’ s new Islamist leaders may want to restore “ full sovereignty ” over the peninsula , as President Mohamed Morsi ’ s legal adviser , Mohamed Fouad Gadalla , recently noted .
Such saber-rattling comments vis-à-vis Israel are currently popular in the country .
But the generals , who have the final say on military matters , are likely to preserve the status quo .
Egypt ’ s indifference toward Sinai stems from its view of Israel .
When the guns fell silent following the two countries ’ 1973 war , Egypt stopped viewing Israel as a threat .
In the cease-fire talks that followed , the two sides made so much progress that US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger , fearing that he would have nothing to negotiate when he arrived in the region weeks later , asked the Israelis to halt them .
Since then , Egypt has fought a war with Libya and sporadically clashed with Sudan .
But not a shot has been fired across Sinai .
Employing CSF troops in the sensitive border region where jihadis have established their strongholds is similarly indicative of Sinai ’ s insignificance in Egyptian military thought .
Created to absorb army rejects who must still complete their mandatory national service , the CSF is a lower-rung security organization in a country whose armed forces are subpar to begin with .
Its members are uneducated rural men , some of whom are illiterate .
Their most crucial tasks include guarding banks and hotels .
These forces are poorly trained and badly equipped to take on fighters with experience in international jihadist campaigns .
And the CSF ’ s track record is dismal at best .
When it was deployed as part of the battle against the Islamist uprising of the 1990 ’ s , insurgents penetrated a number of units .
The government ’ s counter-terrorism policies also work against an enhanced military role in quashing the Sinai jihadis .
Historically , Egypt has used its intelligence services , supplemented by the police and the CSF , to fight Islamist militants .
As a result , the army has neither the training nor the experience to grapple with Sinai insurgents .
The military ’ s recent offensive reflects this , relying on air strikes that imperiled civilians rather than a ground offensive that would have been more precise in achieving its objectives .
And dropping bombs instead of arresting jihadis prevented the military from gaining valuable intelligence about future attacks and transnational ties to other organizations and networks .
But , beyond such theoretical objectives , lay the operation ’ s practical realities .
Sinai residents claim that there were no funerals following the missile strikes .
The lack of evidence of casualties has left many Egyptian analysts believing that the military ’ s aim was not to target jihadis , but rather to silence its domestic and international critics .
If so , it is a tactic that can work only until the next attack .
And that will only lead to more civilian and military casualties in Egypt ’ s neglected war .
