Obama Steps Up
WASHINGTON , DC – For the past six years , US President Barack Obama 's administration has , more often than not , sided with the interests of big banks on financial-sector policy .
But this week , announcing a new proposal to prevent conflicts of interest in financial advising , Obama seemed to turn an important corner .
From the outset of his first presidential term , Obama maintained the approach taken by George W. Bush 's administration .
Large financial firms benefited from the provision of massive government support in early 2009 , and their executives and shareholders received generous terms .
Citigroup , in particular , benefited from this approach , which allowed it to carry on with substantially the same business model and management team .
And the Dodd-Frank financial-reform legislation of 2010 could have done much more to curtail large banks ' power and limit the damage they can cause .
Most recently , in December 2014 , the administration abandoned an important part of the Dodd-Frank reforms – a move that directly benefited Citigroup by allowing its management team to take on more risk ( of the kind that almost broke the financial system in 2007-08 ) .
Among financial-industry lobbyists and House Republicans , the knives are out to roll back more of the constraints imposed on Citigroup and other big banks .
But now , in an abrupt and commendable turnabout , the Obama administration put the issue of conflicts of interest in the financial sector firmly on the table .
The specific context involves the investment advice given to people saving for retirement .
The decisions these savers must make are complex and can have profound consequences .
Getting it right is difficult even under the best of circumstances .
What will interest rates be ?
How long will you and your spouse live ?
What will your commitments to your children be , and for how long ?
But perhaps the most important question is whether you can trust your financial adviser .
Some financial advisers in the United States are paid not on the basis of how their clients do , but according to what financial products they persuade them to buy .
Dennis Kelleher of Better Markets , a pro-reform group , recently summed up the current situation well : “ [ A ] dvisers can recommend investments that generate lucrative commissions for them , even though their clients get stuck with high fees , subpar performance , and unacceptably risky products . "
Kelleher has been an effective critic of the administration in recent years , pushing long and hard to address all potential conflicts of interest in finance .
And now his analysis and recommendations are being echoed in a new report issued by the Council of Economic Advisers . “ Such fee structures , " the CEA warns , “ generate acute conflicts of interest : the best recommendation for the saver may not be the best recommendation for the adviser 's bottom line . "
And the CEA goes further , estimating that conflicted investment advice leads to a one-percentage-point drop in return .
In today 's low-interest-rate environment , that 's a huge potential loss .
( The actual impact will also depend on what happens to equity prices in the coming years . )
The CEA report provides a useful primer on the issues and data .
I wish they weighed in more frequently on finance-related issues , rather than deferring to the US Treasury .
Or they could just listen to Senator Elizabeth Warren as she speaks out repeatedly on a broad range of financial-reform issues .
( Warren joined Obama in unveiling the proposal to protect retirement savers . )
Not surprisingly , at least some people at the US Securities and Exchange Commission have reacted negatively – this is stepping onto their turf , after all .
And the lobbyists are , naturally , out in full force .
But with sufficient White House willpower , the administration can see this through .
What is needed is a change in the rules set by the Department of Labor , which has jurisdiction over retirement-related issues .
No doubt industry defenders will claim that current practices benefit small investors – a point disputed directly by the CEA .
The broader and more interesting question is : Where are the statesmen in the financial industry ?
Where are the leaders who push for a race to the top , by better serving their clients ' best interests ?
Jack Bogle , who built his investment-management company , the Vanguard Group , on exactly this principle , with a clear focus on lower fees at every opportunity , has come out strongly in favor of the administration 's proposal .
Unfortunately , his remains a lonely voice .
Everyone who provides investment advice to retirement savers should act solely in their clients ' best interests .
And , judging by the high number of distinguished and honorable professionals in the industry , many advisers , if not most , already do .
But there also are too many people being exploited , which harms them individually and discourages savings more broadly .
That is why the law should be amended to eliminate as many potential conflicts of interest as possible , by requiring all retirement advisers to act in their clients ' best interests at all times .
Such a requirement would be a promising start , but there is still a long way to go .
All retail investors , not just retirement savers , deserve the same legal protection .
Until they get it , the best investment advice may be to assess your adviser carefully , bearing in mind a well-tested performance metric : “ Where are the customers ' yachts ? "
