Social Democracy Lives in Latin America
MONTEVIDEO , URUGUAY – Amongst the different leftist governments in Latin America , there are new and rather strident populist regimes ( Venezuela , Bolivia , Ecuador ) , which seem to grab all the attention . But there is also a social-democratic strain to Latin American politics – a historical novelty in the region – that is gaining strength .
In Brazil , Chile and Uruguay , social democracy is proving that it can work .
What distinguishes these social democratic governments from their populist counterparts is that they are composed of a left that is integrated into competitive , multi-party democracies .
These social democrats were once part of a socialist , revolutionary , or reformist left , tightly allied with labor unions . But they ultimately accepted the market economy , and came to lean toward ideological moderation and to compete for votes in the political center . At the same time , motivated by their political competition and their own leftist ideology , these social democratic governments emphasize both economic growth and social inclusion .
These governments ’ potential to innovate depends on the political resources and power at their disposal . The first government of the left in Uruguayan history has comparative advantages in this respect , for , unlike in Brazil and Chile , Uruguay ’ s social democrats have ruled as a one-party majority government .
The Frente Amplio ( FA ) brings together nearly all the country ’ s left-wing groups and has the loyal support of labor unions .
Moreover , Uruguay ’ s president , Tabaré Vázquez won his office five years ago in the first round and , by uniting the posts of head of state and party leader , was able to forge a strong presidential leadership and popularity . As a result , during the cycle of economic prosperity that lasted until 2008 , with rising commodity prices and internal dynamism , the Vázquez government insured macroeconomic stability , fiscal balance , and an open market , encouraging competitiveness as well as domestic and foreign private investment .
Despite this economic orthodoxy , Vázquez ’ s government also pursued important policy innovations : protection of human rights was improved ; tax reform , including introduction of a general , progressive income tax was undertaken and a more inclusive health system was created .
In addition , the government forged policies for the poor with non-contributory income transfers and family allowances , which benefited minors and female who are heads of household . Public education was boosted by bigger expenditure and a “ one laptop per child ” program .
A labor policy favorable to workers and unions revived Wage Councils for setting pay .
Vázquez ’ s term ends in March 2010 . He cannot run again and the looming presidential election promises to be close .
Indeed , despite the government ’ s successes , there could be a change , as the Partido Nacional of the center-right bloc is now running neck-and-neck with the FA .
In the FA primaries , José Mujica won the presidential nomination by defying Vázquez and placing himself farther to the left than his rival , Danilo Astori , who represented a continuation of the present administration . Mujica has a populist profile , based on charisma , anti-establishment stances and an appeal to the poor , which was strengthened by his personal traits and his lineage as a member of the 1960 ’ s Tupamaros guerrilla movement , as well as his affinity for the ruling Kirchners of Argentina and the “ Bolivarian ” left .
Given all this , it might seem that Uruguay ’ s carefully constructed social-democratic alternative could unravel .
But the party system and the FA ’ s internal balance of power do not favor any turn abrupt toward radical left or populism . Indeed , because populist tactics are likely to prove self-defeating in the presidential campaign , Mujica started supporting Vázquez ’ s administration ’ s record and made Astori his candidate to be Vice President , entitled to take the lead on economic policy and participate in the executive . To stress their social democratic credentials both candidates , Mujica and Astori , have gone on pilgrimages to the United States , Brazil , and Chile .
Moreover , Uruguay ’ s political structures will invariably have a moderating effect on any government that might be elected .
Regardless of the president ’ s political slant , if the FA remains in office , the social-democratic reforms of recent years are likely to continue , although with different emphases and considerable variations imposed by the economic cycle and the government ’ s political resources .
If the FA does not win the first round , it will not secure the absolute majority that Vázquez has enjoyed , limiting the government ’ s capacity for innovation . Furthermore , while Mujica has majority support within the FA , he is not the sole chief of the party but just the head of one of its competing factions .
His leadership will be sorely tested in the electoral campaign , and also in his presidency should he triumph .
A second term for the Frente Amplio would pose new problems , since the balance of power and political competition will be stronger , both between parties and within the left itself . These challenges may eventually tug Uruguay ’ s social democrats even closer to the experiences of Brazil and Chile . Like their European brethren , Latin America ’ s social democratic governments should eventually prosper through pluralist democracies and the even more demanding politics of compromise .
