A Raisin in the Israeli Sun
WASHINGTON , DC – Decades of efforts to reduce the death toll from drunk driving in the United States produced the mantra , “ Friends don ’ t let friends drive drunk . ” After Israel ’ s election last week , the country ’ s friends around the world should adopt a similar slogan : “ Friends don ’ t let friends govern blind . ”
Israel ’ s blindness is self-induced .
Its government cannot solve the conflict with the Palestinians on Israeli terms , so it has decided to behave as if the entire issue did not exist .
Astonishingly , when Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu addressed the United States Congress earlier this month , his 39-minute speech about Iran ’ s existential threat to Israel did not contain a single mention of the Palestinian people .
Campaigning at home , however , he talked only about the threat some Palestinians pose to Israeli security today , never of the opportunity that other Palestinians offer for peace tomorrow .
Israeli voters chose the politics of fear over the politics of possibility .
Whether to support the right or the center-left was a classic choice between guns and butter , security and prosperity .
The Zionist Union , the principal opponent of Netanyahu ’ s Likud party , focused mostly on domestic issues like housing , the high cost of living , and growing economic inequality .
Netanyahu emphasized the threat Israel faces from Iran , the Islamic State , and Hamas .
He even added a racist dimension to the fear mongering on Election Day , warning that , “ Arab voters are coming out in droves to the polls . ”
During the campaign , Netanyahu also renounced any possibility under his government of a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
An interviewer with an Israeli news site asked , “ Are you saying that if you are Prime Minister , a Palestinian state will not be created . ”
Netanyahu answered : “ Correct . ”
Once secure in his victory , Netanyahu immediately retracted the statement .
He claimed that he meant only that a two-state solution was not achievable under current conditions , as long as the Palestinian Authority is in a coalition with Hamas and as long as vacated territories bring the “ rise of militant Islam . ”
But it is too late for clarifications .
Palestinians heard clearly and explicitly what they have long assumed : the Israeli government has no interest in reaching a peace deal .
It would prefer to keep building settlements and to hunker down behind security walls .
That is a tragedy , because it drives both sides into a cycle of action and reaction that ultimately will make impossible a negotiated two-state solution – the kind of solution in which each side gives up something it wants in order to gain something that both sides want more .
Israel now faces three scenarios , all of them bad .
One is increasing international isolation and the politicization of support for Israel in the US , traditionally its staunchest military and diplomatic ally .
Younger US voters , generations removed from the Holocaust , do not share most of their elders ’ reflexive habit of support for Israel .
They do not see Israel the way Israel sees itself , as a nation under threat ; instead , they see a government that has explicitly aligned itself with the Republican Party .
They will also begin to question why the US stands with Israel in the United Nations when even America ’ s closest allies in Europe and elsewhere have begun to peel away .
Though Netanyahu received many rounds of applause when he addressed Congress , more than 60 Democrats boycotted his speech .
Losing the support of Europeans and a significant number of Americans cannot be good for Israel ’ s security and prosperity .
The Palestinians will now pursue with renewed determination and vigor a path to statehood through unilateral recognition .
If they succeed , Israel will face a Palestinian state with borders to which it did not agree and a continuing conflict that will become a formal inter-state war , subject to international law .
If the Palestinians fail , they will most likely turn again to violence : a third intifada , bigger and with greater international support than the first two .
Israel will have no option but to repeat the horrors of recent Gaza wars on a much larger scale , filling the world ’ s media with images of dead children , destroyed schools and hospitals , and heavily armed Israeli troops taking on rock-throwing teenagers .
That is not an experience that Israel or its friends could possibly want .
Netanyahu thinks that he can build a fence and let the problem simply fester forever .
But one should heed the words of Langston Hughes ’ famous poem , which became a refrain of the US civil rights movement .
In a slightly abridged version , it reads :
“ What happens to a dream deferred ?
Does it dry up
like a raisin in the sun ?
Or fester like a sore —
And then run ?
Maybe it just sags
like a heavy load .
Or does it explode ? ”
Successive Israeli governments have shown that they can meet and contain explosions of Palestinian frustration and rage .
But each time they do , Israel loses a little more of its soul .
Israel is a special and vibrant country , filled with talented , hard-working , and committed people who have much to contribute to the world .
But right now its leaders , by ignoring Palestinian dreams , are courting a nightmare .
