Opening Up Japan
After a dozen years of stagnation , Japan 's economy seems to be looking up .
But appearances can deceive .
Despite improvements and reforms , many of Japan 's fundamentals remain woeful .
Japan 's decline has been palpable .
In the late 1980 's , it was fashionable in some Japanese policy circles to argue that the Pax Americana was over , to be replaced in Asia by Pax Japonica .
America 's economy seemed to be tanking , Japan 's was soaring , and projections favored 2005 as the date when it would overtake the United States .
That things have turned out far differently reflects Japan 's inertia .
The problems underlying Japan 's decline are legion .
Japanese policymakers and business leaders do not understand the concept of " creative destruction . "
Too many industrial dinosaurs are kept on life support .
So , although some firms do extremely well - say , Toyota and Canon - there is little space for new ventures and entrepreneurs .
If Japan 's economy were a computer , it would have a hard disk full of obsolescent programs and a " delete " button that doesn 't work .
No matter what criterion one uses , Japan 's economy remains the most closed among OECD countries and one of the most closed in the world .
Not only is foreign capital conspicuously absent , but so are foreign managers , workers , intellectuals , and ideas .
Universities , think tanks , and the media are for the most part insular institutions .
Similarly , while non-government organizations ( NGO 's ) are a dynamic component in most societies nowadays , Japan has few , and major international NGO 's are nonexistent or have only a weak presence .
Oxfam , one of the world 's leading NGOs , with offices and branches all over the world , is absent altogether .
The closed nature of Japanese society and the dearth of ideas are partly attributable to the linguistic barrier .
Where Japan really falls short is in English - the global language , and thus the main purveyor of global ideas .
In Asia , Japan ranks above only North Korea in scores on the Test of English as a Foreign Language ( TOEFL ) examination .
Moreover , Japan 's demographics are among the worst in the world .
In this respect , Europe is not much better , although its current restrictive immigration policies will likely be eased over the next decade or so .
No such assumption can be made about Japan , where an aging population will intensify the closed and intellectually arid nature of its society .
As one of the world 's major trading powers , Japan should be a leading player in the World Trade Organization and in trade policy forums .
Yet despite being one of the main beneficiaries of the post-World War II open and multilateral trading system , Japan stands out as a retrograde mercantilist state .
Isolation has brought confusion about Japan 's place in the world .
While Japan 's government lobbies hard to get a permanent seat on the UN Security Council , its Prime Minister regularly flouts Asian opinion by paying his respects to war criminals at the Yasukuni Shrine .
Apart from the immorality of such public behavior ( imagine a German chancellor paying his respects at Goebbels ' grave ! ) , the fact that both China and the US have veto power at the UN suggests that it is stupid even from the standpoint of Realpolitik .
Indeed , relations with China are Japan 's most profound problem .
Japan 's emergence as East Asia 's leading power in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries involved three brutal wars in China , in which the Japanese army committed dreadful atrocities .
The 1949 communist takeover in China , the Cold War , America 's adoption of Japan as its pampered protégé , and the failure to prosecute Emperor Hirohito for war crimes , allowed Japan to avoid a moral reckoning .
Now , as China rises and Japan declines , the old , deep-seated suspicions , tensions , and distrust are resurfacing .
Japan 's grim outlook is bad news for the world because it is the globe 's second leading economic power .
Prospects for Japan acting as a global economic locomotive and of playing a role in poverty reduction and economic development are , for now , almost nil .
Indeed , Japan 's current growth is being driven overwhelmingly by trade with China - a country with only one-thirtieth of Japan per capita GDP !
From a broader geopolitical perspective , the situation becomes alarming .
Despite its frequent economic booms , Asia is also a strategic and security minefield .
A sclerotic , atavistic , nationalist , and inward-looking Japan can only aggravate the situation .
What should Japan do ?
The only solution for Japan is to open up - not only its economy , but its society , its universities , its media , its think tanks , and , indeed , its bars and bathhouses .
Many young Japanese - often the brightest and most entrepreneurial - demand to live in an open society , but the option they are choosing now is emigration .
An open Japan would , by definition , be more outward-looking , would speak better English so that it could communicate across Asia and the world , would be more influenced by foreign ideas - including ideas concerning war guilt .
It has been 150 years since the " black ships " of America 's Navy forcibly opened up Japan .
Today , the Japanese must open up their country themselves .
