Palestine ’ s State of Mind
RAMALLAH – The idea of Palestine becoming a permanent member of the United Nations originated , say Palestinians , with none other than US President Barack Obama .
Speaking at the UN General Assembly on September 23 , 2010 , Obama said that he hoped that “ when we come back here next year , we can have an agreement that will lead to a new member of the United Nations – an independent , sovereign state of Palestine , living in peace with Israel . ”
Palestinians decided to take Obama at his word .
Obama ’ s & # 160 ; efforts to rekindle the Middle East peace process & # 160 ; began with Israel ’ s refusal to carry out a & # 160 ; temporary settlement freeze .
The United States was even willing to offer a $ 3 billion arms deal to Israel in return for & # 160 ; the suspension of building Jewish-only settlements in areas earmarked for the Palestinian state .
But Israel ’ s prime minister , Binyamin Netanyahu , & # 160 ; rejected the US offer .
Nine months later , Obama made another effort to kick-start the talks .
“ The borders of Israel and Palestine should be based on the 1967 lines with mutually agreed swaps , so that secure and recognized borders are established for both states , ” & # 160 ; he said in & # 160 ; May .
Once again , Palestinians accepted Obama ’ s formula , while Netanyahu publicly rejected it , leaving Palestinians with no other nonviolent alternative but to go to the UN to seek a state & # 160 ; based on the 1967 borders .
In 1967 , it should be recalled , Israel occupied the remainder of historic Palestine and other Arab territories following the June War .
Shortly after the war , the UN Security Council declared in the preamble to Resolution 242 that “ it is inadmissible to occupy land by force . ”
This is not the first time that the UN & # 160 ; has been called upon to arbitrate the intractable Middle East conflict ; nor have only Palestinians approached .
Back in 1947 , when the UN & # 160 ; General Assembly voted to partition the British Mandate of Palestine into a Jewish state and an Arab state , Jews of the British Mandatory state of Palestine danced in the streets of Tel Aviv .
Today ’ s Israelis are rejecting recognition of Palestinian statehood on a much smaller territory than that assigned to Arabs by the original partition .
In more recent history , since 1991 ’ s Madrid Conference , direct talks between Israelis and Palestinians have taken place in various formats .
Palestinians made one compromise after another , hoping that partial agreements would lead to statehood .
The 1993 Oslo accords set in motion a peace process that was & # 160 ; supposed to last five years , with the end goal being an independent Palestinian state and a safe , secure , and recognized Israel .
But the peace process & # 160 ; exposed a permanent inability to agree on anything of real substance .
Worse , direct talks have not only failed to produce the desired results ; their continuation has also helped to mask widespread construction of Israeli colonies on Palestinian territory .
Palestinian lands continue to be confiscated , Jewish-only settlements continue to be built , and Israel ’ s so-called “ security wall ” has strangled the Palestinians socially and economically .
The International Court of Justice at The Hague has ruled that the wall built inside Palestinian territory is illegal under international law , yet nothing has been done to enforce that ruling .
Mahmoud Abbas , the chairman of the PLO and President of the Palestinian Authority , who has vowed not to run for re-election , has chosen to & # 160 ; take the path of UN recognition & # 160 ; rather than continue & # 160 ; with the charade of useless – indeed , harmful – direct talks .
And , clearly , that change in tactics has hit a raw nerve with Israelis and frustrated the US .
Few Palestinians see anything wrong with the move , although many are not certain that it will produce much & # 160 ; in the way of immediate and tangible results .
Nonetheless , the Palestinian public is pleased for now with a leadership that has found the backbone to stand up to pressure from Israel and the US .
This will certainly help Abbas in the short term .
But if the UN move does not & # 160 ; bear fruit within a reasonable timeframe , the public might turn against its political leaders – as well as against the Israeli occupiers .
So what , exactly , is Abbas hoping to achieve ?
The UN General Assembly , unlike the Security Council , cannot declare a state , and the US has vowed to veto any Security Council resolution that recognizes Palestine ’ s independence .
But , if two-thirds of its members agree , the General Assembly can recognize Palestine as a state with observer status , similar to the Vatican .
At that point , the international community would be obliged to begin acting against any party that was denying Palestine the right to behave as a fully functional and sovereign state .
Moreover , as a state ( even with observer status ) , Palestine could seek legal relief from the International Court of Justice .
It might also try , within the General Assembly , to invoke the rarely used Uniting for Peace resolution ( the last time was against South Africa ’ s apartheid regime ) .
Palestinians ’ desire to obtain a UN vote on statehood ( in whatever form ) does not mean that they cannot have direct negotiations with Israel .
Palestinian spokesmen , including Abbas , have said that they see no reason why representatives of the newly recognized state cannot negotiate with representatives of Israel . & # 160 ; If the UN vote succeeds , however , & # 160 ; it will not be a people talking with their occupiers , but two states negotiating about how to manage their relations in peace and harmony .
