Bibi Goes to Washington
NEW YORK – Why did he do it ?
What possessed Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin “ Bibi " Netanyahu to accept an invitation from the Republicans in the US Congress to come and attack President Barack Obama 's policy on Iran without letting the White House know ?
Netanyahu claims that his was “ a fateful , even historic mission " to voice his concern for the fate of Israel and all Jews .
But we already knew about his concerns – and that many Jews , in the US and elsewhere , do not feel that he was speaking for them .
Did Netanyahu crave the applause of his Republican supporters ?
Is he gambling on the chance of a Republican presidency in 2016 ?
If so , he got the applause ; but , given the current polls , the latter motive would be quite a gamble .
Or was Netanyahu simply using the US Congress as a venue for his own campaign to keep his job ?
Did he wish to impress voters back home with a starring role on a world stage ?
This , too , would seem to be a gamble : many Israelis , however worried they might be about an Iranian nuclear bomb , have been highly critical of Netanyahu 's provocation of Obama , and of many Jewish Democrats .
Two former Mossad directors joined a chorus of Israelis in arguing that he should no longer be prime minister .
Meir Dagan , who resigned as the Israeli intelligence chief in 2011 , called Bibi 's grandstanding in Washington “ destructive to the future and security of Israel . "
Whatever his motives , Netanyahu has achieved what no Israeli leader ever has : not only infuriating the US president ( who was already quite angry with him ) , but also earning the public rebuke of people who would normally have supported any Israeli leader , whatever they might have thought in private .
If an Israeli prime minister cannot even count on the backing of a man like Abraham Foxman , the national director of the Anti-Defamation League , he is in trouble .
By forcing Americans – and not just Jews or Democrats – to choose between their loyalty to Israel and the president of their own country , Netanyahu has punched a large hole in Americans ' normally bipartisan support for Israel .
This is not to say that US politicians have always agreed with Israeli policies .
But few have thought it worth their while to express their criticism in public .
The benefits of doing so rarely outweigh the costs : lost campaign contributions , accusations of anti-Semitism , charges of betraying a close ally ( “ the only democracy in the Middle East " ) , and so on .
The fact that Israel could always count on US backing , especially on such public occasions as congressional speeches by an Israeli leader , only confirmed the assumption of many people around the world that Israel and the US are joined like Siamese twins .
Some think that Israel is the cat 's paw of the US ; others believe it is the other way around .
In the spirit of that notorious nineteenth-century czarist forgery , The Protocols of the Elders of Zion , anti-Semites think “ the Jews " run the US government , Wall Street , and the media .
Such beliefs , of course , have been around for much longer than the modern state of Israel .
Nineteenth- and twentieth-century European nationalists often regarded the US as the natural home for capitalists and “ rootless cosmopolitans " without any loyalty to their native soil .
Only money ruled in America , it was thought , so that meant that the Jews ruled .
Though it was Stalin who used the phrase “ rootless cosmopolitans " to describe unwanted Jews , anti-Semites believed that Jews were natural Bolsheviks and probably pulled the strings in the Soviet Union , too .
It was widely assumed than Jews , whether capitalist or communist , knew no allegiance except to their own people ; after 1948 , that increasingly came to mean the state of Israel .
By claiming to be the leader of all Jewish people , wherever they live , Netanyahu has only strengthened that notion .
In fact , the US was not always as pro-Israel as it is today .
The French were Israel 's greatest supporters until President Charles de Gaulle turned away from the Jewish state after the Six-Day War in 1967 .
America 's subsequent patronage of Israel had less to do with evangelical passion for the Holy Land , or a spontaneous love for the Jewish people , than with the Cold War .
But over time , especially in conservative political discourse , criticism of Israel increasingly came to be regarded as not just anti-Semitic but also anti-American .
There is some truth to this view .
The old anti-Semitic myth about America being run by Jews has not completely disappeared – especially ( but by no means only ) in the Middle East .
But the almost automatic identification in Washington of US interests with Israel 's has made it difficult to criticize either country without criticizing the other .
Now , by openly seeking to undermine the US president , Netanyahu is breaking that link .
He has made it easier for American Jews , even those who feel a deep devotion to Israel , to be critical of its leaders .
This will also make it less costly for American politicians to oppose Israeli policies with which they disagree .
Some might see this as a defeat for Israel .
In fact , the opposite may be true .
Bibi 's ill-considered trip to Washington might be the best thing that could have happen to Israel .
It is in neither country 's interest to be seen as the other 's pawn .
And a tougher US stance toward its ally might force the Israelis to try harder to come to terms with the Palestinians .
This is not what Netanyahu intended .
But it might end up being his greatest achievement .
