Reviving the Quartet
Following the formation of a Palestinian unity government between Fatah and Hamas , and the Arab League summit which revived King Abdullah ’ s peace plan of 2002 , it is time for the so-called Middle East Quartet , consisting of the European Union , Russia , the United Nations , and the United States , to get into action .
The Quartet has been dormant since 2000 , because any peace process requires negotiations between the parties in conflict .
Instead , the region has witnessed a policy of unilateral steps .
Some measures – Israel ’ s unilateral withdrawal from Lebanon in 2000 and from the Gaza Strip in 2005 , or Hamas ’ year-long ceasefire – might be seen as constructive .
But , however positive their aims , these steps were taken without consulting the opposite side , thereby entrenching the perception that no partner existed .
By the summer of 2006 , with the Lebanon war and Israel ’ s reoccupation of the Gaza strip , the failure of unilateralism was clear .
Today , we know that only a political process that takes each party ’ s legitimate national interests into account can reduce the risk of renewed violent conflict in the Middle East .
Four steps are needed to restart such a process .
The first step , revival of the Quartet , has already been taken .
The Quartet remains the most appropriate format , as it combines European ideas and service with UN legitimacy and US leadership .
It binds Russia and includes few enough participants to take quick decisions when necessary .
But , aside from its revival , the Quartet should also widen its mandate to deal not only with the Israeli-Palestinian problem , but also with the Israeli-Syrian and Israeli-Lebanese conflicts .
This does not preclude individual initiatives on the part of the US administration in the Israeli-Palestinian arena .
Currently , the US refusal to negotiate directly with Syria , or to encourage Israel to talk with Syria , prevents such a widening of the Quartet ’ s mandate .
Syria , however , cannot be ignored , since it is capable of undermining attempts at reaching an Israeli-Palestinian track or stabilizing Lebanon .
Syria ’ s behavior is closely related to its prospects for recovering its own occupied territory – the Golan Heights – and is clearly interested in a new peace process with Israel to achieve this national goal .
Second , a “ goal map ” should replace the Quartet ’ s largely outdated “ road map , ” and should state the basic legitimate interests of the parties to the conflict .
These interests are not mutually exclusive and can be summarized as follows : Israel ’ s security , Palestinian statehood , Lebanon ’ s sovereignty and Syria ’ s territorial integrity .
The Quartet should consult with the individual parties and to specify them further .
What does Israel ’ s security mean and require ?
How can Palestinian statehood be preserved ?
Which guarantees are needed to safeguard Lebanon ’ s sovereignty ?
Third , dialogue must be re ‑ established .
This may be the most difficult task , and it is mainly a responsibility for the Europeans .
Again , the relationship between Syria and Israel is crucial here .
The Israeli government needs to be convinced that resuming peace talks could lead to more constructive Syrian behavior vis-à-vis Lebanon and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
The Syrian government itself has realized that it must demonstrate its willingness for dialogue by offering Israel unconditional negotiations , receiving the Iraqi and Palestinian presidents for talks in Damascus , and supporting intra-Palestinian talks .
But it has yet to send convincing and reassuring signals towards Lebanon .
In Lebanon itself , serious internal dialogue about the county ’ s future remains stalled .
External actors like the EU or individual EU states could offer their support and facilitate talks on political and constitutional reforms .
They should also make clear that no regional deal can be made at the expense of Lebanon ’ s sovereignty .
With regard to the Palestinians , dialogue capacity of a different kind is needed .
Since the Palestinian parliamentary election in January 2006 , the international community has been communicating with President Mahmoud Abbas while boycotting the Hamas-led government .
But isolating the Palestinian government significantly heightened the chaos in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip and has effectively contributed to a deconstruction of statehood .
If the EU wants to continue its state-building efforts in Palestine and contribute to a peaceful settlement , it must find ways to talk to and work with the elected government .
The formation of a Palestinian national unity government enables the EU and its partners to resume cooperation with the Palestinian authorities without losing face .
Based on the Saudi-sponsored agreement between Fatah and Hamas , the unity government meets the EU Council ’ s demand that a legitimate Palestinian government “ adopts a platform reflecting the Quartet principles . ”
According to its program , the government will respect all agreements signed by the PLO .
Implicitly , this includes recognition of Israel and the obligation to refrain from and fight acts of terrorism .
Avoiding contact with individual Palestinian ministers who violate these commitments may be necessary , but ostracizing the entire Palestinian administration must end .
A fourth step , albeit for the future , is an international conference at which all relevant parties would adopt the “ goal map ” and commence parallel bilateral negotiations on this basis , which would enhance the actors ’ interest in seeing the entire process through to a successful conclusion .
Meticulous preparation of such a conference is more important than convening it quickly , as initiatives by individual states could undermine the EU ’ s and Quartet ’ s effort .
Naturally , the US , as the most important Quartet member , must participate actively .
The current EU presidency was able to convince the US administration that reviving the Quartet could be useful .
However , the Bush administration ’ s priority in the region clearly remains Iraq , not the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
In these circumstances , the Europeans and the other Quartet partners could help Bush secure a more flattering legacy with regard to the Middle East .
The EU must not , however , let US or Israeli lack of support thwart its efforts to devise a goal map that would be acceptable to all regional parties , or to push Syria onto a more constructive course by engaging it .
