Syrian Roulette
JERUSALEM : Parliamentary maneuvers in the Knesset and recent fighting in Lebanon put Syrian / Israeli peace talks in cold storage .
Even Israeli ’ s unilateral pledge to pull its army out of south Lebanon this summer did not instantly rekindle them .
But these ups and downs only indicate the difficulties involved .
They also reflect the nature of the closed Syrian regime , which never underwent anything like a perestroika .
The most important new fact remains unchanged : after fifty years of enmity Syria has signaled its readiness to follow Egypt , Jordan and the PLO in seeking reconciliation with the Jewish state .
So even the Lion of Damascus ( " Assad " means lion in Arabic ) , it appears , is no longer willing to isolate himself from changes in the region .
Three causes push President Hafez al-Assad , ever so glacially , towards accepting the necessity of peace with Israel .
First , disappearance of the Soviet bloc deprived Damascus of its Moscow-based strategic umbrella : if Syria finds itself at war with Israel and loses , as in the past , hundreds of tanks and aircraft , there will be no automatic resupply from Moscow .
In short : Syria has no military option .
Secondly , Syria does not like feeling isolated – neither in the Arab world , nor on the international scene .
With Egypt , Jordan and the Palestinians at peace with Israel , the idea of being in the same category as Baghdad and Tripoli does not appeal to Assad .
Moreover , all Arab regimes that made peace with Israel benefit from improved relations with the United States ( i.e. : economic assistance ) , while Syria remains on the American list of terrorist states .
Here again the disappearance of Soviet power brings our Syria ’ s vulnerability .
When even Assad ’ s allies in Teheran talk about a " dialogue of civilizations " with the West , the chill felt in Damascus must be great .
Last and not least : although President Assad has been ailing for years , he has outlived most of his neighbors .
There is no doubt that the Assad era is coming to a close .
He is grooming his son Bishar to succeed him .
Alliance between the three pillars of the regime – the Army , the Ba ’ ath Party and the Alawite clans – seems capable of guaranteeing a smooth transition .
What better gift can Assad-pére bequeath to his son than a return of the Golan Heights .
These developments have their mirror image in Israel and suggest why the Labour-led governments of Rabin , Peres and now Barak are ready for meaningful compromise on the territorial issue of the Golan .
The strategic importance of the dramatic heights , overlooking most of the northern Israeli region of Galilee , is obvious .
Because Syria , bereft of Soviet support , is less of a threat to Israel , Jerusalem can be more flexible than before , when the Golan was a glacis defending Israel not only against Syria , but against a bloc seemingly stretching all the way to Vladivostok .
So , despite today ’ s interruptions , a context for negotiations exists , as well as political will on both sides .
The agendas of both parties are , however , different : while Syria focuses on the symbolic meaning of the return of the Golan , Israel wants specific , entrenched guarantees regarding the security of its northeastern border , as well as an end to Syrian-supported Hizbullah incursions from Lebanon – a country that is virtually a Syrian protectorate .
For Israel the quid pro quo for returning the Golan is not a piece of paper with the usual phrases about peace and coexistence .
It needs tangible , institutionalized arrangements that will assure a skeptical Israeli public and make a return of hostilities difficult .
This means normalization of relations : mutual recognition , full diplomatic relations , exchange of ambassadors , open frontiers , free movement of people and goods , possibilities for economic and scientific cooperation – plus an effective early warning system .
It is these steps , which may sound reasonable to outsiders , which create problems for the closed , claustrophobic , regime in Damascus .
Syria does not enjoy open relations with any of its other neighbors : the border with Iraq has been virtually closed for decades , the border with Turkey is contested .
What for Israel appears as " normalization " is totally abnormal for Syria .
A different obstacle appears on the Israeli side , where any territorial concessions must be ratified , according to a law passed in the waning days of the Netanyahu government ( and recently toughened ) , by a referendum .
Israel has no experience with referenda , and having a peace treaty ratified by a referendum is in any case quite unique .
It is reasonable to argue that if agreement is reached with Syria and accepted by the government as well as a majority in the Knesset , it will eventually be ratified .
This is Barak ’ s argument , and it seems plausible .
Yet , negotiating a complicated and painful agreement with Syria , which may involve uprooting 15,000 Israeli settlers from the Golan , under a Damocles ’ sword of a referendum doesn ’ t make Barak ’ s task easier .
Recent demonstrations in Tel-Aviv against returning the Golan marked the beginning of a campaign that will shadow the negotiations with ever greater force the more the negotiations seem capable of bearing fruit .
So both sides labor under complex conditions and in political contexts which make negotiations an almost Byzantine game .
Yet the political will on both sides is there , giving hope to a process which otherwise appears like squaring a circle .
