Radical Islam \ u0027s Challenge to Indonesia
With the Taliban on the run , sighs of relief can be heard as far away as Indonesia .
Protests against the US-led coalition 's bombing campaign had roiled Indonesia for weeks , increasing the country 's already perilous instability .
Now that the war in Afghanistan may wind down soon , there is a fear that President Megawati Sukarnoputri will do little to change her do-nothing ways .
These protests came as Mrs Megawati 's first 100 days in office ended .
They were but another sign of the scant political honeymoon she enjoyed .
Grumbling about her " slow motion " style of government can be heard everywhere ; applause for her few accomplishments - such as weathering the Islamic storm - is slight .
Public expectations about Mrs Megawati were modest from the start .
In her report to the annual session of the People 's Consultative Assembly , delivered on November 1 , Megawati admitted that her government had achieved little .
The Assembly sought to fill this policy vacuum by outlining steps that her government must take to jump-start the economy .
Although the Assembly remains dubious about her , Mrs Megawati was heartened when Assembly Chairman Amien Rais foreswore any challenge to her presidency for the remainder of her term , which expires in 2004 .
So Megawati need not worry about being ejected from office as her predecessor Abdurrahman Wahid was , just a few months ago .
But Amien Rais ' statement is as much self-serving as it is in the interest of political stability .
He is the only viable rival candidate for President Megawati 's job , and would be the man to step into the presidential palace should she be removed .
No politician with any common sense ( which Mr Rais has in abundance ) would seek to unseat Megawati at this moment , for the challenges she faces are daunting and the chances of success small .
Many people suspect that Megawati 's inactivity results from her recognition of the almost intransigent nature of the challenges facing Indonesia .
Hers is a kind of " self-healing " administration in which events are left to run their course in the hope that they won 't get out of hand .
So Amien Rais ' assurance that Megawati will remain president until 2004 will not have injected a greater urgency into her presidency .
Her sense of security ( and hence her indolence ) is also increased because her political opponents are in complete disarray .
But government by sleepwalking is risky in a country 's whose territorial integrity seems to be coming apart at the seams .
The unified Indonesia of the past 40 years or so is finished .
A new regional autonomy law will provide greater freedoms for regions and local communities to express themselves .
Right now , this decentralization process is manageable .
It may not remain so without a firm policy hand at the center .
If the central government refrains from re-imposing its power in the regions , either administratively or militarily , they are more likely to remain within the Republic .
Granting special autonomy to the two most strife-ridden provinces - Aceh and Papua ( Irian Jaya ) - may also reduce tension between national and local military commanders .
However , the deep wounds of the past few years of violence will not heal unless serious efforts are made by the government in Jakarta to bring human rights abusers to justice .
Megawati promised to pursue human rights violators , but few actions have been taken to enforce this promise .
Such inaction cannot last if national unity is to be maintained .
A credible system to manage Indonesia 's new decentralized system is needed .
Regions must be prevented from promulgating regulations that violate national laws or impose negative effects on other regions , as has happened with the creation by some regions of internal trade barriers .
Because of the government 's inactivity , such barriers are rising across the Indonesian archipelago .
Regional autonomy , moreover , has not pacified ethnic tensions .
Violent conflicts among Indonesia 's myriad ethnic and religious groups continue .
Radical Muslim groups have declared holy war , " jihad , " which has complicated and aggravated conflicts in the Moluccan islands .
Fundamentalist Islamic groups , indeed , raised the most consistent challenge to Megawati 's " secular " government even before the attacks on America .
They are not yet a serious threat to Megawati , only because they are not backed by Indonesia 's powerful Islamic political parties .
Mrs Megawati 's challenge is to keep these Islamic parties firmly within Indonesia 's conventional political framework .
In the first month of the war on terrorism , some Islamic political parties were drawn into anti-American protests and even Vice President Hamzah Haz ( chairman of one of Indonesia 's strongest Islamic parties ) was tempted to ride this tiger for a time .
During Megawati 's trip to America to support President Bush 's policy , indeed , the government in Jakarta was almost incapacitated by these small , noisy and radical Islamic groups .
On her return , Megawati restored her credibility by ordering the security services to act against these groups .
This restored order .
Credit for the absence of a truly serious Islamic challenge , however , should perhaps be given to Indonesia 's moderate and mainstream Muslim leaders and groups , such as Nahdatul Ulama and Muhammadyah , who avoided incendiary words and deeds .
Their responsible behavior demonstrates the growing importance of Indonesia 's civil society .
Because Indonesia 's government will likely be weak for years to come , Mrs Megawati should forge alliances with the many civil society groups that are emerging in Indonesia and which support a democratic regime .
Such activity by the President will do more to root Indonesia 's democracy than any other action Megawati might take .
