Sarkozy ’ s Société Générale Myopia
SAN FRANCISCO - The French government should be honoring Bank of France Governor Christian Noyer for saving Société Générale from certain bankruptcy in the current rogue trader scandal , not criticizing him , as some high government officials have done .
“ Loose lips sink ships ” is received wisdom in central banking circles . But if President Nicolas Sarkozy ’ s team in the Élysée Palace had had its way , Noyer would have immediately informed the government of Société Générale ’ s troubles .
Had that happened , there would have been an unacceptable risk that the news would leak to speculators before Société Générale had a chance to liquidate the extraordinary large stock positions that Jérôme Kerviel had amassed , presumably without the bank ’ s knowledge .
The loss for Société Générale could have been far higher than the € 5 billion it is reported to have incurred .
Speculators could have “ front run ” the bank in the markets , selling short , driving equity prices down , and forcing the French financial institution to sell into a bottomless pit .
Is a forced bankruptcy in extremely fragile global financial markets what the French government wanted for Société Générale ?
How can President Sarkozy , who has repeatedly attacked financial speculators , question the judgment of the very man who , by knowing how to keep his mouth shut in a crisis , thwarted them ?
Of course , independent central bankers are not Sarkozy ’ s favorite people .
According to Laurent Dubois , a political science professor at the Sorbonne in Paris , Noyer may pay for Sarkozy ’ s battles with the European Central Bank .
Sarkozy has “ a problem with central banks ’ independence , ” and Noyer may become a “ scapegoat . ”
Not likely – at least in the current political environment .
Sarkozy ’ s recent poll numbers have been dropping like a stone .
According to the TNS Sofres poll for Le Figaro Magazine , Sarkozy ’ s popularity tumbled a whopping eight percentage points in January , to just 41 % , the lowest level since he took office last May and down from a high of 65 % in July .
Sarkozy , who during his electoral campaign vowed to be the “ president who delivers on purchasing power , ” now faces an angry French public whose primary complaint is that purchasing power is being eroded by inflation .
In this changed political environment , Sarkozy is not likely to go after someone like Noyer who , as Bank of France Governor and a member of the ECB ’ s Governing Council , is widely viewed as a stalwart against inflation and a defender of French purchasing power .
Why risk a “ soft on inflation ” label ?
Sarkozy might even tone down his attacks on the ECB , whose single-minded , inflation-fighting policies have made it one of his favorite targets .
That would be a good thing .
With Sarkozy off his back , ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet might feel freer to cut interest rates to counter the impending economic slowdown in Europe .
Meanwhile , though Société Générale has been saved by Noyer ’ s professionalism and political courage , it has been badly wounded and will most likely be taken over by another bank .
“ Société Générale will remain a great French bank , ” Prime Minister Francois Fillon has said . “ The government will not allow it to be the target of hostile raids by other banks . ”
The problem is that the French government is barred from doing this under an EU directive that it signed last year , which was specifically introduced to improve transparency in banking mergers .
After Italy ’ s former central bank governor , Antonio Fazio , flagrantly abused his position to block a takeover of an Italian bank by ABN Amro , member countries agreed that future mergers would be assessed on five objective criteria , the idea being to prevent governments from blocking foreign bids purely for protectionist reasons .
Noyer ’ s diplomatic skill certainly will be put to the test if he has to navigate the treacherous waters between the Scylla of French protectionism and the Charybdis of the EU ’ s five criteria for bank mergers .
Foreign bank mergers have proved poisonous for euro-zone central bankers .
So far , the only serious candidates to emerge for a Société Générale takeover are two French banks , Credit Agricole and BNP Paribas .
But should a credible foreign offer for Société Générale appear in the coming weeks ­ – and it well might – another disruptive conflict between the Bank of France and the government may be in the offing .
The Société Générale rogue trader scandal has caused more problems than any of the main players possibly could have imagined .
