Washington Recaptured
WASHINGTON , DC – Two hundred years ago , Washington DC was captured by the British – who then proceeded to set fire to official buildings , including the White House , Treasury Department , and Congress .
Today , it is a domestic interest group – very large banks – that has captured Washington .
The costs are likely to be far higher than they were in 1814 .
America ’ s largest bank holding companies receive an implicit government subsidy , because they are perceived to be “ too big to fail . ”
The authorities will not allow the biggest banks to default on their debts , through bankruptcy or in any other fashion , owing to the need to prevent the financial system from collapsing .
This doctrine became starkly apparent in late 2008 and early 2009 ; it remains in force today .
This effective exemption from the risk of bankruptcy means that anyone who lends to the largest half-dozen banks receives a government guarantee – free insurance against the risk of a catastrophe .
This allows these banks to obtain more debt financing on better terms ( from their perspective ) .
In particular , their executives operate highly opaque firms , with risks effectively masked from outsiders and very little in the way of loss-absorbing shareholder equity .
Simply put , without their government backstop , these murky empires could not exist .
Democratic Senator Sherrod Brown of Ohio and Republican Senator David Vitter of Louisiana , along with some important colleagues , have long sought to phase out this implicit subsidy .
And independent analysts , such as Anat Admati of Stanford University , have explained all of the relevant details of how – and why – this should be done .
Those details – for example , in Admati ’ s recent testimony to the Senate subcommittee chaired by Brown – are not in doubt .
Thanks to Admati and her colleagues , we have a clear rendering of them in straightforward , non-technical language .
Unfortunately , the leading federal government officials remain in denial .
The most spectacular recent example of this is a report issued this summer by the Government Accountability Office .
The GAO had a simple task : At the request of Brown and Vitter , it was charged with assessing the scale and impact of the implicit guarantees provided by the government to large bank holding companies .
The GAO responded by producing a deeply muddled report that followed the financial industry ’ s suggestion of focusing almost exclusively on the difference in bond spreads ( interest rates on various forms of financing ) between the largest banks and some of their competitors .
Such spreads are only a small component of the funding advantage for big banks , and they are also highly cyclical – meaning that the advantage for the biggest banks manifests itself the most when markets are under pressure , as they were in the fall of 2008 .
The GAO concluded that these spreads had indeed been high in 2008 , and that now they have fallen .
But , as Admati pointed out in her testimony , if the authors had included 2006 and earlier years in their analysis , they would have seen low spreads using their own methodology – despite the obvious fact that massive implicit subsidies were already in place .
All that the GAO established is that the macroeconomy was previously in bad shape and it is now doing somewhat better – hardly a profound finding .
The GAO report also refers to the Dodd-Frank financial reforms of 2010 , including the requirement that large bank holding companies create “ living wills . ”
The industry contends that the existence of these living wills – showing how a big bank ’ s collapse could be handled without causing global financial panic – means that “ too big to fail ” is over .
Sadly for the GAO , shortly after their report appeared , the Federal Reserve and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation rejected the most recent living wills as completely inadequate – meaning that there is still no road map for handling the failure of a very large bank .
Either such a firm would be allowed to fail , with dire consequences for global finance , or there would be some sort of backdoor bailout .
The GAO ’ s failure to see and state this problem clearly is a major disappointment .
As FDIC Vice Chairman Tom Hoenig put it , “ Despite the thousands of pages of material these firms submitted , the plans provide no credible or clear path through bankruptcy that doesn ’ t require unrealistic assumptions and direct or indirect public support . ”
To be fair , the GAO is not the only part of official Washington seemingly beguiled by large banks .
While the Fed now recognizes that living wills are inadequate , it has taken an extraordinarily long time to reach this rather obvious conclusion – and the Fed ’ s Board of Governors is still dragging its feet on forcing the banks to simplify their operations .
American forces performed disastrously at the Battle of Bladensburg in August 1814 , allowing the British to capture and burn the capital .
Two hundred years later , we may well be witnessing that battle ’ s intellectual and policymaking analogue .
