Rogue Diplomacy
NEW DELHI – “ Such very fine brains ” filled with “ such bad ideas . ”
That was how the late Daniel Patrick Moynihan , a former United States senator and perhaps the keenest mind to enter US politics since World War II , once described India , where he was US ambassador in the 1970 ’ s .
That snappy description of my country is also a very good way to describe the current – and seemingly unending – contretemps between the leaders of Iran and the US .
As a new round of negotiations with Iran begins – with European Union High Representative Catherine Ashton the first into the breach – finding a way to move Iran-US relations beyond their freighted past is an urgent matter .
In both countries , deep and mutually paralyzing suspicion has poisoned relations for three decades .
Negotiations in such an atmosphere are almost fated to failure .
America ’ s acceptance of Iran ’ s current regime is grudging .
Iranian leaders demonize the US as if the millions killed in the 1980 ’ s in the Iran-Iraq War ( in which the US backed Saddam Hussein ’ s invading army ) died only yesterday .
So long as these dark shadows are allowed to linger , “ resetting ” relations between the two countries , in the manner of US-Russia relations , will be impossible .
The list of disputes between the two countries is almost endless , but Iran ’ s plan to enrich uranium now stands above everything else .
The Iranians insist that they need nuclear power to generate electricity .
Their secretiveness , maintains the US , betrays the regime ’ s drive to develop nuclear weapons .
Not surprisingly , given the Americans ’ deeply ingrained suspicion , the agreement reached earlier this year between Iran and Turkey and Brazil to allow for the export of low-enriched uranium from Iran in return for fuel rods was “ not acceptable ” to the US .
Indeed , after years of sanctions , threats , negotiations , and then more sanctions and threats , the US remains unclear about what specific nuclear program it might accept .
So what does the US want ? “ Crippling sanctions , ” Secretary of State Hillary Clinton once said , though she quickly retracted that impromptu remark .
But no such caution restrains US senators like South Carolina ’ s Lindsey Graham , who says that the “ evil ( of ) a nuclear … Iran ” will affect the US “ far more than ( any ) conflict . ”
Following the hopeful early months of the Obama administration , this “ stop Iran ” policy has become America ’ s focus .
Iran , of course , repeatedly asserts its commitment to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) , but its past relations with Dr. A. Q. Khan – the self-proclaimed “ godfather ” of Pakistan ’ s nuclear-weapons program , and the world ’ s most notorious nuclear proliferator – invites skepticism .
Indeed , the US holds the “ Khan network ” responsible for helping Iran start its own nuclear program .
Mistrust is compounded by Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad ’ s incendiary pronouncements , particularly about Israel .
Although the origins of Iran ’ s nuclear program are to be found in the “ enlightened ” presidency of Mohammad Khatami ( 1997-2005 ) – it was just before Ahmadinejad ’ s inauguration that Iran ended its self-imposed moratorium on uranium enrichment – Ahmadinejad ’ s bombast has made matters worse .
And not just with the US .
In September 2005 , the International Atomic Energy Agency deemed Iran “ non-compliant ” with the NPT . Between 2006 and 2008 , Iran was subjected to three United Nations Security Council resolutions , each imposing yet more sanctions .
Yet , despite increasing economic costs , Iran ’ s response only hardened .
Iran ’ s insecurity goes back at least to 1953 , when US and British officials plotted the military coup that removed from office Mohammed Mossadegh , Iran ’ s first elected prime minister and an ardent nationalist , and installed General Fazlollah Zahedi .
Mossadegh ’ s sin was his plan to nationalize Iran ’ s oil industry .
But , in the process of laying claim to Iran ’ s oil , subverting its democracy , and jeopardizing its national security , the US and Britain committed a much graver sin : the wounding of Iranians ’ national pride .
Then there is the Shah ’ s ouster , Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini ’ s Islamic Revolution , the absurd abduction of US diplomats , President Jimmy Carter ’ s disastrous attempt to free them militarily , and the “ Iran-Contra ” scandal , when Reagan administration officials sought to sell weapons to Iran through third parties and channel the proceeds to anti-Sandinista guerrillas in Nicaragua .
Iran sits at the heart of an extremely volatile region .
The country ’ s Shia footprint stretches from the Mediterranean to the Hindu Kush .
It has a vital role in Afghanistan ; indeed , it was passively supportive of the removal of the Taliban from power in 2001 .
With such a country , “ non-engagement ” means having no policy at all .
America ’ s failure to talk to Iran is as foolhardy as its decades-long failure to talk with Mao ’ s China .
And the ongoing failure to talk to North Korea does not appear to be working either , as the recent shelling of South Korea demonstrates .
Even if Iranian nuclear weapons are not acceptable to the US , President Barack Obama needs to start talking more openly about what is .
His Nobel Peace Prize demands it .
And talking should not be impossible .
As India ’ s foreign minister , I engaged in successful talks with Iran frequently .
Iran may be a self-proclaimed theocracy , but it has conducted foreign relations since the 1979 revolution in a rational , if not always emollient , way .
Ahmadinejad may bluster , but there is usually considerable ambiguity and calculation behind his outbursts .
Iran is obstinate , prideful , ambitious , and , yes , sometimes paranoid .
But it also sees itself as vulnerable .
A young population with no memory of the Islamic Revolution is desperate for the jobs that its leaders have failed to provide .
In these circumstances , if Iran is offered a diplomatic ladder that it can climb down with its dignity intact – above all , a credible promise of an historic reconciliation with the US that includes specific economic benefits , not Obama ’ s current vague offers – a tired revolution ’ s troubled leadership might take it .
That , not Western bluster and sanctions , is the way ahead .
