Stimulating Equality
NEW YORK – With unemployment climbing in the United States and other OECD countries , job creation is a key objective for policymakers .
In the US , President Barack Obama recently proposed to increase public spending by about $ 600 billion over the next two years to create an additional four million jobs .
But Obama is also concerned with reversing a sharp rise in income inequality ( which is now at an 80-year high ) .
Is it possible for leaders to do both at the same time ?
The answer is unequivocally yes , but only if they focus on government spending rather than reforming their tax systems .
That lesson is even more powerful for other advanced countries like Germany and France , which spend a far higher percentage of GDP on public programs ( 35 % and 43 % , respectively , in 2005 ) than the US ( only 25 % ) .
America ’ s tax system has surprisingly little redistributional punch .
Using a measure of “ comprehensive income ” – money income , total capital gains on wealth , imputed rent on owner-occupied housing , non-cash government benefits , and public consumption – income taxes are generally progressive .
Federal income taxes as a proportion of income increase steadily from 2 % at the 10th percentile ( that is , a family ranked tenth from the bottom out of 100 ) to 14 % at the 90th percentile , but then falls off slightly to 13 % at the very top , reflecting the favorable treatment of capital gains and investment income under the Bush administration ’ s income-tax laws .
On the other hand , social security taxes – the biggest tax for more than two-thirds of families – are mildly regressive .
Social security taxes as a proportion of income rise gradually from 5 % at the 10th percentile to 9 % at the 80th percentile , stay there at the 90th percentile , but then fall off sharply to 5 % at the top .
This decline reflects the wage cap on social security taxes ( currently at $ 102,000 ) .
The total tax burden on families also includes sales taxes , which are steeply regressive , and property taxes , which are progressive .
Total personal taxes are mildly progressive , increasing steadily as a share of income from 14 % at the 10th percentile to 28 % at the 90th percentile , but then falling off sharply to 22 % at the top , owing to the favorable treatment of capital gains and investment income , the wage cap on social security taxes , and the sharp regressivity of sales taxes .
On the other hand , total transfers have a much bigger equalizing effect on incomes .
Cash transfers , like social security and unemployment insurance , are highly equalizing .
When the value of non-cash government benefits , like Medicaid , Medicare , and Food Stamps , are also included , total transfers become extremely progressive .
As a proportion of income , they fall almost continuously , from 50 % at the 10th percentile to 2.5 % at the very top .
But government spending on goods and services , like education , highways , police , and sanitation , has distributional consequences , too , and can be allocated to actual beneficiaries in much the same way as government transfers .
Educational expenditures are allocated on the basis of the number of schoolchildren in the family .
Highway spending is allocated in proportion to the number of cars owned by the family and estimated miles driven .
Collective goods like fire and police protection are allocated on a per capita basis .
Public consumption is just as progressive as transfer payments .
As a proportion of income , it declines almost continuously , from 34 % at the 10th percentile to 3 % at the very top .
The main beneficiaries of public spending are the poor and the middle class .
When you add together government transfers and public consumption and subtract taxes paid , you get a figure for net government expenditures .
This is extremely progressive .
As a share of income , it declines sharply from 70 % at the 10th percentile to -16 % at the top ( in other words , the top bracket pays more in taxes than it receives in government benefits ) .
In fact , the crossover point between positive and negative net government expenditures is at the 66th percentile .
The extremely progressive nature of net government expenditures comes about equally from government transfers and public spending ; very little is contributed by taxes .
It is not just the poor who benefit from net governmental expenditures .
The middle class is also a big beneficiary .
Between 1959 and 2005 , about half of the growth of the middle class ’ s income came from increased net government expenditures .
Indeed , from 2000 to 2004 , the increase in net government expenditures accounted for 150 % of income growth , as other sources of income shriveled up .
Net government spending also helped to reduce overall inequality over those years .
As Obama and other leaders around the world implement stimulus packages in the months ahead , they should recognize that the question of who benefits goes beyond the number of jobs created .
Government spending , no less than government transfers , has actual beneficiaries .
If these packages target education ( very redistributive ) or sanitation , fire , police , and highways ( mildly redistributive ) , they can create jobs and reduce inequality .
