The Voices Behind Angelina Jolie
NEW YORK – On May 26 , Angelina Jolie ’ s aunt , Debbie Martin , died of breast cancer at 61 .
Jolie ’ s mother , Marcheline Bertrand , died at 56 from a related illness , ovarian cancer .
And , two weeks before Martin died , Jolie revealed that she had undergone a preventive double mastectomy after testing positive for a BRCA gene mutation – which is correlated with a woman ’ s being five times more susceptible to breast cancer and 28 times more susceptible to ovarian cancer .
The test for the BRCA mutation is expensive – roughly $ 3,500 .
In the United States , health insurers cover the cost only if a first-degree relative – for example , a woman ’ s mother – has had a history of breast or ovarian cancer ; other women must pay out of pocket .
Given the benefits of preventive care , the test has become highly controversial , because its manufacturer , Myriad Genetics , holds a genetic patent that gives it a monopoly – and huge profits – on all testing .
Jolie ’ s announcement has thrown a spotlight on that issue .
More broadly , she is that rare entertainer / sex symbol who , like Madonna and a few other women , largely dictates her own narrative about the “ meaning ” of her celebrity .
For Jolie , that means often using her iconic status to advance a positive agenda , whether the issue is Syrian refugees in Jordan or breast-cancer awareness .
Her revelation of her mastectomy – and the evident support of her partner , Brad Pitt – has elicited a rapturous response from popular media , including the tabloids that once damned her as the “ other woman ” who broke up Pitt ’ s previous marriage .
There is something about the narrative – a sex symbol sacrificing her fetishized breasts for the sake of her children , with her husband staying by her side – that is deeply reassuring to women in Western culture .
One can be reasonably certain , however , that Jolie ’ s decision will alter the roles available to her as an actress .
As enthusiastically as the global mass media has received her choice , it is nonetheless extremely difficult in the West for a woman to be portrayed as maternal – let alone physically “ flawed ” or “ impaired ” – and also as a fantasy sex object .
But the real importance of Jolie ’ s story is its context : a wave of women and men , in very different settings around the world , who are insisting on narrating their own meanings for events involving their bodies – events that , like breast cancer , were once shrouded in shame , silence , fear , or blame .
Jolie has refused to treat mastectomy as scary or tragic – or as making her “ less of a woman ” in any way .
She is thus modeling a refusal to be a woman victim ; by doing so , she is also modeling agency in relation to her own body and its “ story . ”
Jolie is prominent , but she is hardly alone .
Consider the Brazilian women who are coming forward to talk publicly about having been raped on public buses – & # 160 ; attacks that echo similar assaults in India and Egypt .
Or consider the two young female staffers of New York officials who have publicly pressed their complaints about having been sexually harassed by New York Assemblyman Vito J. Lopez .
Similarly , the men who were sexually abused in the 1970 ’ s at Horace Mann , a prestigious New York City private school , are refusing to perpetuate the silence and “ shame ” of their victimization by a circle of pedophiles ( and by the school officials who covered up the abusers ’ behavior ) .
They have now joined a highly publicized lawsuit against the school , stepping into the light of day under their own names .
Times have surely changed – partly because of people and actions like these .
Twenty-two years ago , when Anita Hill publicly accused then-US Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment , it was she , the alleged victim , who was scrutinized and smeared as “ a little bit nutty and a little bit slutty . ”
In all these cases , one can see the once-silenced woman – or child of either gender – take charge of the obligation and the right to speak to her or his own situation and recast the public story .
It is they , and they alone , who may assign authoritative meaning to their breasts , their bodies , and the difficult events related to them .
When I began in recent years to insist that the traditional silence and anonymity assigned to rape victims does not protect them , but only perpetuates a Victorian framework in which rapists attack with impunity and victims are asked to carry the “ shame , ” my argument was met with hostility .
But events are proving me right : nothing changes until everything changes – & # 160 ; that is , until a critical mass of “ victims ” comes forward under their own names to reject the shame assigned to them for carrying a scary , “ mutilating ” disease , for having been assaulted by rapists , or for having been abused by pedophiles .
Angelina Jolie puts a famous face on this phenomenon .
But many others are already standing up and proclaiming , under their own names and bylines : “ I have a right to say publicly what happened to me , and to define it in my own terms ; it is not my disgrace . ”
