Bringing the Chinese Consumer to Life
BEIJING – History will be the ultimate judge , but there is good reason to believe that China ’ s recently completed Third Plenum will come to be regarded as a pivotal moment in the country ’ s development .
At long last , China ’ s senior leadership has endorsed a raft of reforms that could impel the economy ’ s shift from reliance on exports to consumption-led growth .
Until now , this transformation was framed in terms of broad goals and aspirations .
For example , the 12th Five-Year Plan , adopted in March 2011 , promised the emergence of a consumer-led economy , resting on the building blocks of urbanization and the development of an embryonic services sector .
Notwithstanding the importance of these commitments in setting out opportunities for China ’ s middle class , they lacked a critical component : incentives for Chinese families to convert their newfound income into discretionary consumption .
On the contrary , financial and economic insecurity has gripped Chinese households since the “ iron rice bowl ” – the cradle-to-grave support that the socialist state offered workers and their families – was discarded in the late 1990 ’ s .
Fearing for the future , households have hoarded incremental income , rather than spending it on consumer goods .
Economists call that precautionary saving .
China ’ s leaders called it frustrating .
The reforms endorsed by the Third Plenum focus on this wedge between income and consumption , offering specific proposals aimed at altering the behavior of fear-driven Chinese families .
Especially important is the proposal to channel 30 % of the profits of state-owned enterprises ( SOEs ) – currently running at close to $ 400 billion – into the country ’ s woefully under-funded social safety net .
China ’ s national health-insurance plan , for example , boasts nearly universal coverage , but the benefits it provides are negligible .
The same is true of China ’ s retirement system : the workforce ’ s enrollment rate is around 50 % , but only $ 600 of assets per worker ( in national , local government , and private pension schemes , combined ) are available to cover lifetime retirement benefits .
Little wonder that Chinese families , fearful of such an uncertain future , save to excess .
An adequately funded safety net could go a long way in tempering the expectations underlying this behavior .
Several other measures proposed at the Third Plenum seek to shift Chinese families ’ behavioral norms .
A major reconsideration of the one-child policy is especially important , given the need to relieve pressures arising from the inevitable decline in China ’ s working-age population .
Reform of the hukou ( residency permit ) system to allow citizens to transfer their welfare benefits from one city to another is vital for an increasingly flexible labor force that now includes almost 200 million migrant workers .
China ’ s consumers should also draw comfort from the likely move to market-based deposit rates on their savings accounts , which will reinforce incremental growth in wage income .
This long overdue policy shift is an important component of the Third Plenum ’ s official elevation of market-based pricing as the “ decisive ” mode of resource allocation in China .
The word “ decisive ” holds important implications for key resources – including fuels , financial capital , and , of course , the currency – that historically have been subject to state-administered pricing .
Rhetorical flourishes have always been an important signaling mechanism for major policy changes – think of Deng Xiaoping ’ s “ reforms and opening up ” of the late 1970 ’ s .
The Third Plenum ’ s use of “ decisive ” to anchor a market-based approach is a similar gambit .
All of this casts modern China ’ s development strategy in a new light .
Beginning with Deng in the late 1970 ’ s , scientists and engineers – technocrats with the determination to convert a dysfunctional centrally planned economy into an investment- and export-led colossus – framed and implemented a producer-oriented development model .
Today , the task at hand is very different : to transform the technocratic framework of the producer model into the aspirational vision of a flourishing consumer society .
The need to navigate this shift raises the toughest question of all : Is the new “ fifth-generation ” Chinese leadership , headed by President Xi Jinping , up to the challenge ?
There are three reasons to believe that it is .
First , the role of technocrats in China ’ s senior leadership is on the wane .
Research by Cheng Li of the Brookings Institution reveals that only about 15 % of the current 25 Politburo members are engineers and scientists , down from 40 % in 2007 and 72 % in 2002 .
Li ’ s analysis points to the related ascendance of senior officials trained in law and the social sciences – providing a skill set that is more closely aligned with the vision of a consumer society .
Second , the Third Plenum established a new high-level organization – the so-called Central Leading Group on Reforms .
This small group , likely to be headed by Xi , will play the key role in drafting specific guidelines for implementing the Plenum ’ s proposed reforms – thus threatening to marginalize the long-dominant technocrats of the National Development and Reform Commission , the heir to the old State Planning Commission .
Finally , Xi ’ s power base is far broader than that of his two predecessors , Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao , both of whom had shaky transitions in the first years of their leadership .
Unlike Jiang and Hu , Xi assumed quick command of the Chinese Communist Party , the government , and the military , and very effectively shepherded the Third Plenum ’ s historic reforms .
As always , proof will come only with implementation .
But with China ’ s leaders now focusing squarely on aligning the vast population ’ s behavioral norms with the next phase of transformation , the case for a consumer-led China has become more compelling than ever .
