Qatar ’ s Jihad
ABU DHABI – Qatar may be tiny , but it is having a major impact across the Arab world .
By propping up violent jihadists in the Middle East , North Africa , and beyond , while supporting the United States in its fight against them , this gas-rich speck of a country – the world ’ s wealthiest in per capita terms – has transformed itself from a regional gadfly into an international rogue elephant .
Using its vast resources , and driven by unbridled ambition , Qatar has emerged as a hub for radical Islamist movements .
The massive , chandeliered Grand Mosque in Doha – Qatar ’ s opulent capital – is a rallying point for militants heading to wage jihad in places as diverse as Yemen , Tunisia , and Syria .
As a result , Qatar now rivals Saudi Arabia – another Wahhabi state with enormous resource wealth – in exporting Islamist extremism .
But there are important differences between Qatar and Saudi Arabia .
Qatar ’ s Wahhabism is less severe than Saudi Arabia ’ s ; for example , Qatari women are allowed to drive and to travel alone .
In Qatar , there is no religious police enforcing morality , even if Qatari clerics openly raise funds for militant causes overseas .
Given this , it is perhaps unsurprising that , whereas Saudi Arabia ’ s sclerotic leadership pursues reactionary policies rooted in a puritanical understanding of Islam , Qatar ’ s younger royals have adopted a forward-thinking approach .
Qatar is the home of the Al Jazeera satellite television channel and Education City , a district outside of Doha that accommodates schools , universities , and research centers .
Similar inconsistencies are reflected in Qatar ’ s foreign policy .
Indeed , the country ’ s relationship with the United States directly contradicts its links with radical Islamist movements .
Qatar hosts Al Udeid air base – with its 8,000 American military personnel and 120 aircraft , including supertankers for in-flight refueling – from which the US directs its current airstrikes in Syria and Iraq .
Camp As-Sayliyah – another facility for which Qatar charges no rent – serves as the US Central Command ’ s forward headquarters .
In July , Qatar agreed to purchase $ 11 billion worth of US arms .
Moreover , Qatar has used its leverage over the Islamists that it funds to help secure the release of Western hostages .
And it hosted secret talks between the US and the Pakistan-backed Afghan Taliban .
To facilitate the negotiations , Qatar provided a home , with US support , to the Taliban ’ s de facto diplomatic mission – and to the five Afghan Taliban leaders released earlier this year from US detention at Guantánamo Bay .
In other words , Qatar is an important US ally , a supplier of weapons and funds to Islamists , and a peace broker all at the same time .
Add to that its position as the world ’ s largest supplier of liquefied natural gas and the holder of one of its largest sovereign-wealth funds , and it becomes clear that Qatar has plenty of room to maneuver – as well as considerable international clout .
Germany ’ s government found that out when it was forced to retract its development minister ’ s statement that Qatar played a central role in arming and financing the Islamic State .
Qatar ’ s growing influence has important implications for the balance of power in the Arab World , especially with regard to the country ’ s rivalry with Saudi Arabia .
This competitive dynamic , which surfaced only recently , represents a shift from a long history of working in tandem to export Islamist extremism .
Both Qatar and Saudi Arabia generously supplied weapons and funds to Sunni extremists in Syria , opening the door for the emergence of the Islamic State .
Both have bolstered the Afghan Taliban .
And both contributed to Libya ’ s transformation into a failed state by aiding Islamist militias .
During the 2011 NATO campaign to overthrow Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi , Qatar even deployed ground troops covertly inside Libya .
Today , however , Qatar and Saudi Arabia are on opposite sides .
Qatar , along with Turkey , backs grassroots Islamist movements like the Muslim Brotherhood and its offshoots in Gaza , Libya , Egypt , Tunisia , Iraq , and the Levant .
That pits it against Saudi Arabia and countries like the United Arab Emirates , Egypt , and Jordan , whose rulers view such movements as an existential threat , with some , including the House of Saud , investing in propping up autocratic regimes like their own .
In this sense , Qatar ’ s tack has produced a rare schism within the Gulf Cooperation Council , whose members collectively possess nearly half of the world ’ s oil reserves .
The proxy competition among rival monarchies , which led some of them to withdraw their ambassadors from Qatar in March , is intensifying violence and instability throughout the region .
For example , the UAE , with Egyptian assistance , secretly carried out airstrikes in August to stop Qatari-aided Islamist militias from gaining control of the Libyan capital , Tripoli .
Qatar ’ s leaders are willing to challenge their neighbors for a simple reason : They believe that the grassroots Islamist movements they support – which , in their view , represent majority political aspirations – eventually will win .
Anticipating that such groups will increasingly shape Arab politics , displacing strongman regimes , Qatar has set out to empower them .
In doing so , Qatar is destabilizing several countries and threatening the security of secular democracies far beyond the region .
For the sake of regional and international security , this elephant must be tamed .
