Putin and Pushkin
MOSCOW : By arresting media mogul Vladimir Gusinsky , the Kremlin -- whether by order of President Putin or not -- revived fears of censorship and thought control .
Are those fears justified , and what does Gusinksy 's arrest presage , if anything ?
Neither censorship nor the gulag ever completely suppressed intellectual life in Russia .
Witness the genius of Akhmatova , Mandelstam , Shostakovich , Pasternak and Prokofiev who created great works even in the nightmare years of the Stalinist era .
Recognizing this indestructibility , Russian leaders have always sought to keep the mass media under their thumb , and artists on their side .
Newspapers buckled and often artists returned the state 's embrace .
Pushkin , for example , announced that AI am not a flatterer when I sing praises to my Tsar . " Even Mandelstam , although he did it under duress , wrote an Ode to Stalin , which nevertheless failed to save him from the gulag and death .
Lenin , Khrushchev , Brezhnev , Gorbachev -- all constructed their ruling Soviet ideology on the foundation of the Russian intelligentsia .
When communism imploded , however , Yeltsin sought to divert Russia 's intellectual energy toward money and the media .
High culture was abandoned as a Kremlin plaything and left to survive -- or not -- on its own .
The Internet and mass media , not poetry , was to be the catalyst in jump-starting Russia 's civil society .
As President , Vladimir Putin vowed last January to revive the moral fiber of the Russian people , their glory and international respect .
To achieve this goal he has sought to restore high culture to a position of primacy in Russian life , and to put mass media back in its ( politically ) subservient place .
If geniuses like Solzhenitsyn and Sakharov helped dismantle the USSR , Putin appears to believe , other artists and thinkers could revive Russian greatness .
But politics in Russia has never been a matter of greatness , only control ; and because the media is key to controlling politics , it seems almost natural that Putin is now seeking to manage it more directly .
Indeed , in his half-year as acting and elected president , Putin has posed as a great supporter of Russian culture in all its aspects : film , literature , music , architecture , science .
Mass media , because of its political usefulness , now seems exempted from these tender concerns .
For Russians , Gusinsky 's arrest incites a sinister sense of déjŕ vu . Stalin also posed as a " best friend of Soviet linguists , athletes , children and soldiers , " but most of all as the " friend " of writers , composers , poets , and artists even as he kept an iron grip on newspapers and broadcasters .
Stalin 's " friendship , " of course , sent Mandelstam to his grave , and Pasternak , Shostakovich , and Bulgakov all found themselves isolated .
Again and again Josef Vissarionovich would repeatedly telephone Bulgakov after viewing the film version of his novel " The White Guard " in his favorite Moscow Art Theater ( MkhAT ) , to express his admiration . " Mikhail Afanasievich , Stalin speaking , " would come the voice down the receiver , freezing the author in terror .
With Shostakovich Stalin discussed the need to write songs rather than symphonies , particularly for the movies . " One cannot underestimate the ideological effect of cinematography -- 120 million people can be the viewers , " Stalin added .
Vladimir Putin 's new " dictatorship of law " also seeks to play the " culture card " of his " law and order " predecessors .
Thankfully ( so far ) , Putin 's cultural involvements have assumed less grandiose and intimidating forms .
Gusinsky , after all , was arrested in the glare of news cameras , not shipped off to the gulag in the dark of night .
But this gentleness may merely be the result of the fact that democratic / capitalist governance now affords its own forms of surveillance to replace Soviet-style censorship .
Putin 's state influences editors , publishers , and theater owners by raising licensing fees , auditing taxes , even applying fire and pest-control regulations to close down the offices of disagreeable magazine , theater , and film companies .
The point is to atomize and isolate .
Great voices can speak , but these voices must be singular ; the chorus of opinion that mass media outlets like those controlled by Gusinksy offers , it seems , must be overseen , monitored , and if necessary , controlled when they get too far out of line , as Kremlin power brokers seem to believe Gusinsky has been .
Gusinsky 's Media-Most empire , including television and influential newspapers and magazines , bridled at earlier Kremlin attempts to control them by other means .
Gusinsky 's arrest seems a signal that the old whips can still be taken out of storage .
On the other hand , Putin 's benevolent gestures towards mastera cultury ( maestros of culture ) -- Kremlin benevolence that was once so life-threatening -- are complacently accepted by today 's mastera .
Valery Gergiev , the renowned conductor of the Kirov ( now Mariinsky ) Opera in St. Petersburg , was pleased by the President 's direct interest in his new production of Prokofiev 's opera War and Peace ; as was Nani Bregvadze , a legendary Georgian singer , whom Putin begged on his knees to sing for him after missing her concert at the Moscow Conservatory .
In treating cultural masters different from media barons , Putin 's calculations have been proven right so far .
Recently , Nikita Mikhalkov , director of the Oscar-winning film " Burnt by the Sun , " the pianist and president of Russia 's Art Academy Nikolai Petrov , the singer and composer Alexander Gradsky and other members of the intelligentsia spoke to the press in Moscow in defense of Putin 's strategy in Chechnya .
" When the nation mobilizes its forces to achieve some task , that imposes obligations on everyone including the media , " they said in a written statement . Sentiments of which Josef Stalin would heartily approve .
Vladimir Gusinsky may be just the first to learn the limits of freedom , and the depth of those obligations .
