Tax the Oligarchs
Around the world , there is concern about the arrest of Russian oil billionaire Mikhail Khodorkovsky .
The worry is that Russia may be backtracking from democracy and the rule of law .
Russia faces numerous problems posed by the legacy of Communism and the way the transition from Communism to a market economy was handled .
One set of problems concerns politics and the difficulties of creating democracy and the rule of law after decades of totalitarianism .
Another relates to economics .
Two grievous economic policy errors were committed during Yeltsin 's presidency .
The first , as I argue in my book Globalization and its Discontents , was to create incentives that led to asset stripping rather than wealth creation .
The other was to squander the few positive legacies left from the Communist era .
One such legacy was a high level of human capital , especially in technical and scientific areas , much of which was lost , as many of the country 's most talented people emigrated .
Another squandered legacy -- with serious political consequences -- was the relative equality bequeathed by Communism .
Politics and economics are in fact inextricably linked here : the erosion of the middle classes , which accompanied the rise of a few enormously wealthy oligarchs , and the descent of millions into poverty , made creation of a democratic society and the rule of law much more difficult .
The reason is simple .
It is not the Rockefellers and the Gateses of this world that are the strongest advocates of a " level playing field " and respect for law ( including the law of competition ) .
Historically , it is the middle classes that have an inherent stake in fairness and equality , thus playing an instrumental role in instituting the rule of law .
For this reason , coming to terms with the illegitimate privatizations of the 1990 's , which are at the root of wealth inequality in Russia , is something that still needs to be done -- and not only as a matter of justice ; it is important for the long-term performance of Russia 's economy .
Ultimately , security of property rights -- and the growth it enables -- depends primarily on the legitimacy with which those rights are viewed by society .
If those who hold wealth are seen as having obtained it in ways that lack legitimacy , no legal system can make property secure .
If property is not secure -- or even is not perceived as secure -- incentives are distorted .
Those in control of Russian businesses will thus continue to strip assets and convert them into forms of wealth that can be easily taken out of the country .
Worse , if the legacy of illegitimate privatizations is not addressed , the economic oligarchy will likely be transformed into a political one as well .
It is in light of this that Putin 's moves against Khodorkovsky should be seen .
For if the oligarchs succeed in keeping their ill-gotten gains , it is not hard to imagine someone like Khodorkovsky -- who was already starting to build a political machine alongside his business empire -- cashing in his Yukos shares , parking his wealth in a safe haven offshore , and using it to manipulate Russian politics .
What is to be done , then , with the tainted property gained during the wild privatizations of the 1990 's ?
It probably would have been easier for Russia 's government to recapture some of the oligarchs ' ill-gotten gains earlier , say , after the ruble crisis of 1998 , when many of them fell into arrears on their loans .
Although that opportunity has passed , I still think that it will be far easier to address this problem now than , say , in another decade .
Once Khodorkovsky and his ilk sell their stakes to foreign interests and take their money out of Russia , there will be little that can be done .
But wouldn 't a reversal of the illegitimate privatizations of the 1990 's create new problems and undermine Russia 's attempt to establish secure property rights ?
I believe some of the inequities of the past can be addressed without any direct attack on " property rights , " no matter how dubiously acquired .
Russia could impose an " excess capital gains tax , " analogous in spirit to the tax imposed on US oil companies when their profits soared , through no effort of their own , from high oil prices in the 1970 's .
A tax could be imposed , say , at the rate of 90 % , on the " excess " gains from the acquisition of state assets--e.g. , on gains in excess of 10 % cumulative returns on original equity investments .
The tax would be payable either when the company is listed on a stock market or when the assets are sold .
Such a tax would leave the oligarchs with plenty , and could even compensate them for their efforts at restructuring enterprises .
To encourage domestic investment , and recognizing that it is difficult to tax assets held abroad , an " exit " tax could also be imposed on capital taken out of the country .
It would be a move somewhat similar to that contemplated in the US by the Clinton administration , which proposed a tax on billionaires who surrendered their citizenship in order to avoid taxation .
The money raised by the new tax could help restore , for instance , Russia 's ailing health and educational systems .
To be sure , the tax would not solve all of Russia 's problems .
It would not eliminate huge inequalities . It would not create a new middle class .
It would , however , go some way towards rectifying the consequences of the " wealth grabs " of the Yeltsin era .
Most importantly , while it would not ensure the creation of a viable democracy , it would at least reduce the threat to democracy posed by the increasingly poisonous role played by money in Russian politics .
