The Kremlin ’ s Tragic Miscalculation
COPENHAGEN – Russia ’ s aggression against Ukraine is one of the great tragedies of our time , not only because of the tremendous human cost , but also because it is utterly pointless .
Indeed , Russia ’ s leaders fundamentally misjudged the West ’ s intentions and created an entirely unnecessary confrontation that undermines both sides ’ interests .
Russia and the West – with their closely interlinked economies and many overlapping political objectives in Europe and beyond – have much to gain from peaceful cooperation .
But instead of working with Western powers to enhance shared prosperity , the Kremlin turned on its partners abroad .
The reason was simple : Russia viewed the gradual enlargement of the European Union and NATO – achieved through their “ neighborhood ” and “ open door ” policies , respectively – as carefully orchestrated attempts to encircle and threaten it .
According to Kremlin rhetoric , by welcoming former Soviet countries , the EU and NATO were explicitly attempting to weaken Russia .
This interpretation ultimately drove Russia to respond to Ukraine ’ s plans to sign an association agreement with the EU by annexing Crimea and attempting to create a “ frozen conflict ” in eastern Ukraine .
But Russia ’ s interpretation was patently wrong – and I can say so with full authority .
As Prime Minister of Denmark , I chaired the 2002 EU summit in Copenhagen , where European leaders agreed on the bloc ’ s most expansive enlargement ever .
And as Secretary General of NATO , I spent five years chairing the NATO-Russia Council to build cooperation with our largest neighbor .
The truth is that the young democracies of Central and Eastern Europe sought to join the EU and NATO – and worked hard to gain membership – because they longed for peace , progress , and prosperity .
It was those countries ’ ambitions , not some vendetta against Russia , that drove EU and NATO enlargement .
Russia should not bemoan its neighbors ’ decision to engage with the EU and NATO , which , after all , paved the way for economic progress and security improvements .
The EU and NATO supported the construction of strong democratic institutions based on the rule of law and respect for minorities , the emergence of viable and dynamic economies , and the peaceful resolution of border disputes .
A secure and prosperous Central and Eastern Europe benefits everyone – especially Russia .
Today , the EU is Russia ’ s largest foreign market , with a major share of its exports going to the member states that joined in 2004 .
And Russia ’ s border with the EU , far from posing a threat , is the most stable and secure of all its frontiers .
In fact , no NATO ally would attack Russia , as such a move would defy a key tenet of international law : respect for other countries ’ sovereignty .
In the case of border disputes , NATO members are committed to finding nonviolent solutions .
In short , thanks to the EU and NATO , the stability on its Western borders that Russia has sought for centuries has now been achieved .
Russia should be celebrating – and it should be seizing the opportunity to deepen its ties with the West .
When I became Secretary General of NATO in 2009 , I identified a strengthened relationship with Russia as a top priority .
By the end of the next year , it seemed like we were making major progress toward closer cooperation .
At the third summit of the NATO-Russia Council , Russia ’ s then-president , Dmitri Medvedev , and his counterparts from the other 28 participating states issued a joint statement in which they pledged to develop a “ true strategic partnership . ”
But five years later , Russia is far from our strategic partner ; it is our strategic problem .
In fact , the current Russian military doctrine names NATO as one of the main external threats to Russian security .
It is time to redefine Russia ’ s relationship with the West .
The first step would be for the EU , the United States , and other NATO members to demonstrate clearly that cooperation pays – and that confrontation has costs .
This means continued economic sanctions against Russia , alongside economic aid for Ukraine .
From a security point of view , NATO should enhance its territorial defense , while NATO allies help Ukraine improve its defense capabilities .
The EU and the US must remain firm and united in their policy toward Russia .
This approach offers the best chance of bringing an end to the current confrontation , and compelling Russia to engage constructively with the West .
Of course , if cooperation is to work , Russia must earn back the trust that it has broken , demonstrating its commitment to abide by the treaties and international norms of behavior to which it has agreed .
When it comes to Russia today , appeasement will not lead to peace ; on the contrary , a conciliatory approach will only prolong the conflict .
The sooner the West convinces Russia ’ s leaders that it will not back down , the sooner the conflict will be over .
Only then will Russia return to the path of constructive cooperation with the EU , NATO , and the US – and a more prosperous future .
