Reforming Germany \ u0027s Army
MUNICH : What are the military threats European countries now face ?
What forces are required to meet them ?
How much are governments willing to pay ?
The debate over these issues has now reached West Europe 's biggest army , Germany 's Bundeswehr .
Its outcome concerns not only Germans but their partners in Nato and the EU as well .
It is a belated debate here .
The Cold War ended a decade ago , and most of Germany 's allies conducted their debate years ago .
If Germany has lagged , it is for two reasons : Germany 's security environment has undergone the most dramatic change , and Germans remain deeply attached to military conscription .
Revolutions happen quickly but it takes time to adjust to the changes they bring .
For half-a-century , Germany was the point where the Cold War was most likely to turn hot .
Then , beginning in the spring of 1990 , Germany united , the Warsaw Pact and USSR disintegrated , and countries to Germany 's east , which had been the staging post for Soviet tank armies , suddenly became friends , then partners .
In 1994 the last Russian soldier left German soil .
That would have been the moment to take stock of Germany 's new strategic situation .
But Helmut Kohl 's government feared that any examination would unravel the central feature of the army created in the mid-1950s and a major condition for its wide acceptance in the country : military conscription .
The military embraces conscription because it assures the armed forces of high-quality recruits and a close link to civil society ; politicians like it because it helps make the armed forces transparent ; agencies of the welfare state appreciate it because , without conscription , there would be no conscientious objectors to be usefully ( and cheaply ) employed in all sorts of social tasks .
So the armed forces found themselves in a double bind : the Cold War 's end prompted calls for a peace dividend and for unification to be funded .
Germany 's defense budget slid to lower levels even faster than did those of her allies .
But to maintain conscription implied a large and costly military structure which bloated personal expenditure at the price of squeezing the budget share of military investment .
The result is an army neither manned nor equipped for dealing with likely security threats , nor for cooperating with the armed forces of Germany 's allies .
So reform became inevitable .
Because the conservatives of Helmut Kohl did not address it , Gerhard Schroeder 's left coalition had to .
A year ago , it set up an independent " Commission on Common Security and the Future of the Armed Forces " under the chairmanship of Richard von Weizsaecker , the respected former President of the Republic .
Earlier this week , the Commission 's report was published .
A debate long in coming is finally beginning .
The 179 page document does not mince words .
The Bundeswehr has no future in its current structure .
Germany is no longer threatened by invading armies ; she is surrounded by allies in Nato and partners in the EU .
This strategic condition is here to stay .
Instead of the capability for repulsing a massive attack on its borders , the armed forces need to be able to intervene in and manage crises B whether within or beyond Nato B in joint operations with their closest allies .
Hence what counts is the number and equipment of forces deployable for crisis operations .
At the moment , barely sixty thousand soldiers qualify ; the Weizsaecker Commission calls for an increase to 140,000 of different stages of readiness , sufficient to intervene in two simultaneous crises .
At the same time , it proposes a drastic reduction in the overall size of the Bundeswehr : from the current 320,000 to no more than 240,000 men and women ( yes , women : they will be eligible for practically all military functions ) .
The number of conscripts , with a military service of 10 months , should be 30,000 a year , down from the present 130,000 .
In other words : the number of soldiers needed for the new tasks goes up , while the total of the armed forces goes down .
The resulting savings are proposed to modernize military hardware and equip the forces for future tasks .
Just as soldiers and their means should be geared to these , so the chain of command needs to be streamlined to assure rapid deployment of combined forces , in close coordination with allies , and with political oversight guaranteed .
It will take up to six years , the Commission estimates , to manage the transition from the present to the future Bundeswehr , and Weizs „ cker suggests a program budget to make sure the reform stays on course .
But if it does , Germany will be fully capable of honoring commitments she has undertaken in Nato and the EU .
Indeed , the reform will give a boost to much closer European defence cooperation by increasing interoperability with major European allies and encouraging joint procurement , joint production and joint management of military investment .
Now politicians are taking over .
In the ensuing public debate , two items have already emerged as central : money and conscription B one politically demanding , the other politically convenient .
These reforms will not come cheap .
Although the new Bundeswehr will be more cost-efficient , it will need money to manage the changeover , more than currently planned by a government set on a laudable course of fiscal consolidation .
Will Chancellor Schroeder be willing to commit himself to reforms which will bring fruit only after the next elections ?
Conscription is another matter .
While one third of the Commission members favored a volunteer army , the majority supported conscription , albeit with a smaller number of call-ups than today .
Their reasoning : Since the future is uncertain , it makes sense to retain the flexibility conscription permits , to respond both to unforeseen changes in the security environment and to shortfalls in the recruitment of volunteers ; here the difficulties that allied armies are encountering which have jettisoned conscription have been a warning .
But the number of young men to be called up depends on the requirements of the forces ; hence the Commission insists on no less than ten months ' service .
This explains the much reduced figure of only 30.000 a year .
It is this part of the proposal which is encountering most criticism .
Most political parties reject it , preferring instead to draft a much higher number .
The Commission 's selective draft , they argue is unconstitutional because it allows the large majority of eligible young men to escape conscription .
This may not be the last word in the debate .
For to argue that the draft is only just if everyone is called up regardless of military requirements is unconvincing , provided those that are drafted are compensated for their service .
Moreover , to draft more than one needs is a costly luxury .
That recognition is gradually sinking in , at least in the government .
Defense Minister Scharping who is currently preparing his own proposals for the future Bundeswehr , also envisages a major reduction in the number of conscripts though not as drastic as the Commission wants .
Less money and more conscripts will slow down , and possibly derail , the Weizsaecker reforms .
But then commissions propose , politicians dispose .
They are under greater constraints than independent advisers , they get the credit for success but also bear the risk of failure .
It would be naive , therefore , to demand that they should not deviate from the script that Weizsaecker wrote .
It would be wrong , as some are doing , to dismiss the Report as an inconsequential wishlist .
In one year of hard work , Weizsaecker 's group has done what no other body in government or parliament can do : define the benchmark for needed reforms .
Politicians will deviate , but they will have to account for it if and when they do .
That is why it is safe to say : reform of the Bundeswehr is finally under way .
