Stopping Latin America ’ s Budding Arms Race
In recent weeks , many observers of the Latin American military situation have detected what could be the beginning of a new arms race in the region .
Brazilian President Luis Inacio “ Lula ” da Silva was photographed boarding the Tikuna , his country ’ s first conventional , domestically built submarine .
He used the opportunity to highlight his support for the Brazilian military .
Similarly , Venezuela ’ s President Hugo Chávez has broadcast his intention to purchase Russian Mig fighter jets and Brazilian low-flying surveillance aircraft , and to expand military expenditures .
He is doing so , perhaps , because of recent problems with Colombia .
Even Chile , after a lengthy process of weighing its options , is still pondering whether to acquire a dozen American-built jet fighters or a joint Swedish-Brazilian alternative .
Is there a new arms race underway in Latin America ?
If so , is there any conceivable way it could help address the hemisphere ’ s economic and social dilemmas ?
Regional wars and border conflicts have existed since time immemorial in Latin America .
There was the Chaco war and the Chilean-Bolivian conflagration in the nineteenth century , the so called “ Soccer War ” between Honduras and El Salvador in the 1960 ’ s , the clash between Ecuador and Peru in the 1980 ’ s , and Antarctic border disputes between Chile and Argentina that were finally settled in the early 1990 ’ s .
But the main reason for heavy military spending in Latin America has always been chiefly domestic .
Either the military ran various countries , and gorged itself with hardware and troop increases , or weak civilian governments , terrified of military coups or blackmail , placated their armed forces with all sorts of unnecessary martial goodies . By international standards , arms spending in Latina America is low relative to GDP ; but it is nonetheless excessive relative to the region ’ s needs .
Today the situation is more complex .
In Venezuela , keeping his former comrades in arms happy is obviously a concern for Chávez .
But festering conflicts with his Colombian neighbors are also a factor , particularly in view of the constant accusations and suspicions that Chávez comforts and supports the FARC guerrillas in Colombia .
High oil prices allow Venezuela to go on this military spending spree , and there seems little that anybody can do about it .
In Brazil , matters are somewhat different .
Lula has been able to neatly dovetail his socialist roots with traditional Brazilian nationalism , which has always been strong in the country ’ s armed forces . “ O Brasil , país grande ” is a universal slogan in South America ’ s giant – a country that has borders with nine neighbors and fears that its distant jungle frontiers cannot easily be patrolled .
Similar sentiments are apparent elsewhere in the region .
But the question everywhere in Latin America is whether it would not be a better idea to implement former – and perhaps future – Costa Rican President Oscar Arias ’ s idea of Latin American disarmament , to turn “ spending on swords ” into investments in ploughshares .
Arias , the 1987 Nobel peace prize recipient , has a good reason for pushing this idea : his country has no standing army .
Still , it is a bold initiative that should be revived in view of Latin America ’ s incipient arms race .
Indeed , it could be the cornerstone of a new program for the next Secretary General of the Organization of American States , who is to be elected in the coming weeks .
Obviously , I am rooting for the Mexican candidate , Foreign Minister Luis Ernesto Derbez .
But whoever wins will need new ideas and initiatives to reinvigorate a dormant institution .
Stopping Latin America ’ s budding arms race is about as good an idea as there can be .
