United With Putin Against Terror ?
NEW YORK – Russian President Vladimir Putin has just vowed to “ find and punish ” those responsible for using a homemade bomb to bring down a Russian airliner over Egypt in October , killing 224 people .
The timing of his announcement , just days after terrorists used suicide bombs and Kalashnikovs to kill 129 people in Paris , is no coincidence .
Putin sees an opening to the West , and he wants to take advantage of it .
The West should not shut him out .
For weeks , the Russian government seemed to be dithering over the proper response to the plane crash , as if it were worried that the loss of life would be blamed on its decision to intervene in Syria ’ s civil war .
The bloodshed in France , however , has changed the calculus completely , pointing toward the possibility of a rapprochement between Russia and the West .
By striking Paris , the Islamic State has turned the Syrian war into a global conflict .
And , as Putin ’ s performance at the G-20 summit in Turkey showed , Russia is firmly in the middle of the fight .
It must be noted that an adversarial relationship with the West was not part of Putin ’ s original plan . “ Russia is part of European culture , ” Putin told the BBC in 2000 , shortly before his election as President .
“ I cannot imagine my own country in isolation from Europe and what we often call the civilized world . It is hard for me to visualize NATO as an enemy . ”
It was only in 2002 , after NATO began talks to admit Bulgaria , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Romania , Slovakia , and Slovenia , that relations began to sour .
As former British Prime Minister Tony Blair described the turning point in his memoirs , “ Vladimir later came to believe that the Americans did not give him his due place . ”
Putin ’ s bellicosity was later reinforced by domestic political concerns – a deep recession that made it necessary to channel voters ’ anger – and perceived slights , especially at the hands of the United States ( President Barack Obama once referred to Putin as “ the bored kid in the back of the classroom ” ) .
But it was only with Russia ’ s intervention in Ukraine and its annexation of Crimea in March 2014 that Putin became openly confrontational , portraying his country as the victim of aggression .
The West has “ lied to us many times , made decisions behind our backs , placed before us a fait accompli , ” Putin said in a televised address , shortly after a dubious referendum in Crimea cemented Russia ’ s control over the region . “ This happened with NATO ’ s expansion to the East , and the deployment of military infrastructure at our borders . ”
At the G-20 summit in Turkey , however , Putin struck a markedly different tone , extending an open hand : “ We proposed cooperation on antiterrorism ; unfortunately our partners in the United States in the initial stage responded with a refusal … [ But now ] it seems to me that everyone is coming around to the realization that we can wage an effective fight only together … If our partners think the time has come to change our relations , then we will welcome that . ”
The logic behind Putin ’ s overtures is clear .
Russia has achieved its objective in Ukraine : a frozen conflict that will provide the Kremlin a continuous role in the country ’ s politics .
His goal now is to convince the West to lift its sanctions .
As analysts at Stratfor Global Intelligence put it , “ Unless the Kremlin is willing to let Russian companies default on their debts or make bigger cuts to their current operations or future investments in the coming years , Moscow will need to convince the Europeans to let at least the harshest sanctions expire . ”
The attacks in Paris have provided Putin with the opportunity to present his military operations in Syria as a service to the West , an example of Russia ’ s willingness to perform the dirty work of attacking the Islamic State in its own territory .
And Putin is already making concessions in the diplomatic sphere .
At a summit in Vienna on November 15 , just two days after the attacks in Paris , Russia and the US seemed to set aside some of their differences on how to end Syria ’ s civil war , agreeing to a timeline in which a new government would be elected in early 2017 .
The US and its European allies have suddenly gained a great deal of leverage over the Kremlin , and they should not be shy about using it .
While the West should not be quick to lift its sanctions – the dispute over Crimea is unlikely to be resolved quickly – harnessing the Kremlin ’ s desire to be recognized as a great , global power is a sound strategy .
The frozen conflict in eastern Ukraine can be thawed if Russia is convinced to observe the Minsk Protocol , withdraw its troops from the border , and help facilitate local elections under international standards .
If Putin is willing to create some goodwill by cooperating in Ukraine , the West should consider offering some small concessions in return .
Russia ’ s participation in the battle against the Islamic State – and its return to the rule-abiding ranks of the international community – may be worth the price .
