Japan in Action
TOKYO – Japan ’ s prolonged political anni horribiles – spanning more than half a decade – has ended .
The Liberal Democratic Party ( LDP ) won a decisive victory in elections to the upper house of parliament held on July 21 , bringing to an end the indecisive politics caused by the lack of an effective majority .
During the previous six years , there were six prime ministers , ten defense ministers , and 14 justice ministers ( ten of whom came and went during the 39 months of rule by the Democratic Party of Japan ) .
These figures indicate just how unstable the country ’ s political situation had become .
But anxiety about the immature DPJ government , prolonged deflation , and unprecedented challenges posed by neighboring countries created a widespread sense of crisis among Japanese voters .
It was this that motivated them to return the LDP to power , though many voters seemed fed up with the party just a few short years ago .
In the recent election campaign , the LDP continued to criticize the previous DPJ government ’ s immaturity , but avoided attacks on other parties .
Instead , the LDP highlighted the beneficial effects of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe ’ s reforms ( colloquially known as “ Abenomics ” ) , such as increased share prices , faster GDP growth , and higher employment , all of which have created hope for a turnaround in Japan ’ s prospects .
Since Abe returned last December for a second stint as Prime Minister , Japanese voters have entrusted him with maintaining political stability and ensuring economic revitalization .
But , following monetary easing and fiscal expansion , it is Abenomics ’ third “ arrow ” that will prove most important – and most politically challenging . The Abe government must implement deregulation and other structural reforms while convincing powerful interest groups to adjust to a new national and global environment in which Japan ’ s old economic model no longer works .
Fortunately , Abe will not need to worry about elections for the next three years .
With strong majorities in both houses , he should be able to secure whatever reform legislation he needs – that is , provided that he can maintain the LDP ’ s internal discipline ( his enormous popularity will help him ) .
Abe ’ s agenda includes reform of social security in response to demographic trends , as well as gaining the agriculture sector ’ s acceptance of the Trans-Pacific Partnership , the bold regional trade agreement that will unite the United States , Japan , Australia , New Zealand , and much of the rest of Asia , with the exception of China .
The rigors of the TPP are bound to force significant agricultural reforms , and pushing it through will , indeed , test party discipline .
But Abe is also pressing for change in medical research and the technology sector by embracing long-shunned innovations such as iPS cells ( artificial stem cells ) .
He is also emphasizing the development of renewable energy and power-saving innovations , which became an urgent policy objective following the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant two years ago .
Abe is resolved to make steady progress on each of these key issues .
But Abenomics has a strategic corollary as well .
Japanese diplomacy lost its footing in the unstable – and often naive – politics of the DPJ years .
Thus , Abe has been traveling abroad every month since last December in an effort to demonstrate that Japan has returned as a global player , and is particularly keen to play a prominent role in recasting Asia ’ s security structures in the wake of China ’ s rise .
Indeed , Abe has visited 13 countries in the last six months alone ( a schedule that has helped him to cast aside any lingering memories of his previous tenure as Prime Minister , when ill health forced him from office after barely a year ) .
Abe has placed particular emphasis on strengthening Japan ’ s alliance with the Unites States , which had atrophied as a result of the DPJ government ’ s feckless behavior ( relations with China deteriorated as well ) .
More broadly , Abe envisages Japan ’ s future as that of a trading country that has assumed its rightful role in ensuring a free and open maritime order .
Abe ’ s diplomatic whirlwind is aimed at strengthening ties with countries that share this commitment , as well as Japan ’ s other values , including human rights and democracy .
Of course , given Asia ’ s size and dynamism , there are many other issues that will need to be addressed in the years ahead , including improvement of the security environment in a currently unstable East Asia and amending the country ’ s constitution , which the LDP has considered doing for many years .
But the first priority for Abe ’ s second government is to revive the Japanese economy .
That task has already begun , and the LDP ’ s recent election victory will strengthen Abe ’ s ability to complete it .
