No Country for Young Oligarchs
CAMBRIDGE – Mikhail Prokhorov , the owner of gold mines in Siberia and a professional basketball team in the United States , is one of Russia ’ s richest men , with a net worth of $ 18 billion .
This past June , he agreed to lead a center-right political party to contest December ’ s parliamentary elections .
Prokhorov , who is 46 , seemed to believe that his business experience would boost his political prospects .
Prokhorov was wrong , and resigned in September from the party he had led .
But , whatever embarrassment he may now be feeling is certainly a better fate than that meted out to Mikhail Khodorkovsky , another Russian oligarch with political ambitions , who is now languishing in his eighth year of imprisonment since boldly challenging Vladimir Putin ’ s ideas about how Russia should be run .
Prokhorov ’ s withdrawal preceded by just a few days the announcement by United Russia , the country ’ s ruling party , that Putin will seek a third presidential term in 2012 , swapping jobs with the incumbent , President Dmitri Medvedev , who will become Prime Minister .
That may have been too much for Alexei Kudrin , the finance minister since 2000 , whose disagreement with Medvedev ’ s increased spending led to his resignation .
In the absence of new faces or ideas , the only prospect for the coming election year will be to pump more petrodollars into a struggling and grossly inefficient economy .
That spending binge will feed corruption , inflation , and natural-resource dependency – the three evils with which Kudrin has fought throughout his tenure .
While Prokhorov is one of several respected Russian oligarchs , Kudrin was the most respected member of the government .
Their departure from political life is becoming widely viewed as a symptom of deepening divisions among the Putin-era governing elite , even a harbinger of political crisis .
To be sure , there are many subtle signs of panic at the top about the state of the country ’ s economy ; but there is no hint that United Russia has a new program to meet these challenges in Putin ’ s next administration , apart from more censorship of the Internet .
But all signs of conflict within Russia ’ s supreme leadership of two – Putin and Medvedev – have disappeared .
Until September , Medvedev made great efforts to encourage hopes for change .
But Putin never lost control over the governmental apparatus , and the prospect of his regaining the presidency never dimmed .
So those hopes were always false . & nbsp ; Indeed , most of Russia ’ s rulers have been in office for the better part of a decade .
Some , like Kudrin , had become visibly impatient for change ; but most remained very content with the status quo .
As happened during the Cold War , a bureaucratic crisis suddenly exposed the mechanisms by which this elite has wielded power .
When resigning from his party , Prokhorov publicly accused a Kremlin insider , Vladislav Surkov , of foul play , calling him “ the puppet-master ” who had “ privatized politics in Russia . ”
Surkov , the deputy chief of the presidential administration since 1999 , co-chairs the “ Working Group on Civil Society ” – one of several bodies created in 2009 to “ reset ” Russian-American relations – with Michael McFaul , US President Barack Obama ’ s adviser on Russia .
The working group may have contributed to ending the war of words , at least on the American side , and McFaul has now been nominated to become US Ambassador to Russia .
But members of the US Senate , which must confirm McFaul ’ s nomination , would do well to ask him about Surkov , a man who has overseen the destruction of Russian democratic politics .
In taking on Surkov , Prokhorov demonstrated his refusal to be a puppet .
In fact , Prokhorov has much to offer his country .
His articulate speech and self-made success are unusual among Russian politicians .
And , with housing , healthcare , and education less accessible now than at the end of the 1980 ’ s , his political program focuses on what should be done to improve Russia ’ s human capital – the key problem holding back Russia ’ s economy .
According to Prokhorov , productivity in Russia is just 6-10 % of that in the US , which is why the economy struggles even when the price of oil , its main export , is peaking .
Two million educated professionals have recently emigrated from Russia .
During the last 20 years , social inequality has grown threefold .
Russia , Prokhorov concludes , is a feudal society , with Putin ’ s political monopoly and economic mismanagement exacerbating the so-called “ natural-resource curse ” that afflicts many oil-exporting countries .
Such a bleak diagnosis of Russia ’ s ills could never be the basis for a Kremlin-sponsored political party .
Nevertheless , for a while Prokhorov tried to play politics according to the Byzantine rules that govern Russian elections – and that benefit United Russia , the Putin-built replica of the Soviet-era Communist Party .
But playing politics by Putin ’ s rules requires scores of hired professionals , the so-called “ political technologists . ”
Despite his acumen , Prokhorov surrounded himself with such people , pretentious wizards who have turned Russian politics into the revolting spectacle that it is .
He hoped to break up Putin ’ s monopoly by using its own tools .
Today , Prokhorov ’ s program remains the only tangible result of the $ 26 million that he and his friends invested in his campaign .
He is probably sorrier for the loss of three months of his time .
Although he claims that he will not leave politics completely , he now looks like just another oligarch who must choose between capitulation , emigration , and imprisonment .
Kudrin ’ s future is no less obscure .
