New Policy Paradigms for a New World
WASHINGTON , DC – Over the last quarter-century , the global economy enjoyed a remarkable stretch of stable growth and low inflation .
The so-called “ Great Moderation ” lulled many policymakers into a false sense of security about their ability to manage the economy and deal with financial crises .
But , as the Great Moderation metastasized into the Great Recession , fatal flaws in conventional thinking came to light .
One of the most notable was just how poorly we grasped the linkages between the financial system and the broader economy – as well as the linkages between countries .
Today , as policymakers seek new paradigms for managing the economy in 2011 and beyond , a better understanding of these linkages will be essential to promoting economic growth and reducing the risk of crises .
Equally important is the realization that by working together , we can build a more successful and more stable global economy , for the benefit of all countries .
Let me spell out what this means for three policy objectives : building a stronger and safer financial sector , achieving more balanced and more stable growth , and managing large and volatile capital flows .
A stronger and safer financial system is the bedrock of a successful economy .
This requires strong regulation , with a sensible rulebook for financial markets and institutions .
And , to ensure that everyone plays by the rules , financial institutions must be supervised intensively .
Now , even with the best rules and supervision , crises will still occur – which is why we need effective resolution mechanisms to deal with institutions that get into trouble .
And , finally , given powerful interactions within the financial sector and across the broader economy , we need an overarching framework to manage risks in the financial system as a whole .
Much has already been done to advance regulatory reform , notably the recent agreement to strengthen bank capital ( Basel III ) .
Yet we are far from having the supervision needed for proper implementation of the rules .
Effective resolution mechanisms and systemic frameworks remain even more elusive .
Moving to the broader economy , we have learned that growth must be balanced in order to be healthy .
At the national level , this requires tools to prevent excesses in one sector from bringing down the entire economy .
At the global level , it requires a better distribution of growth across countries , in order to prevent destabilizing imbalances .
What are the implications for macroeconomic policy ?
Monetary policy needs to look beyond its core focus on low and stable inflation and pay much greater attention to financial stability .
The debate now is how , exactly , to factor this imperative into monetary policy , and how to coordinate the work of monetary and regulatory authorities .
For fiscal policy , the crisis showed the value of maintaining low public debt and deficits during good times : countries with healthier public finances have more space to cushion the economic impact of crises .
But the Great Recession has caused public debt and deficits in many advanced economies to soar .
How quickly fiscal retrenchment should be launched – and the right balance between higher taxes and lower spending – will vary by country , reflecting factors like the strength of the economic recovery , the market ’ s appetite for debt , and initial spending and revenue ratios .
But the common objective for fiscal policy must be to support durable medium-term growth and job creation .
The distribution of income is another important issue .
In the years leading up to the crisis , inequality rose in many countries , with worrisome consequences for social cohesion .
Rising inequality may also have increased vulnerability to crisis : with fewer people able to dip into savings during bad times , the impact on growth is even larger .
Turning to the international dimension , understanding better how policies adopted in one country spill over onto other economies is key .
This approach lies at the heart of the G-20 ’ s efforts to achieve strong , stable , and balanced global growth .
The International Monetary Fund is also stepping up its work in this area , through “ spillover reports ” on China , the euro zone , Japan , the United Kingdom , and the United States .
Gaining a better appreciation of the financial linkages between countries is also important .
During the crisis , we saw how quickly capital fled from countries previously considered safe bets .
Today , many of these countries are reeling from a veritable tsunami of returning money .
Policymakers in many emerging-market countries worry that surging capital inflows will drive up the value of the local currency , destabilize financial markets , and fuel economic overheating .
Their reactions range from buying up the foreign money to prevent currency appreciation to adopting capital controls , and , in extreme cases , to keeping the money out altogether .
The situation has become quite tense , with talk of “ currency wars ” and a real risk of financial protectionism .
Clearly , we need to get a better handle on what is driving these capital inflows .
We also need to identify the best policies for dealing with them – keeping in mind the impact of these policies on the global economy as a whole .
And we should explore whether a system of global rules aimed at reducing the volatility of capital flows would be useful .
Global financial insurance is an important related issue .
Just as a family backstops its savings with insurance , countries should be able to tap into a global financial safety net .
Much has already been achieved since the crisis , through more resources for the IMF and new financing instruments .
But more is needed , and the Fund is exploring cooperation with regional financing mechanisms , as well as new ways to use its instruments in a systemic crisis .
Let me tie all of this together .
One principal policy failure in the run-up to the crisis was a lack of imagination : we failed to appreciate just how intricate the global economic and financial web had become .
Let our next failing not be the result of a lack of cooperation .
We must reach across old dividing lines – both within economies and between them – and work together to build a stronger , more resilient global economy .
