Putting Public Health at the Center of the Struggle against Poverty
CAMBRIDGE : One great challenge facing humanity is reducing the huge gaps in income and wealth between the world ’ s haves and have nots .
Globalization by itself is not doing the job .
Now , Dr. Gro Bruntland , the head of the World Health Organization , has taken up the challenge .
She points to the desperate health conditions of the world ’ s poor as one of the greatest barriers to economic development , and is mobilizing the world community to do something about it .
In mid-January , Dr. Bruntland appointed a new global Commission on Macroeconomics and Health ( CMH ) , and honored me by appointing me as its Chairman .
The Commission ’ s task is enormous , but easily described : to help put global public health at the center of a new strategy of global economic development .
The Commission will meet in various parts of the world – Asia , Africa , Latin America , Europe – in the coming two years , and will issue its report and recommendations at the end of 2001 .
Market reforms by themselves cannot lift a population from poverty if people are simultaneously struggling with epidemics of AIDS , or malaria , or tuberculosis , or chronic malnutrition , or other crippling health problems .
Populations battling with disease lack the energy , productivity , or means to invest in their own future .
Studies show that when life expectancy is low , so too are many kinds of investments in the future , such as school attendance , personal saving by households , and foreign investments .
Throughout modern history , improvements in public health have speeded economic development .
It was Britain ’ s rising agricultural productivity in the 18th century , for example , which helped to raise nutrition levels and reduce the burden of infectious diseases , that helped to initiate the Industrial Revolution .
It was U.S. investment in eradicating hookworms from its Southern states in the early 20th century that improved health conditions in the American South , and which helped to bring about a boom in investments in that previously impoverished region .
Similarly , eradication of malaria in Spain , Italy , and Greece in the late 1940s ( using household spraying of pesticides among other factors ) helped bring a boom in tourism and foreign investment to these countries in the 1950s and 1960s .
That boom enabled Southern Europe to begin to narrow the large gap in income with the richer countries of Northern Europe .
Health conditions in many of the poorest countries in the world are shockingly bad , and in some cases getting worse .
Approximately one-third of children in the poorest countries are malnourished , and thereby at risk of much greater incidence of infectious disease , learning disorders , and other maladies .
Life expectancy is little more than 50 years ( compared with around 77 years in the rich countries ) .
Millions of poor people every year die of infectious diseases , such as malaria , tuberculosis , pneumonia , and measles .
Ironically , many deaths would be preventable by existing vaccines ( such as for measles ) , but the populations are often too poor to have access to even basic public health .
Even in many middle-income and higher-income countries , there have been surges of new and re-emerging infectious diseases , as a result of increased global travel , the opening of new regions to settlement , and the overuse of antibiotics with a resulting spread of disease-resistant parasites .
The Commission will address these desperate conditions by :
 mobilizing evidence showing how poor health contributes directly to failed economic development ;
 working with professionals at the World Health Organization , UNICEF , the World Bank , the Gates Foundation , and other organizations , to identify public health interventions , such as greater vaccine coverage , that have a very high economic rate of return as well as a high health benefit ;
 working with the pharmaceutical sector and non-governmental organizations to find creative new ways to get essential medicines to the poorest peoples ;
 helping to devise new ways to re-direct global research and development efforts to unsolved problems , such as an effective vaccine for AIDS , malaria , tuberculosis , and dysentery ;
 exploring ways to increase overall public spending on vital health needs , by mobilizing more international aid , by expanding the depth of debt relief for highly indebted poor countries , and by finding ways that poor countries can increase their own financial efforts .
The Commission will look for inputs from concerned citizens , public health experts , governments , and non-governmental groups from all parts of the world .
One of the crucial purposes of the Commission is to help give voice to the health needs of the poorest of the poor .
Therefore , the Commission will be seeking inputs in advice and research from all parts of the world , and will provide a record of its evidence gathering and deliberations on the internet .
At a time when global science is more dynamic than ever ; when the richest countries are experiencing a boom in wealth unrivaled in history ( including around $ 8 trillion in stock market gains in the United States in the past four years ! ) , the world yearns for more effective approaches to the struggle against poverty .
The World Health Organization is taking its place at the center of that effort .
