Immigration and American Power
CAMBRIDGE – The United States is a nation of immigrants .
Except for a small number of Native Americans , everyone is originally from somewhere else , and even recent immigrants can rise to top economic and political roles .
President Franklin Roosevelt once famously addressed the Daughters of the American Revolution – a group that prided itself on the early arrival of its ancestors – as “ fellow immigrants . ”
In recent years , however , US politics has had a strong anti-immigration slant , and the issue played an important role in the Republican Party ’ s presidential nomination battle in 2012 .
But Barack Obama ’ s re-election demonstrated the electoral power of Latino voters , who rejected Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney by a 3-1 majority , as did Asian-Americans .
As a result , several prominent Republican politicians are now urging their party to reconsider its anti-immigration policies , and plans for immigration reform will be on the agenda at the beginning of Obama ’ s second term .
Successful reform will be an important step in preventing the decline of American power .
Fears about the impact of immigration on national values and on a coherent sense of American identity are not new .
The nineteenth-century “ Know Nothing ” movement was built on opposition to immigrants , particularly the Irish .
Chinese were singled out for exclusion from 1882 onward , and , with the more restrictive Immigration Act of 1924 , immigration in general slowed for the next four decades .
During the twentieth century , the US recorded its highest percentage of foreign-born residents , 14.7 % , in 1910 .
A century later , according to the 2010 census , 13 % of the American population is foreign born .
But , despite being a nation of immigrants , more Americans are skeptical about immigration than are sympathetic to it .
Various opinion polls show either a plurality or a majority favoring less immigration .
The recession exacerbated such views : in 2009 , one-half of the US public favored allowing fewer immigrants , up from 39 % in 2008 .
Both the number of immigrants and their origin have caused concerns about immigration ’ s effects on American culture .
Demographers portray a country in 2050 in which non-Hispanic whites will be only a slim majority .
Hispanics will comprise 25 % of the population , with African- and Asian-Americans making up 14 % and 8 % , respectively .
But mass communications and market forces produce powerful incentives to master the English language and accept a degree of assimilation .
Modern media help new immigrants to learn more about their new country beforehand than immigrants did a century ago .
Indeed , most of the evidence suggests that the latest immigrants are assimilating at least as quickly as their predecessors .
While too rapid a rate of immigration can cause social problems , over the long term , immigration strengthens US power .
It is estimated that at least 83 countries and territories currently have fertility rates that are below the level needed to keep their population constant .
Whereas most developed countries will experience a shortage of people as the century progresses , America is one of the few that may avoid demographic decline and maintain its share of world population .
For example , to maintain its current population size , Japan would have to accept 350,000 newcomers annually for the next 50 years , which is difficult for a culture that has historically been hostile to immigration .
In contrast , the Census Bureau projects that the US population will grow by 49 % over the next four decades .
Today , the US is the world ’ s third most populous country ; 50 years from now it is still likely to be third ( after only China and India ) .
This is highly relevant to economic power : whereas nearly all other developed countries will face a growing burden of providing for the older generation , immigration could help to attenuate the policy problem for the US .
In addition , though studies suggest that the short-term economic benefits of immigration are relatively small , and that unskilled workers may suffer from competition , skilled immigrants can be important to particular sectors – and to long-term growth .
There is a strong correlation between the number of visas for skilled applicants and patents filed in the US .
At the beginning of this century , Chinese- and Indian-born engineers were running one-quarter of Silicon Valley ’ s technology businesses , which accounted for $ 17.8 billion in sales ; and , in 2005 , immigrants had helped to start one-quarter of all US technology start-ups during the previous decade .
Immigrants or children of immigrants founded roughly 40 % of the 2010 Fortune 500 companies .
Equally important are immigration ’ s benefits for America ’ s soft power .
The fact that people want to come to the US enhances its appeal , and immigrants ’ upward mobility is attractive to people in other countries .
The US is a magnet , and many people can envisage themselves as Americans , in part because so many successful Americans look like them .
Moreover , connections between immigrants and their families and friends back home help to convey accurate and positive information about the US .
Likewise , because the presence of many cultures creates avenues of connection with other countries , it helps to broaden Americans ’ attitudes and views of the world in an era of globalization .
Rather than diluting hard and soft power , immigration enhances both .
Singapore ’ s former leader , Lee Kwan Yew , an astute observer of both the US and China , argues that China will not surpass the US as the leading power of the twenty-first century , precisely because the US attracts the best and brightest from the rest of the world and melds them into a diverse culture of creativity .
China has a larger population to recruit from domestically , but , in Lee ’ s view , its Sino-centric culture will make it less creative than the US .
That is a view that Americans should take to heart .
If Obama succeeds in enacting immigration reform in his second term , he will have gone a long way toward fulfilling his promise to maintain the strength of the US .
