Russia \ u0027s Future is Now
MOSCOW : Russia 's politics are not those of the steppe .
Russian voters cannot stroll to the left in one election , to the right in the next , unworried about falling over the edge .
We live psychologically on one or the other side of a great divide .
Now the question is whether or not , in elections to the Duma to be held on December 19th , and in presidential elections due next summer , the country will continue its transition or backtrack across that great divide .
When today 's Duma was elected , many cast a nostalgic vote for the good-old Soviet times when wages were paid , the future was unchanging , and you did not need to work too hard .
An opinion poll of last September shows such sentiments remain : 48 % wanted Leonid Brezhnev back as Russia 's president .
Those voices matter , but less every day . For an epoch in Russia 's history is ending .
It lasted only 9 years but its impact equals the age of Peter the Great and the October Revolution .
It has been a fantastic , dizzying era when vast fortunes were made and lost , but also one when millions learned how to live on their own , without a faceless big brother watching over them .
It is fashionable to mock the reform process as a failure .
But cynicism is wrong .
Some policies could have been handled differently , but despite nostalgia for the security of an all-powerful state , we have moved so far that communism has been consigned to the dustbin of Russia 's history .
The impossibility of communism 's restoration is perhaps the great achievement of Yeltsin 's presidency .
Let me give an example close to me – the financial crisis of August , 1998 .
My government fell because of it , but the plans we initiated were enacted by the Primakov and Stepashin governments that replaced mine .
Despite talk about how everything we did was wrong and that we needed new state planning , there was simply no alternative .
It took almost a year before the proposed measures began to work , and precious time was lost – but not altogether wasted .
That year was a valuable learning experience for everyone .
The need to live within the country 's means became so obvious that , for two consecutive years , the Duma passed austerity budgets of which my government could only have dreamed .
The key task now is not so much to bury communism 's remnants as to overcome the corrupt and inept bureaucratic / oligarchic state in which bureaucrats are simultaneously entrepreneurs and politicians , and in which obeying the law is not mandatory but somehow negotiable .
Most Russians know that such a state is dangerous and cannot succeed .
Somehow they tolerate it because it is so familiar , so Russian .
Bureaucratic corruption and incompetence , however , is not just a legacy of communism .
In pre-revolutionary Russia , as reported by the police at the time , only 3 out of 33 governors did not take bribes .
Soviet regional party bosses simply carried on this tradition of greed and grab .
In another sense , too , our current conditions resemble those that existed before Lenin 's revolution .
Read the memoirs of the tsarist prime-minister Sergei Witte and you understand that , paradoxically , a liberally-minded progressive bureaucrat was back then , just as some in the small circle of officials around Yeltsin are today , the lone pillar of reform .
With luck , several steps forward can be made .
Without luck , a reactionary backlash ensues .
The problems Witte dealt with were the same we confronted over the past decade : corruption , the pseudo-patriots who oppose everything foreign ( including capital ) , and an elite and court system dominated by interest groups , rather than defending the state against them .
What Russia needs is both an economy and state civilized by law .
During the first four years of Yeltsin 's presidency , a functioning state did not exist ; in a free-for-all that passed for market reform , force determined everything .
In 1997 government attempts to tame the power of the oligarchs redounded against the state as the cabinet was dissolved .
The state , however , regained some strength recently ; how it uses it is a matter of great importance .
If it limits itself to setting clear rules and applies them equally , society will benefit .
But if the state follows the old Russian tradition and attempts to manage everything , the consequences will be as grave as those of the absence of state power in the first four years of the Yeltsin era .
In this sense , it is difficult to overestimate the significance of the coming elections , because they will largely determine the future of the Russian state .
A limited state will emerge only if the part of society that values freedom , property and security becomes politically active .
More than 60 % of Russians believe they can provide for themselves , and do not want state patronage .
This vital part of new Russia , while active in the economic sphere , could not care less about politics .
Voters under 30 account for 29 % of the total population , but only 3-5 % of them vote .
The higher the education , it seems , the lower the voter participation : among those who never vote , the percent of people with higher education is twice as high as that of people without higher education .
Alienated for so long , the country 's brightest people have washed their hands of politics .
This is a sort of political depression .
Depression can be cured , but only by giving the patient a positive vision of the future .
The right-centrist parties – the Union of the Right forces and Yabloko – do have such a vision and people know it .
When asked in polls " which is the party of our future , the party of our children ? " people never mention the communists or the nationalist , but they list the Union of Right forces and Yabloko as number one .
Those who support reform must begin to convince Russia that the future is now .
