Kremlin Murder Incorporated
NEW YORK – In his play Murder in the Cathedral , T. S. Eliot describes the murder of the Archbishop of Canterbury , Thomas Becket , as a silently ordered hit .
The English king , Henry II , did not need to give a direct order ; his knights knew what to do with somebody seen to be undermining the state .
Eliot may have set his play in twelfth-century England , but he wrote it in 1935 , barely two years after Adolf Hitler had come to power in Germany .
So it is , at least in part , a cautionary tale about the rise of fascism in Europe .
Sadly , it has lost none of its relevance .
Today , Eliot 's masterpiece can be read as a warning about the path being taken by Russia , where politics under President Vladimir Putin has been growing murderously medieval .
One by one , Putin 's critics have been eliminated .
In 2006 , the journalist Anna Politkovskaya was gunned down in an elevator , and Alexander Litvinenko , a former KGB agent who had been critical of Putin , died of polonium poison while in exile in London .
In 2009 , Sergei Magnitsky , a lawyer campaigning against corruption , died in prison after being denied medical care for life-threatening conditions .
The same year , another lawyer , Stanislav Markelov , a champion of human rights , was shot following a news conference .
The murder last week of Boris Nemtsov , a leading opposition politician and a former deputy prime minister under Boris Yeltsin , should come as no surprise .
But it should come as a shock – and as a wake-up call for those Russians who until now have tolerated a culture of lawlessness and impunity , unseen since the darkest days of Stalin 's personal rule in the Soviet Union .
Before his death , Nemtsov was said to be working on a report titled “ Putin and the War , " providing proof of Russia 's involvement in the conflict in eastern Ukraine .
He was scheduled to lead a protest against the war two days after his murder .
Some have wondered if Putin was afraid of what Nemtsov had uncovered , and thus ordered the assassination .
That is unlikely , at least in terms of someone receiving a direct order from Putin .
Simply put , orchestrating Nemtsov 's murder was not worth the trouble ; after all , the Kremlin 's propaganda machine would have had little problem twisting Nemtsov 's report to Putin 's benefit .
Indeed , even Nemtsov 's brazen murder is unlikely to hurt Putin politically .
His popularity now stands at 86 % .
For many Russians , Nemtsov 's opposition to the war in Ukraine made him a traitor , whose death was justified – indeed , almost demanded – by national necessity .
Putin has announced that he will personally oversee the investigation into the assassination .
But those leading the effort have already indicated its likely conclusion : Nemtsov 's murder was an attempt to destabilize Russia .
We can be all but certain that some culprit or another will be “ found , " and that his crime will be part of a conspiracy by the CIA or Ukrainian authorities .
The Kremlin is no stranger to twisting the truth to fit its needs .
Before Russia 's annexation of Crimea , it argued that the United States had hired snipers to fire at pro-Western protesters in Kyiv in order to blame Russia for their deaths .
When a Malaysian airliner was shot down over Ukraine – most likely by pro-Russia rebels – the official Kremlin story was that Western secret services downed it to undermine Putin 's reputation .
Allegations like these have whipped up nationalism , hatred , and anti-Western hysteria , distracting Russians from Putin 's culpability for their country 's economic crisis .
As menacing as Putin 's Russia may be , however , nothing about it is original .
In 1934 , Joseph Stalin , too , ordered a thorough investigation into the murder of a rival : Sergei Kirov , the head of the Communist Party in Leningrad .
The NKVD , the precursor to the KGB , orchestrated the assassination on Stalin 's order , but the inquiry gave the Soviet dictator a pretext for eliminating other opponents .
The search for Kirov 's murderers eventually culminated in the Great Terror , a massive purge of Party leaders , military commanders , and intellectuals .
Putin may not have ordered the hit on Nemtsov or any of the others .
But , like Stalin , he has nurtured a climate of fear and lawlessness , in which those who rally behind the Kremlin feel a duty to eliminate the leader 's opponents however they can , and in anticipation of his will .
An atmosphere in which unlawful deeds become heroic acts was a signature feature of Stalin 's rule .
That stifling dynamic has returned under Putin .
During the darkest days of the Soviet Union , the chiefs of the NKVD were the country 's second most important officials .
Today , Andrei Lugovoi , the KGB agent that the British government suspects of delivering the polonium that killed Litvinenko , sits in the Russian Duma .
So what will happen next ?
Will Putin , like Stalin , unleash his own great terror , and murderously pursue supposed adversaries ?
Or will Nemtsov 's death finally move complacent and obedient Russians to action ?
In the first decade of this century , it was easy to love Putin .
He made Russians rich , cosmopolitan , and respected .
Today , as low oil prices and Western sanctions bite , he is making them poor and nearly universally despised .
On March 1 , the day Nemtsov was to lead his protest , tens of thousands of Russians took to the streets with slogans like “ Nemtsov is love , Putin is war . "
Could it be that Russia 's culture of impunity has reached an inflection point ?
Putin 's regime relies on the promise of economic prosperity , without which it could begin to unravel – if not as a result of mass protest , then because insiders no longer have a stake in its political survival .
At that point , when Putin is at his most vulnerable , his allies will have to act carefully – and keep looking over their shoulders .
