East Asia ’ s Patriots and Populists
TOKYO – When faced with domestic worries , politicians often resort to foreign diversions – a simple axiom that is highly useful in assessing the increasingly tense sovereignty disputes in the East and South China Seas .
Although China is involved in the most wide-ranging and intense disputes , the most tragic is that between South Korea and Japan , given that both countries are democracies with almost identical strategic interests .
On August 10 , South Korean President Lee Myung-bak visited the island of Takeshima ( called Dokdo in Korean ) , which has been the subject of a territorial dispute between Japan and South Korea for 60 years .
During a lecture at the Korea National University of Education four days later , he stoked tensions further , saying of the Emperor of Japan ’ s proposed visit : “ If he wants to come , he should apologize first for the past . ”
Despite his numerous achievements as president , Lee is trumpeting his nationalist / anti-Japanese credentials in the waning days of his term , which ends in February 2013 .
Indeed , so strident has he become that he refused to accept a message from Japan ’ s prime minister about his island visit .
Lee ’ s hyper-patriotism is new .
Less than two months ago , he reached an agreement to share military intelligence with Japan – a deal that was subsequently abandoned , owing to fears that the opposition would attack his party ’ s presidential candidate as subservient to Japan .
Lee ’ s recent behavior may also reflect his fear that he could suffer a fate similar to that of past South Korean presidents .
Some have been assassinated , one committed suicide , and others were arrested and condemned to death after stepping down .
Lee may have interpreted his brother ’ s arrest in July for accepting bribes as a prelude to such a fate .
Attempting to mitigate future domestic political damage by undermining the dynamics of the relationship between South Korea and Japan – and both countries ’ relationship with the United States – is unwise .
Given North Korea ’ s continued potential for military mischief and the fluid state of security in Asia in the wake of China ’ s rise , such tactics could have serious , if unintended , consequences .
The origins of the dispute over Takeshima lie in the period immediately before the Treaty of San Francisco was signed in 1951 , formally ending World War II in the Pacific .
The treaty demarcated territory , including Takeshima .
But South Korea ’ s then-president , Syngman Rhee , in violation of the treaty and international law , instituted the “ Syngman Rhee Line ” to demarcate an expansive area , including Takeshima , within which South Korea unilaterally claimed fishery jurisdiction .
Since then , South Korea has used the issue as a means of boosting national prestige – and , aware that its sovereignty claims are legally dubious , has refused to allow the International Court of Justice to adjudicate .
More ominous , however , is the sovereignty dispute between Japan and China .
Here , history has a story to tell as well .
Japan ’ s government officially incorporated the Senkaku Islands into Japanese national territory in 1895 .
Since then , the islands have consistently been held to be Japanese .
Indeed , at one point there was a dried bonito factory in operation , and more than 200 residents on Uotsuri , the largest of the islands ( roughly the size of New York City ’ s Central Park ) .
At WWII ’ s end , in accordance with Article 3 of the Treaty of San Francisco , the islands were placed under United States control , but reverted to Japan in 1972 , as part of the agreement that returned to it administration of Okinawa .
Until this point , neither China nor Taiwan expressed objections .
In the Chinese World Atlas published under Mao Zedong in 1960 , the Senkaku Islands were treated as part of Okinawa .
And , although circumstances changed in 1968 , when a survey by the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and Pacific revealed the seas around the islands to contain an abundance of resources , the periodic tensions that arose were manageable .
That dynamic was altered when the Democratic Party of Japan came to power three years ago .
The DPJ ’ s feckless dithering over whether to renew the US Marines ’ lease on a base on Okinawa signaled to the world – and to China , in particular – that the party did not value the US alliance and America ’ s security guarantee as highly as previous governments did .
As a result , China has since been testing Japan ’ s resolve and America ’ s assurances , though US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton ’ s recent and resolute affirmation of her country ’ s commitment to Japan ’ s security should put an end to any suspicion in that regard .
Meanwhile , domestic tension in China – particularly the scandal surrounding the purge of former Chongqing Communist Party boss Bo Xilai and the country ’ s economic slowdown – has probably prompted the government to play the nationalist card more forcefully than usual .
The Party ’ s upcoming Congress to anoint the country ’ s new leadership for the next decade adds to its desire to manipulate public emotion .
But the nationalist genie , once released , is not easily controlled .
Some anti-Japanese demonstrations – which featured rioting , looting , and the destruction of Japanese businesses – mutated into anti-government protests .
By allowing social tensions to mount to such a degree , the Chinese government may also be partly responsible for the recent rampage among thousands of workers at the Foxconn plant ( where components for Apple iPods and iPads are made ) in Taiyuan .
This December , South Korea will elect a new president . Japan is likely to hold fresh elections soon as well .
The governments that emerge should use their popular mandates to forge a new form of cooperation that can transcend an embittered past .
What France and Germany achieved in the 1950 ’ s can serve as an example .
By forging shared sovereignty over issues vital to national security – namely , coal and steel – visionary leaders in both countries laid the foundation for European peace and security , while overcoming a long history of antagonism .
In the face of China ’ s rise and maritime ambitions , East Asia ’ s two great democracies must seek to do no less .
If they succeed , South Korea and Japan would establish a precedent that offers the best path to resolving the great sovereignty questions that are now destabilizing Asia .
