Sovereignty Bound
PRAGUE - Glorification of the nation state as the climax to the history of every national community , as the only thing in whose name it is permissible to kill or for whom it is worth dying for , is passing .
Generations of democrats , and the horrors of two World Wars , have brought humanity to the realization that a human being is more important than the state .
In the coming century , most states will begin to transform from cult-like objects charged with emotional contents into simpler civil administrative units that are part of a complex planetary organization .
This change should do away with the idea of non-intervention , with the concept that what happens in another state is none of our business .
As for the practical responsibilities and the jurisdictions of the State , these can go into two directions : downwards or upwards .
Downwards applies to the various organs and structures of civil society to which the State should gradually transfer many of its tasks .
Upwards applies to various regional , transnational or global communities or organizations .
This transfer of functions has already begun .
The Twenty-First Century – provided that humanity withstands all the dangers that it is preparing for itself – will be a world of ever closer cooperation .
In order that the world can be like this , individual entities , cultures or spheres of civilization must clearly recognize their own identities , understand what makes them different from others and accept the fact that such “ otherness ” is no handicap , but a contribution to the global wealth of the human race .
Of course , the same must be recognized also by those who , on the contrary , have the inclination to regard their “ otherness ” as a reason for feeling superior .
I am not against the institution of the State as such .
Instead , I am talking about the fact that there is a value which ranks higher than the State .
This value is humanity .
The State serves the people , not the other way round .
If a person serves his or her state such service should go only as far as is necessary for the state to do a good service to all its citizens .
Human rights rank above the rights of states .
Human liberties constitute a higher value than State sovereignty .
In terms of international law , the provisions that protect the unique human being should take precedence over the provisions that protect the State .
Thus , the foreign policies of individual states should gradually sever the category that has , until now , most often constituted their axis , that is , the category of “ our national interests , ” tends to divide rather than bring us together .
Each of us has some specific interests .
This is entirely natural and there is no reason why we should abandon our legitimate concerns .
But there is something that ranks higher than our interests : it is the principles that we espouse .
Principles unite rather than divide ; they are the yardsticks for measuring the legitimacy of our interests .
I do not think it is valid when various state doctrines say that it is in the interest of the state to uphold such and such a principle .
Principles must be respected and upheld for their own sake ; interests should be derived from them .
For example : It would not be right if I said that it is in the interest of the Czech Republic that there is an equitable peace in the world .
I have to say something else : There must be an equitable peace in the world and the interests of the Czech Republic must be subordinated to that .
The Alliance of which nations as diverse as Canada and the Czech Republic are members waged a struggle against the genocidal regime of Slobodan Milosevic .
That struggle was neither easy nor popular .
But no person of sound judgement can deny one thing : that this was probably the first war ever fought that is not waged in the name of interests , but in the name of principles and values .
If it is possible to say about a war that it is ethical , or that it is fought for ethical reasons , it was true of this war . Kosovo has no oil fields whose output might perhaps attract somebody ’ s interest ; no member country of the Alliance had any territorial claims there .
The Alliance fought in the name of human interest for the fate of other human beings .
It fought because decent people cannot sit and watch systematic , state-directed massacres of other people .
Decent people simply cannot tolerate this , and cannot fail to come to the rescue if rescue is within their power .
So human rights now must take precedence over the rights of states .
States and collections of states like the European Union must act out of respect for the law – for a law that ranks higher than the protection of the sovereignty of states ; they must act out of respect for the rights of humanity , as they are articulated by our conscience as well as by other instruments of international law .
I see this as an important precedent for the future .
It has now been clearly stated that it is not permissible to slaughter people , to evict them from their homes , to maltreat them and to deprive them of their property .
It has been demonstrated that human rights are indivisible and that if injustice is done to some , it is done to all .
Many times in the past , I pondered on the questions of why humanity has the prerogative to any rights at all .
Inevitably , I concluded that human rights , human liberties and human dignity have their deepest roots outside of this earthly world .
They become what they are only because , under certain circumstances , they can mean to humanity a value that people place – without being forced to – higher than even their own lives .
Thus , these notions have meaning only against the background of the infinite and of eternity .
It is my profound conviction that the true worth of all our actions – whether or not they are in harmony with our conscience , the ambassador of eternity in our soul – is finally tested somewhere beyond our sight .
If we did not sense this , or subconsciously surmise it , certain things could never be achieved .
For while the State is a human creation , humanity is a creation of God .
