Neville Chamberlain was Right
BERKELEY – Neville Chamberlain is remembered today as the British prime minister who , as an avatar of appeasement of Nazi Germany in the late 1930 ’ s , helped to usher Europe into World War II .
But , earlier in that fateful decade , relatively soon after the start of the Great Depression , the British economy was rapidly returning to its previous level of output , thanks to Chancellor of the Exchequer Neville Chamberlain ’ s reliance on fiscal stimulus to restore the price level to its pre-depression trajectory .
Compare that approach to the expansion-through-austerity policy being pursued nowadays by British Prime Minister David Cameron ’ s government ( with Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne leading the cheering squad ) .
The country ’ s real GDP has flat-lined , and the odds are high that British real GDP is headed down again .
Indeed , in less than a year , if current forecasts are correct , Britain ’ s Cameron-Osborne Depression will not merely be the worst depression in Britain since the Great Depression , but probably the worst depression in Britain … ever .
That is quite an accomplishment .
As Phillip Inman of The Guardian recently put it : “ [ T ] he UK ’ s plan for recovery from the financial crisis was based on a full-throttle recovery in 2012 .... [ C ] onsumer confidence , business investment , and general spending would converge to send the economy on a trajectory of above-average growth . ”
It did not work : government ministers “ have done what the right-wing economists told them to do and moved out of the way – the theory being that public-sector spending and investment was ‘ crowding out ’ the private sector . ”
Instead , as Inman says , “ Spain is showing the way with its austerity-driven recession .
Where the weak tread , we [ in Britain ] look keen to follow ... ”
The failure of expansionary austerity in Britain should give all of its advocates around the world reason to reflect on and rethink their policy calculations .
Britain is a highly open economy with a flexible exchange rate and some room for further monetary easing . There is no risk or default premium baked into British interest rates to indicate that fear of political-economic chaos down the road is discouraging investment .
There is an argument – not necessarily true , but an argument nonetheless – that , while in office from 1997 to May 2010 , the Labour governments of Tony Blair and Gordon Brown overshot long-term sustainable government spending as a share of GDP .
Their actions stand in contrast to countries that reduced their debt-to-GDP levels in the 2000 ’ s , and to the United States , where the problem was not excessive spending but insufficient taxation under the Bush administration .
Yet , if one takes this view seriously , Britain , with a ten-year nominal interest rate of less than 2.1 % per year , should already be in a boom .
If there was ever a place where expansionary austerity should work well – where private investment and exports should stand up as government purchases stood down , confirming its advocates ’ view of the world – it is Britain today .
But Britain today is not that place .
And if expansionary austerity is not working in Britain , how well can it possibly work in countries that are less open , that can ’ t use the exchange-rate channel to boost exports , and that lack the long-term confidence that investors and businesses have in Britain ?
Nick Clegg , Britain ’ s deputy prime minister and the leader of Cameron ’ s coalition partner , the Liberal Democrats , should end this farce today .
He ought to tell Queen Elizabeth II that his party has no confidence in Her Majesty ’ s government , and humbly suggest that she ask Labour Party leader Ed Miliband to form a new one .
To be sure , if Clegg did this , his political career would probably be finished , and his party ’ s electoral prospects would be damaged for a long time to come .
But Clegg ’ s political career and his party ’ s fortunes will be shaky for a long time to come in any case , given the economic hardship that Britain is enduring ( and will continue to endure ) .
At least defection from the ill-advised Conservative-Liberal coalition now would benefit his country .
Policymakers elsewhere in the world take note : starving yourself is not the road to health , and pushing unemployment higher is not a formula for market confidence .
