Nigeria ’ s Road to Ruin
With so much political friction in Iran and Iraq , it is easy to overlook the growing unrest in Nigeria , the world ’ s eighth-largest oil exporter .
But Nigeria ’ s mounting social and political problems reveal how violence and uncertainty in yet another major energy producer is driving foreign investors out and global oil prices up .
Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo appears poised to try to amend the country ’ s constitution to allow himself a chance at a third term .
To that end , he has marginalized many of his political rivals .
Vice President Atiku Abubakar – a likely presidential aspirant in 2007 – has been harassed and isolated .
Ministers suspected of less than full loyalty have been sidelined .
But Obasanjo ’ s adversaries have joined the battle , and the president lacks the two-thirds majority needed in both the federal and state legislatures to remain in power after next year .
Two former Nigerian presidents , Generals Muhammadu Buhari and Ibrahim Babangida , publicly oppose Obasanjo ’ s constitutional meddling , and several governors of Nigeria ’ s Muslim-dominated northern states have made clear that they are determined to see Obasanjo off when his term expires in 2007 .
As a result , the uncertainty surrounding Obasanjo ’ s plans is increasing sectional tensions .
At stake is the cohesion of a state that many argue is yet another example of an artificial nation cobbled together by Europeans who did not understand their creation ’ s social , tribal , and religious forces .
Northern governors oppose a third term for Obasanjo because they believe it is now their turn to choose Nigeria ’ s president under a deal , struck with their southern counterparts when democracy was introduced in 1999 , for regional rotation of the presidency .
Southern governors argue that control of the presidency should remain with the south for years to come , because the north controlled the country during more than three decades of dictatorship .
Indeed , even southern governors who are not reliable Obasanjo allies appear determined to maintain their influence within the central government by ensuring that the country ’ s next president is a southerner .
For the moment , Obasanjo offers them their best opportunity to realize that goal .
Last December , 16 of Nigeria ’ s 17 southern governors signed the “ Enugu Declaration ” in support of the constitutional amendment that would permit him a third term .
This is a bad time for Nigeria ’ s federal government to face these distractions .
The Niger Delta region , home to most of Nigeria ’ s oil and many of its poor people , is in turmoil .
In October 2004 , violence in the region forced Obasanjo ’ s government to negotiate with militia leader Asari Dokubu , after his men attacked a series of Royal Dutch Shell oil facilities and threatened to “ burn down the area . ”
In December 2004 , Dokubu ’ s militias took 75 oil workers hostage and forced Shell to shut down about 10 % of the country ’ s oil supply .
Dokubu then forced Obasanjo into a peace deal .
The deal did not last long .
After Dokubu renewed threats to oil infrastructure last September , he was arrested on sedition charges and now faces the possibility of execution or life in prison .
Dokubu ’ s allies have responded with new attacks .
A splinter group , the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta , has claimed credit for several recent attacks and kidnappings of foreign workers , and says it will not retreat until Delta states gain control of the revenue produced by locally extracted oil .
There are also fears that the splintering of Dokubu ’ s militias has created fertile ground in the Delta for Islamist groups .
A few weeks ago , a previously unknown organization called “ The Martyr ’ s Brigade ” claimed credit for attacks on Delta pipelines , raising concerns among multinationals that mercenary resistance in the region is becoming ideological .
Whatever the motivations of the various groups , a surge of militia attacks and kidnappings over the past several weeks has now shut down roughly 20 % of Nigeria ’ s oil exports and killed dozens of people .
Shell has closed key facilities in the Delta after the abduction of several workers .
Once a verdict is reached in Dokubu ’ s trial , probably this summer , violence is expected to intensify .
In addition , religious violence sparked by the Danish cartoons mocking the prophet Muhammad ripped through Nigeria in February .
Angry Muslim and Christian mobs burned churches and mosques , killing dozens of people in a series of attacks and reprisals that have deepened the sectional divide between the Muslim north and the Christian south .
If all this turmoil weren ’ t enough , the discovery of avian flu in the northern provinces further undermines political stability .
Obasanjo has called on Muslim farmers in the area to cull their birds , a key source of protein in a region where malnutrition is a constant threat .
In some ways , Nigeria is plagued with the same problems facing Iraq .
Various ethnic and religious groups , based in different regions , are battling for oil revenue and political clout .
As in Iraq , the conflict could provoke large-scale bloodletting .
Yet , unlike Iraq , Nigeria has a recent history of relatively stable democratic governance .
The country ’ s factions each have good reason to compromise before the conflict comes to a head .
Northern governors could , for example , offer the southern states a larger share of Nigeria 's oil revenue in exchange for their support for a northern president .
But achieving such a compromise won ’ t be a smooth or predictable process .
On the contrary , the risks of extended political instability and further large-scale disruptions to Nigeria ’ s oil output will remain high , at a time when the world can least afford it .
