The Mealy-Mouthed West
MADRID – Among the numerous challenges the West faces , one is consistently overlooked : its addiction to meaningless rhetoric .
From US President Barack Obama ’ s oxymoronic first-term mantra “ leading from behind ” to the recent German variant “ leading from the center , ” empty phrases have become the currency of Western governments ’ foreign policies .
Of course , the inherent complexity and unpredictability of international affairs intensify politicians ’ inclination to equivocate .
And today , with the geopolitical environment more complicated and less predictable than ever , our leaders have even less incentive to offer the kind of boldness and clarity that effective policymaking demands .
Unfortunately , the result has been to make a bad situation worse .
Strategic statements play an important role in signaling a country ’ s direction and intentions to its adversaries , allies , citizens , and government agencies .
When such statements require endless interpretation and explanation , their impact is weakened dramatically .
This is not to say that there is no place for ambiguity in international affairs .
History abounds with episodes when strategic ambiguity would have been beneficial .
For example , some historians suggest that then-US Secretary of State Dean Acheson ’ s decision in 1950 to exclude South Korea from America ’ s “ defense perimeter ” signaled to North Korea and the Soviet Union that the United States would not defend the South in the event of an attack .
The problem with today ’ s ambiguity is that it is not particularly strategic .
Consider Obama ’ s underlying rationale for his foreign policy – the so-called “ Obama doctrine ” – which he finally provided following the announcement of the framework agreement on Iran ’ s nuclear program . “ We will engage , ” Obama declared , “ but we preserve all our capabilities . ”
On the surface , that statement makes sense .
But it leaves us with more questions than answers .
What has Obama really signaled ?
What , in his view , are the boundaries for US engagement ?
Under what conditions would the US use its capabilities ?
Nearly 70 years ago , when George Orwell examined the tendency toward ambiguity , he offered the rather simple explanation that “ political speech and writing are largely the defense of the indefensible . ” In other words , hazy language is necessary to obscure unsavory realities .
Massive violence against civilian populations is “ pacification , ” and ethnic cleansing is a “ transfer of population . ”
As Orwell noted , “ [ t ] he great enemy of clear language is insincerity . ”
To some extent , Orwell ’ s observations still ring true .
But the issue today is different : politicians are using vague rhetoric less because their policies are fundamentally indefensible than because they fear having to defend any position at all .
While there are myriad reasons for this reticence , when it comes to international relations , two stand out .
The first is the hyperbolic political atmosphere in Western democracies , where the 24-hour news cycle and social media have made “ gotcha politics ” the order of the day .
Add to that the intrinsic uncertainty of foreign affairs , and it is unsurprising that politicians would rather spout empty lines than risk saying something that might blow up in their faces .
Indeed , one need only consider the years-long stream of commentary – characterized by partisanship , hearsay , and hostility – following the 2012 attack on the US diplomatic compound in Benghazi to understand leaders ’ angst .
The second reason is more fundamental : the waning sense of purpose and conviction that characterizes Western democracies today .
Whereas , say , Presidents John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan clearly confronted the Soviet Union in their speeches at the Berlin Wall , a succession of Western leaders has spoken in nods and winks about the crisis in Ukraine and China ’ s aggressive stance toward its neighbors .
The difference is not difficult to discern .
During the Cold War , the West ’ s certainty that it occupied the moral high ground inspired confidence in both word and deed .
Though the West still occupies the moral high ground on many important issues – such as the Islamic State and Russia ’ s invasion of Ukraine – the global system is far less clear-cut today .
Internal social challenges , which have called into question the justness of Western countries ’ liberal model , have exacerbated politicians ’ reticence .
As diffident Western leaders offer garbled messages or , worse , mere verbal fluff , they allow cynical actors with simpler and more forceful narratives , often based on lies and distortions , to win support more easily .
In Europe , the rise of demagogic populists on both ends of the political spectrum exemplifies this phenomenon .
Likewise , Russian President Vladimir Putin , unburdened by facts or guilt , has taken advantage of domestic and international audiences ’ deep-seated resentments and insecurities to craft compelling narratives in support of his policy toward Ukraine .
Western leaders should see no need to dispense with the truth ; the facts are on their side .
What is needed is the confidence to defend the liberal rules-based international order – and to back up arguments with action .
After all , powerful declarations mean nothing if leaders do not follow through ; worse , they undermine the credibility of the speaker ’ s future statements .
Obama learned this the hard way , when he drew a “ red line ” against Syria ’ s use of chemical weapons and then failed to act forcefully when Syria crossed that line .
The Obama doctrine cannot be credible if the US is not willing to use the capabilities that the president has pledged to preserve .
This imperative is not limited to Obama .
All Western policymakers will , before long , have to move beyond their parochial political considerations and anxieties to present a clear strategic vision .
The habit of bland rhetoric is a hard one to break .
Indeed , Orwell warned of its potential to weaken one ’ s capacity for critical thought , because “ every such phrase anaesthetizes a portion of one ’ s brain . ” But , as the global balance of power shifts toward the East and the South , the West must do what it takes to secure its continued influence – and that means taking a firm , clear , and credible stance on the strategic challenges it faces .
