Taiwan ’ s Journey From Troublemaker to Peacemaker
OXFORD – Is the “ harmonious society ” that Chinese President Hu Jintao constantly proclaims being realized in China ’ s relations with Taiwan ?
Before Ma Ying-jeou became President of Taiwan ( officially known as the Republic of China ) in May 2008 , Taiwan was regularly portrayed in China as a “ troublemaker , ” and was the main cause of tension between China and the United States .
Now Taiwan has become something of a diplomatic afterthought because it no longer makes trouble .
At the US-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue , indeed , Taiwan was barely mentioned , as North Korea , Iran , and the value of the renminbi claimed the most attention .
It has always been unfair to demonize the Taiwanese merely for wanting what most people around the world take for granted : to uphold their basic human rights and way of life , including the right to decide through a democratic process their own future .
China , however , rejects such sentimentality about self-determination .
And , as a rising power , China is not a force that leaders , even democratic ones , dismiss lightly .
For years , China ’ s ruling Communist Party has maintained that Taiwan is a “ core national interest , ” despite the reality that Taiwan has existed and functioned as a virtual state for 60 years .
China has long threatened to use force if the international community should formally recognize Taiwan ’ s independence .
But the atmosphere gradually changed in recent years , and the “ troublemaker ” label , applied under Ma ’ s predecessor , President Chen Shui-bian of the Democratic Progressive Party ( DPP ) , has not been used for two years .
Of course , Taiwan under President Ma still wants the same rights that it desired under Chen .
But Ma has taken a different approach .
He has eased tensions with China by focusing on what both sides can agree upon .
China ’ s leaders find his language inoffensive .
He seeks to advance Taiwan ’ s national interests without arousing the People ’ s Republic ’ s threat to use force .
And he has sought to forge closer trade and transport links .
Ma ’ s strategy suits China , whose leaders welcome being able to avoid confrontation with Taiwan , given their current focus on engineering their country ’ s “ peaceful rise . ”
Moreover , China does not wish to see the DPP and its aggressively pro-independence leaders return to power .
When Ma ’ s popularity fell dramatically as Taiwan ’ s economy suffered from the global financial crisis , China ’ s leaders worked with Ma to pre-empt just such an outcome .
This has allowed Ma ’ s administration to claim credit for improving relations with China .
But the fundamental causes underlying the threat of a China-Taiwan war – and conflict between China and the US , which has long been committed to supporting Taiwan should China seek to determine its status unilaterally – have not been removed .
The Chinese Communist Party remains committed to forcing Taiwan to accept the idea of ultimate “ reunification , ” while the Taiwanese remain determined to decide their own future .
But each side ’ s interests need not be mutually exclusive .
The right to national self-determination does not imply an assertion of de jure independence .
For example , acknowledgement of Scotland ’ s right to choose independence has not resulted in Scotland leaving the United Kingdom .
What people in Taiwan want is nothing more and nothing less than acknowledgement that they can decide their own future .
Given China ’ s deep distrust , it will never believe that a DPP president who insists on the Taiwanese people ’ s right to determine their future will not secretly push for independence .
But , since China knows that Ma is not advocating independence , they are able to countenance with greater equanimity his commitment to sustain the Republic of China on Taiwan .
If ever there were an opportunity for China and Taiwan to find a way to ensure that future confrontations do not escalate and drag the US into a conflict , it is now .
What Ma must do is forge a clearer consensus within Taiwan that the independence vs. unification issue is a phoney one .
The real issue is whether both sides can acknowledge that Taiwan ’ s people have the right to determine their future .
China ’ s leaders need to be persuaded that conceding this point does not imply letting Taiwan move towards de jure independence .
This may require that the Taiwanese abandon their tendency to hold regular referenda to show that they enjoy this right .
And the People ’ s Republic will need to recognize that the best way to entice Taiwanese to embrace reunification is to make the proposition so attractive that they cannot resist .
There is no need to set a timetable for this .
As a rising superpower , China should feel confident that time is on its side .
The whole world shares an interest in preventing disagreements between Taiwan and China from becoming a cause for military confrontation between the US and China .
Ma has created the necessary conditions for deactivating the trigger .
It is time for the rest of the world to support him in removing it forever , so that Taiwan will continue to fade as a global concern .
