President Bush Goes Soft
The first term of George W. Bush ’ s presidency was marked by unilateralism and military power .
The United States was the world ’ s only superpower , so others had to follow .
The result was a dramatic decline in America ’ s “ soft ” or attractive power .
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld said he did not know what soft power was .
Now it is back in fashion in Washington .
Bush ’ s second inaugural address was devoted to the power of liberty and democracy .
Such rhetoric is not new to American presidents .
Harry Truman spoke of defending free people everywhere , and Woodrow Wilson spoke of promoting democracy .
The neo-conservatives in Bush ’ s first administration were in that tradition , but ignored the fact that both Wilson and Truman were also institution-builders who consulted other countries .
In dropping that half of Wilson ’ s approach , they stepped on their own message , reducing its effectiveness .
The tone at the beginning of the second Bush administration is different .
As Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said recently in Paris : “ I use the word ‘ power ’ broadly , because even more important than military and indeed economic power is the power of ideas , the power of compassion , and the power of hope . ”
Bush not only chose to visit Brussels , the capital of the European Union , on his February trip to Europe , but stated that what “ we seek to achieve in the world requires that America and Europe remain close partners . ”
Even Rumsfeld is trying to be conciliatory !
Will Bush ’ s new approach succeed ?
On a recent trip to Europe , I encountered both encouragement and skepticism .
Many people welcomed the new tone , but wondered if it was simply sugarcoated cynicism .
Words must be matched by deeds before people are convinced .
One place to look to see if deeds are forthcoming is in Bush ’ s latest budget .
The budget cuts discretionary spending ( other than defense and homeland security ) by nearly 1 % , and slashes as many as 150 domestic programs .
Yet , in this climate of fiscal stringency , he calls for increased contributions to international organizations , the Millennium Challenge Account to provide assistance to countries with a commitment to making progress in poverty reduction , and the Global HIV / AIDS Initiative .
Bush ’ s new budget also includes an increase in funding for public diplomacy .
The allocation for the State Department ’ s educational and cultural exchange programs , including overseas research centers , libraries , and visitor programs , is boosted by nearly 25 % .
As Bush ’ s budget request to Congress puts it , “ Rarely has the need for a sustained effort to ensure foreign understanding for our country and society been so clearly evident . ”
This comes after a first term in which public diplomacy was a neglected stepchild , and a Pentagon advisory panel summed up the situation as a “ crisis . ”
Even with these increases , there is a long way to go to improve America ’ s standing .
A recent non-partisan report by the Public Diplomacy Council called for a new Agency for Public Diplomacy within the State Department , 24-hour English-language broadcasts by the Voice of America , and a fourfold budget increase over the next five years .
The Bush administration still has much to do in promoting ideas , but early indications suggest a change from the neglect of the first term .
But it will not be enough for Bush to start his second term with grand rhetoric about values and increased investment in public diplomacy .
A country ’ s attractiveness or soft power stems partly from its culture and values ( where they are attractive to others ) , but it also grows out of a country ’ s policies when they are seen as legitimate , consultative , and inclusive of the interests of others .
Unless the policies fit the values , the discrepancy will give rise to charges of hypocrisy .
At a minimum , Bush will need to pursue policies – in a more consultative manner – that seek a political solution in Iraq and progress in the Israel-Palestine peace process .
Here too , the early signs are encouraging .
The 60 % turnout in the January elections and the scenes of Iraqis risking their lives to vote has led to hopes that a political settlement in Iraq may be possible .
The elections are but a first step ; the insurgency continues ; civil war remains possible .
Nonetheless , the elections may have softened some of the sense of illegitimacy that has clouded Bush ’ s Iraq policy .
Similarly , with regard to the Middle East peace process , the replacement of Yasir Arafat by Mahmoud Abbas , the Palestinian elections , and the meetings between Abbas and Ariel Sharon suggest progress .
On difficult nuclear issues , such as North Korea and Iran , Bush has pursued multilateral consultation and coordination with other powers .
Of course , this still leaves unresolved other multilateral issues , like the International Criminal Court and global climate change .
There is little prospect that Bush will reverse his rejection of the Kyoto Treaty , but it will be interesting to see how far he accommodates Prime Minister Tony Blair ’ s efforts to make climate change a priority during Britain ’ s period as chair of the Group of Eight major economies .
It is much too early for a verdict on Bush ’ s second term policies .
As he looks ahead to the verdict of history , he seems to realize that hard power alone will not consolidate his reputation , but he remains hostage to incidents and accidents that could drive even his best-laid plans off course .
Nonetheless , the most striking thing at this point in Bush ’ s second term is his belated discovery of the importance of diplomacy and soft power .
