Nigeria ’ s Resurgent Oil Diplomacy
Russia is not alone in seeing oil as a means to transform its global standing .
Nowadays , the mantra of President Umar Yar ’ Adua , who took power in June 2007 , following controversial elections , is to transform the country into one of the world ’ s 20 largest economies by 2020 .
Yar ’ Adua and his Peoples Democratic Party ( PDP ) are struggling to stamp their authority on an unwieldy and restive country of 140 million people , and the government views rapid growth as a means to achieving that aim .
Nigerians can use a dose of hope .
Olusegun Obasanjo , who became Nigeria ’ s first elected president in 1999 after nearly two decades of military dictatorship , left vast swathes of the country trapped in poverty when he handed power to Yar ’ Adua last year .
With oil reaching $ 100 dollars per barrel , and energy-hungry giants like the United States and China beating a path to Nigeria ’ s door , Africa ’ s leading oil producer wants to use petrodollars to cure the country ’ s economic ills and flex its muscles in the international arena .
While riding the crest of the last oil boom in the late 1970 ’ s , Nigeria ’ s military leaders nationalized the assets of British Petroleum and became champions of pan-African co-operation , financing several African liberation movements .
The interests of the West and Nigeria repeatedly clashed , but Nigeria always stood its ground .
Inept government and economic decline in the 1980 ’ s and 1990 ’ s obliged Nigeria ’ s leaders to focus on problems closer to home , like the civil wars in Liberia and Sierra Leone .
But old habits die hard .
Nigeria has always sought a leadership role in Africa and its diaspora .
Even in the turbulent 1990 ’ s , when Nigeria was temporarily suspended from the British Commonwealth following the execution of minority rights campaigner Ken Saro-Wiwa by General Sani Abacha ’ s regime , the governing elite sought to achieve Nigeria ’ s “ rightful ” place in global affairs .
There are now signs of a resurgent oil-driven foreign policy .
Last October , Yar ’ Adua joined South Africa and Libya in opposing US plans to deploy AFRICOM , its new African regional military command , on the continent .
He then asked Nigeria ’ s National Assembly to write off $ 13 million of Liberia ’ s $ 43 million bilateral debt after Liberian President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf withdrew her offer to host the new command .
Nigerian officials are careful to disavow any link between this financial gift and Johnson ’ s turn away from AFRICOM .
Nor do they voice their concern that AFRICOM could be part of an American effort to exert control on West Africa ’ s oil-producing countries .
But , in confidential briefings , Nigeria has strongly hinted that it will not tolerate any foreign incursions on a vital and strategic resource in its own backyard .
Domestically , the renewed flexing of Nigeria ’ s foreign policy muscles is being played out in the ongoing face-off between the new National Energy Council , which reports to the President , and Western oil companies , led by Shell ’ s Nigerian subsidiary , over when to end production-related gas flaring .
The government insists on a January 2008 deadline , but the companies complain that the government ’ s reluctance to fund its share of operating costs fully and rising political violence in the Niger Delta make this deadline unrealistic , and want it extended three years .
The Department of Petroleum Resources ( DPR ) , the regulatory agency for the oil industry , has dismissed these claims , vowing to impose hefty fines on companies that flout the deadline .
In the early 1990 ’ s , desperately short of hard currency , Nigeria negotiated contracts permitting the oil companies to develop new fields and recoup their investment before sharing profits .
Now , following the companies ’ discovery of massive reserves , technocrats appointed by Yar ’ Adua to take charge of oil policy want Nigeria to get a larger slice of the pie .
That also means ending government co-financing of operating costs and demanding that the oil companies tap capital markets to bridge the shortfall .
Moreover , Tony Chukwueke , the DPR ’ s head , has announced plans to create an African version of Petronas , Malaysia ’ s state-run oil company , and transform the sclerotic Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation into a powerful oil-producing firm that can dominate the market in the Gulf of Guinea and other emerging regions .
Intense Western pressure has been brought to bear on Yar ’ Adua to re-consider the January deadline .
His election is being challenged in court by other candidates , and Western backing could play a role in stabilizing his government .
But his advisers , some of whom played a key role in shaping Nigeria ’ s foreign policy in the 1970 ’ s , are keen to use the gas-flaring issue to demonstrate Yar ’ Adua ’ s resolve and standing as a pan-African leader .
But , as in the 1970 ’ s , the success of Nigerian diplomacy will depend on the government ’ s ability to win legitimacy at home .
That will require repairing and improving damaged infrastructure , generating economic prosperity , running efficient social services , and taming the unrest in the delta region .
It is not yet clear whether Yar ’ Adua ’ s government can meet these challenges .
