Repairing the Global Plumbing
NEWPORT BEACH – More than three years after the global financial crisis , the world still has a nasty plumbing problem .
Credit pipes remain clogged , and only central banks are working to clear them .
But their ability to do so is waning , posing yet another set of risks for Western economies blocked by too little growth , too much unemployment , deepening inequality , and debt in all the wrong places .
Fortunately , it is not too late to build broader pipes that compliment and replace the damaged infrastructure .
The current situation embodies two narratives that seem contradictory , but are not .
One speaks to the reality that most large companies with access to capital markets have no problem securing new funding .
In fact , they have been remarkably successful in lengthening their debt maturities , accumulating cash , and lowering their future interest payments .
In sum , they now have “ fortress ” balance sheets .
The other narrative speaks to an opposing , but equally valid reality .
Too many small companies and households still find it difficult to borrow at reasonable terms .
This includes those reliant on bank credit , as well as many mortgage holders with very high legacy interest rates and balances that exceed their homes ’ market value .
From every angle , the extremity of this state of affairs – in which those with access to credit do not need it , and those who do cannot get it – is highly problematic .
If left unattended , it leads to a gradual , and then accelerated , renewed deleveraging of the economic system , with the highest first-round costs – a longer unemployment and growth crisis – borne disproportionately by those least able to suffer them .
In the next round , as the system slowly implodes , even those with healthy balance sheets would be impacted , accelerating their disengagement from a deleveraging world economy .
All of this slows social mobility , tears already-stretched safety nets , worsens inequality , and accentuates genuine concerns about the functioning and sustainability of today ’ s global economic system .
This is not just about socio-economic issues .
There is also a political angle .
With two competing , yet simultaneously valid narratives , ideological extremes harden .
The result is even greater dysfunction in both process and content , ruling out any sustained policy attempt to make things better .
The problem has become acute in Europe , whose crisis has been belatedly recognized as reflecting something more than turmoil in the eurozone ’ s weakest countries .
It also reflects broad-based contamination , resulting , most recently , in France ’ s loss of its vaunted AAA sovereign credit rating .
In the process , the efficacy of pan-European rescue mechanisms is being undermined .
And , as fragilities increase – and as a financial wedge is driven into the eurozone ’ s core ( Germany and France ) – growth and employment prospects dim .
Central banks have recognized all of this for some time , prompting them to take enormous reputational and operational risks to slow the process .
They have implemented a host of “ unconventional policies ” that previously would have been deemed unthinkable , even outrageous – and that can be seen in the enormous growth in their balance sheets .
In the last four years , the United States Federal Reserve ’ s balance sheet has more than tripled , from under $ 1 trillion to a mammoth $ 3 trillion .
The growth relative to the size of the economy is even more stunning – from slightly more than 5 % of GDP to 20 % .
The Bank of England ’ s balance sheet is also at 20 % of GDP .
And both seem to be itching to do even more .
The European Central Bank is often viewed as a laggard .
No longer .
Its balance sheet has now doubled , to a whopping 30 % of GDP – & nbsp ; and it , too , appears set to do even more .
Mario Draghi , the ECB ’ s new president , recently said that he expects heavy take-up on the next three-year long-term refinancing operation , a powerful tool to pump cheap liquidity into the banks .
Unfortunately , the economic outcomes have come nowhere close to matching the intensity of these efforts .
Effectively , the central banks have been unconventional bridges to nowhere , owing mainly to their imperfect tools and other government agencies ’ inability or unwillingness to act .
At some point – and we are nearing it – bridges to nowhere become a standalone risk : they can topple over .
Rather than just pumping liquidity into clogged pipes , countries can and should do more to build a more effective network of compensating conduits .
In doing so , their main objective ( indeed , the test for effectiveness ) would be the extent to which new private-sector investment is “ crowded in . ”
It is high time to move on five fronts , simultaneously :
· & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ;
Countries such as Spain and the US need to be more forceful in unblocking the housing sector by making overdue decisions on burden sharing , refinancing , and conversion of idle and foreclosed housing stock .
· & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ;
Countries with excessive debt , such as Greece and Portugal , need to impose sizeable “ haircuts ” on creditorsin order to have a reasonable chance to restore medium-term debt sustainability and growth .
· & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ;
In several Western countries , public-private partnerships should be formed to finance urgently needed infrastructure investment .
· & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ;
Regulators should stop bickering about the future configuration of key financial institutions , and instead set a clearer multi-year vision that is also consistent across borders .
· & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ;
Finally , governments should inform their electorates explicitly and comprehensively that a few contracts written during the inadvisable “ great age ” of leverage , debt , and credit entitlements cannot be met , and must be rewritten in a transparent way that strikes a balance between generations , labor and capital , and recipients and taxpayers .
Such policies would allow healthy balance sheets around the world , both public and private , to engage in a pro-growth and pro-jobs process .
They require leadership , focus , and education .
Absent that , plumbing problems will become more acute , and the repairs more complex and threatening to virtually everyone – including both the “ one percenters ” and those who worrisomely are struggling at the margins of society .
