New Economy , Same Old Realities
NEW YORK : Let me begin with a warning : avoid the hype .
In the US , anybody who was ever a VP of marketing can go to Palo Alto in Silicon Valley , stand on the corner of Sand Hill Road , and get $ 25 million for a website for Siamese cats .
Next week someone will start a website for Persian cats .
Meanwhile , anybody who was ever in finance can leave JP Morgan or Citibank , find three friends , one of whom took a computer programming course in college , and raise $ 100 million to invest in the internet .
These people sell ideas to each other .
Prices shoot up and they deem themselves brilliant .
It ’ s scary . Little real value is created .
Say 20 companies start sites for cats .
Each expects a 20 % market share . Do the math : it won ’ t work .
So though I welcome the advent of venture capital for internet investments outside America , I worry .
I see the same silliness happening .
Three guys – and I won ’ t say who they are because I am not impressed with them – decide to start a venture fund to invest in high tech in Europe and off they go ; they raise a $ 100 million easily .
Even people who used to invest in Russian oil and steel companies have jumped on the bandwagon .
I got a fax from one , Boris Jordan , telling me he was starting a European high-tech venture fund and would I care to work with him .
So , from a time when there was a shortage of venture capital , a shortage of interest , we are moving quickly to a point where there is too much .
What remains in short supply are people who know what they are doing .
Most internet ideas are fine as ideas , but what will make them profitable ?
People who know how to run a business .
There is no magic in starting a website .
There is a lot of magic in hiring people , making sure your VP of sales gets along with your VP of marketing , making sure that what is ordered electronically is delivered physically , finding someone to answer the phones , dealing with everything that happens in a business .
The fact that sales increase 20 % a month does not mean that you can grow your business 20 % a month .
Beware those who say starting an internet business is easy .
I learned this lesson the old-fashioned way .
My first investment was with a guy I knew from Hungary who was going to create a joint venture to bring CompuServe into Hungary .
The guy was not the best guy in the world , but CompuServe had a good brand name .
The investment was a mistake , but I learned a lot more than I would have from a success .
The lesson ? Rely on people more than on brands , especially in a specific market .
Relying on people matters because much information about the internet is lacking .
Of course , we lack the same information about our roadways : we don ’ t know how many roads there are ; we don ’ t how many people travel those roads ; we don ’ t know exactly how many cars there are , because some were thrown away or destroyed in crashes .
Yet we all understand the impact of the automobile on the economy .
Like the road network , the internet is an integrated channel , but one for communication .
It supports not just people and PC ’ s , but television broadcasts and radio ; it supports many different formats .
Within a few years there will be more devices connected to the internet than people .
For the first 40 years we put all these computers in place and the computers knew nothing except the data fed them by humans .
Most data was financial and business information , and fairly abstract .
Now , we are connecting this virtual network to the real world .
Suddenly , you are going to find – yes ! your refrigerator online .
Your luggage is going to have a little tag so you know where the airline sent it , which is different from where the airline sent you .
Your children ’ s school bus is going to tell you that it is coming so you can send your children out to catch it ; trains will report when they ’ re late .
Suddenly we won ’ t know only about the virtual world at the push of a button ; we ’ ll also know about the physical world at the push of a button .
That ’ s going to make for a huge change in how we think about our world ; it ’ s going to make for big distinctions between the parts of the world that are wired and the parts of the world that are not .
So , my second warning : everyone must take the internet seriously .
I spent the last ten years watching huge changes sweep Eastern Europe .
Societies and economies , formerly inefficient and just plain stupid , were rationalized .
Established companies crumbled .
People with high positions found that they were worthless .
The same thing will happen everywhere because of the internet .
This change will be far more disruptive than in the US , because America was already a fluid , fairly efficient , and often overhyped economy .
Western Europe is not terribly efficient , let ’ s face it , with too many regulations and restrictions and different laws that are not harmonized .
Governments put out directives but the directives are implemented differently from country to country .
Pricing in Europe is considered a moral or legal issue , whereas in the US it is a practical issue : what the market will bear .
And the elite , though it welcomes the advent of high technology and supports the advent of high-tech businesses , also reminds me of what a Russian said to me back in 1990 : " Our government is going to set free-market prices just like yours ! "
But you cannot have an internet economy without an internet society .
That means people who talk back .
It means consumers who don ’ t want to be protected ; who want to make their own choices .
It means the end of the ‘ official story . ’
Suddenly you can ’ t control the press : you may control how many hours of television is broadcast in a particular language , but you can ’ t control what people choose to see on the internet .
Established companies , established ways of doing business , established pricing structures , established channels of distribution are all under threat .
The question facing every country is this : do you want to jump over the river before the rest of the world or after .
The best and surest way to jump it is to have a clear vision of where you want to land .
