Nixon Then , China Now
CLAREMONT , CALIFORNIA – When US President Richard Nixon embarked on his historic trip to China 40 years ago , he could not have imagined what his gamble would unleash .
The immediate diplomatic impact , of course , was to reshape Eurasia ’ s geopolitical balance and put the Soviet Union on the defensive .
But the long-term outcome of America ’ s rapprochement with China became visible only recently , with the economic integration of the People ’ s Republic into the world economy .
Had Nixon not acted in 1972 , China ’ s self-imposed isolation would have continued .
Deng Xiaoping ’ s reform and opening of China to the world would have been far more difficult. amp # 160 ;
Four decades after the “ Nixon shock , ” no one disputes that China has benefited enormously Today , the impoverished and autarkic country that Nixon visited is history .
Global reintegration has turned China into an economic powerhouse .
It is the world ’ s largest exporter in volume terms , and is the world ’ s second-largest economy .
China ’ s presence is felt around the world , from mines in Africa to Apple stores in the United States .
As we reflect on China ’ s remarkable progress since 1972 , it is also an opportune time to consider how China continues to fall short in overcoming systemic obstacles to long-term success .
Because China is widely regarded as a winner of globalization , it is natural to assume that the country has developed the means to meet its challenges .
But , while China has implemented policies to maximize the benefits of free trade ( undervaluing its currency , investing in infrastructure , and luring foreign manufacturing to increase competitiveness ) , the country remains unprepared for deeper integration with the world .
One sign of this is China ’ s lack of the necessary institutions and rules .
For example , China has become a significant player in providing economic development assistance ( often tied to its strategy for acquiring natural resources ) .
Its loans and grants to Africa have now surpassed those made by the World Bank .
But China has no specialized agency in charge of international development assistance .
As a result , its foreign-aid programs are poorly coordinated and often seem counterproductive .
Instead of earning goodwill , they are viewed as part of a sinister neocolonial plot to grab natural resources in poverty-stricken nations.amp # 160 ;
Another example is China ’ s lack of an immigration policy .
Even though China is beginning to attract labor from around the world , it has yet to promulgate a comprehensive legal framework that would allow the country to compete for the most talented people or to deal with the complexities of international migration .
A third example is the absence of independent policy-research organizations .
Owing to political control and inadequate professional development , government-run research institutions can seldom provide the high-quality , unbiased analysis of global issues on which sound policymaking depends .
Perhaps most importantly , two decades of rapid GDP growth have masked serious weaknesses on the economic front .
Because China continues to favor state capitalism and discriminates against the private sector , it lacks strong private firms that can take on Western multinational giants .
Except for Huawei , Lenovo , and perhaps Haier ( which is nominally collectively owned ) , there are no private Chinese firms with a global footprint .
Until now , China has not paid dearly for this .
Its role in the global economy is confined to low-to-medium-end processing and assembly functions .
The most critical , sophisticated , and profitable parts of the value chain – research and development , product design , branding , marketing , service , and distribution – are occupied by American , European , Japanese , South Korean , and Taiwanese companies .
China simply “ outsources ” these high value-added functions to the likes of Apple and Walmart .
Of course , China does have huge firms , but they are inefficient state-owned behemoths that owe their size and profitability to their legal monopolies and government subsidies .
They may have the heft needed for global operations , but they lack the motivation to compete with world-class Western firms and are greeted with suspicion and fear around the world .
A China deeply embedded in globalization also needs a large pool of talented people , comparable to the best that the West can produce .
Today ’ s China lacks that pool .
While tens of millions of Chinese young people display impressive innate abilities , the country ’ s system of higher education does an abysmal job cultivating their talents .
For most , the curriculum is largely obsolete , and skewed toward rote learning of theory at the expense of basic analytical and critical-thinking skills .
Education in social sciences and humanities is particularly deficient , owing to lack of investment in these disciplines and excessive political control of curricula .
As a result , Chinese graduate from colleges and universities having learned relatively little about the outside world in fields such as anthropology , sociology , international relations , comparative literature , and history .
Unless China reforms its ossified system , the country will not be able to produce enough highly trained talent to compete with the world ’ s best and brightest .
None of these shortcomings – the lack of globalization-friendly institutions , rules , corporations , and talent – is an insurmountable obstacle .
The real question is whether China can remove them under a one-party regime that is hostile to the liberal values that inspire and underpin globalization .
Nixon himself was probably not bothered by the nature of the Chinese regime four decades ago .
The fact that the question must be addressed now attests to China ’ s astonishing progress since then .
But it also shows that China ’ s long march toward global integration remains unfinished .
