Sarkozy and the Euro ’ s Perfect Storm
The more French president Nicolas Sarkozy attacks the European Central Bank and the strong euro , the more he is criticized in the European media , by European finance ministers , European Union officials and the ECB itself .
The critics are right .
The fundamental reason behind France ’ s current economic weakness is its lack of competitiveness even in other euro-zone economies where the euro is not a factor .
But Sarkozy has a point .
A perfect storm is forming in the foreign exchange markets that threatens to catapult the euro to levels that will make even the euro-zone ’ s most efficient exporter — Germany — unable to compete in world markets .
If German exporters can ’ t compete at 1.50 euros to the dollar , what chances do French exporters have ?
The euro is gaining ground for several reasons .
A precipitating factor is that the Federal Reserve has had a dramatic change of heart about the strength of the US economy .
Fed chairman Ben Bernanke is now extremely concerned that the economy ’ s housing market and mortgage problems will cause a recession unless interest rates are aggressively cut even if this means taking some risks with inflation .
This new “ no recession ” Fed policy has started the US dollar down the path to new lows .
The decline will likely be sustained by the substantial US current account deficit , which found in Bernanke ’ s cuts the spark it needed to make its impact fully felt in foreign exchange markets .
Of course , if interest rates also were being cut in the euro-zone , the fall in the dollar against the euro would be moderated .
This is Sarkozy ’ s major point .
But the ECB has made it clear not only that interest rate cuts are not on the table — it is merely postponing , not abandoning , the interest rate increase originally planned for September .
The perfect storm is forming because both Europe and America , for different reasons , are following monetary policies that encourage the euro to rocket to dangerous levels .
The anti-inflation hawks in Frankfurt are not at all happy with Bernanke ’ s aggressive 50 basis point cut and the promise of more to come .
It gives comfort to ECB critics like Sarkozy , and otherwise puts pressure on them to drop the central bank ’ s inflationary bias because of its effect on the euro .
Some are recalcitrant and are more than willing to see the euro rise because , with rate hikes off the table , the strong euro may be the only way left for fighting the incipient inflation they fear .
But this policy is unsustainable .
The ECB should drop its inflationary bias because the European economy is weakening , and the weaker economy will contain whatever inflationary pressures now exist .
The anti-inflationary bias , which made sense until recently , now is seriously out of whack with current economic realities .
But European officials — and not only the ECB - seem very reluctant to admit that their economy is faltering , fearing that it will further weaken confidence and add to the slowdown pressures .
Every soft number — and there have plenty lately — is given a positive spin ( “ euro-zone economic fundamentals remain strong ” or “ the economy remains robust ” ) - and the media goes along with the deception .
The Ifo business confidence indicator in Germany has been down four months in a row but , according to Ifo , “ the ECB does not have to change policy . ” The European Commission ’ s economic index is plummeting , purchasing managers indices are down and so are German retail sales .
Ordinary Europeans will pay a high price for their leaders self -deception and mistaken policies .
The longer the ECB maintains its inflationary bias , the steeper the consequent economic decline as the economy crumbles under the weight of the skyrocketing euro and interest rates that are too high for current economic realities ( though lower than where the ECB hawks had planned to go before the current financial crisis hit ) .
Ironically , the ECB will have to cut interest rates sooner , and by greater amounts , because its inflationary bias is sending the euro to dangerous levels for the current state of its economy .
It will not do ECB credibility any good if takes an economic collapse to convince it that the coast is clear on the inflation front .
The ECB is not the old Bundesbank , which had such public support and trust in Germany that it could get away with almost anything .
The ECB ’ s margin for error is much narrower — the support of its constituents less deep .
A major policy mistake and the same public officials now criticizing Sarkozy for attacking the ECB will be joining him .
Maastricht treaty or no Maastricht treaty , loss of public support for the ECB will diminish its independence .
