Europe ’ s Bogus Banking Union
LONDON – After a 16-hour marathon negotiating session ending on March 20 , politicians , technocrats , and journalists were all keen to declare the deal on the final piece of Europe ’ s banking union a success .
But appearances are deceptive .
While the “ banking union ” may soon exist on paper , in practice the eurozone banking system is likely to remain fragmented along national lines and divided between a northern “ core , ” where governments continue to stand behind local banks , and a southern “ periphery , ” where governments have run out of money .
Think back to June 2012 .
Spain ’ s busted banks threatened to drag down the Spanish state , as Ireland ’ s had done to the Irish state 18 months earlier , while panic tore through the eurozone .
European Union leaders resolved to break the link between weak banks and cash-strapped governments .
A European banking union would move responsibility for dealing with bank failures to the eurozone level – akin to America , where distressed banks in , say , Florida are dealt with by federal authorities with the power to bail in bondholders , inject federal funds , and close down financial institutions .
But , a month later , the European Central Bank finally intervened to quell the panic .
That saved the euro , but it also relieved the pressure on Germany to cede control of its oft-distressed banks .
Since then , the German government has used its clout to eviscerate the proposed banking union ; all that remains is a shell to keep up appearances .
For starters , it will not apply to the huge losses incurred during the current crisis .
The ECB will directly supervise bigger eurozone banks starting in November ( the first step of the banking union ) , and now it is assessing the strength of their balance sheets .
If this exercise is conducted properly – a big if – undercapitalized banks that are viable would be forced to raise additional equity , from bondholders if necessary , while unviable ones would be wound down .
But EU rules on national bank resolution will not yet be in force , while the eurozone ’ s single resolution mechanism will be initiated only in 2015 .
So banks in northern Europe that are still backed by creditworthy governments would be treated differently than those in cash-strapped southern Europe : Germany can afford to bail out its banks ;
Italy cannot .
More likely , the ECB will fudge the exercise , owing to fear of reigniting the financial crisis and pressure from national governments .
Small countries will be singled out to make the exercise look tough , while bigger problems will be swept under the carpet : German banks have already succeeded in excluding many of their assets from the assessment .
One argument for making the ECB the watchdog for eurozone banks was that it was less captured by the banks than national supervisors were .
But its behavior throughout the crisis suggests otherwise .
It has repeatedly prioritized the interests of banks in “ core ” countries and proved more pliable to political pressure from Berlin and Paris than from Madrid or Rome , let alone Dublin or Athens .
Even after the new banking union framework is fully in place , it will be full of holes .
At Germany ’ s insistence , the ECB will supervise only the eurozone ’ s 130 or so biggest banks .
That will leave the smaller Ländesbanks ( state-owned regional banks ) , many of which made spectacularly bad lending decisions in the bubble years , and Sparkassen ( smaller savings banks ) in the hands of local politicians and Germany ’ s pliable financial supervisor .
The argument that smaller lenders are not a systemic threat is spurious : consider Spain ’ s cajas .
In any case , there will not be a level playing field .
Above all , the single resolution mechanism is a mirage , because national governments retain a veto over closing down any bank .
The mechanism is deliberately complex to the point of being unworkable ; it is inconceivable that a bank could be wound down over a weekend to avert market panic .
And the collective funds that eventually will be at its disposal are meager : a mere € 55 billion ( $ 76 billion ) .
In practice , then , rescuing banks will remain in the hands of national governments , all of which are captured by “ their ” banks but whose capacity to bail them out varies : French and German banks will be rescued ;
To increase their chances of a bailout , banks in the eurozone periphery will doubtless borrow as much as they can from politically connected banks and investors in the core countries .
Thus , national taxpayers will remain on the hook for bankers ’ losses .
The upshot is that the eurozone as a whole is likely to struggle with a zombie banking system , with only patchy efforts to restructure banks decisively and fairly .
Worse , the north-south , core-periphery divide will harden , with taxpayer-backed banks on one side and banks that must fend for themselves on the other .
That is a bonus for struggling southern taxpayers , but it implies that even sound banks could have higher funding costs than dubious northern European banks for the foreseeable future .
Southern businesses would then face higher borrowing costs than northern businesses , hindering growth .
The bogus banking union is thus a recipe for entrenching economic and political division .
