Sarkozy Agonistes
“ Why do they hate us ? ” asked the Americans of the Islamic fundamentalists after 9 / 11 . “ Why do they not like me ? ” could be the question asked by Nicolas Sarkozy to the French after more than one year in power .
Sarkozy is omnipresent both domestically and internationally .
On July 13 , the leaders of more than 40 countries attended the first gathering of the “ Union for the Mediterranean ” in Paris .
France is back in the world and in Europe .
Domestically , an ambitious and difficult program of long-awaited reforms , which a majority of French citizens recognize are inevitable , has begun , with some early results in the field of labor law and education .
Sarkozy ’ s energy , willpower , and activism are nothing short of spectacular .
And yet he is the least popular of the Fifth Republic ’ s presidents , the one whose “ fall from grace ” with the French has been the most spectacular , rapid , and durable , to the point where political experts , and his friends and foes alike , wonder whether he can rebound .
What went wrong ?
“ I don ’ t want a good General , I want a lucky one ” the French Emperor Napoleon I used to quip . By that standard , he would not have wanted Sarkozy .
Having campaigned on a promise to restore and improve the French people ’ s purchasing power , Sarkozy came to power , in May 2007 , just a few weeks before the sub-prime mortgage crisis erupted , and a few months before commodity prices exploded .
He then assumed the European Union presidency just days after the resounding Irish “ No ” to the Lisbon Treaty reduced his role to an exercise in damage control at best .
And , to make matters worse , the French soccer team , whose World Cup victory in 1998 gave his predecessor Jacques Chirac a short respite and a passing popularity boom , was humiliated in June ’ s Euro championship .
Yet the international context , with its unforeseen events , does not suffice to explain Sarkozy ’ s unpopularity with the French .
His problem stems from the combination of his essence and style , which adds up to a brutal lack of coherence .
As economic crisis engulfs France and most of the world , the French are not reassured by their young and energetic president .
Of course , there is an element of deeply unfair subjectivity in this perception .
But this is what politics is all about .
The president ’ s physical appearance and his body language – if he was a Shakespeare character , he would probably be the traitor Iago in Othello – are part of the problem .
His nervousness , his impulsiveness verging on vulgarity , is disconcerting even for the majority of French who voted for him .
At home for example , the badly needed reform of the army has been accompanied by unnecessary malignity , as if a former interior minister imbued with a “ police culture ” was utterly incapable of understanding the “ army culture ” and its sense of honor .
And his undeniable success in implementing his labor laws , exemplified by sparse street demonstrations , has been undermined by his irrepressible will to provocation , reflected in his gratuitous remark that “ today when there is a strike in France , no one notices it ! ”
In his foreign policy , too , Sarkozy seems to combine the right intuitions with the wrong tactics – that is , when his entire strategy is not marred by the pursuit of contradictory objectives .
France ’ s policy toward China and the issue of the French and EU president ’ s attendance at the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympics has represented a spectacular illustration of this lack of consistency .
Sarkozy misjudged the balance of power between France and China , and France came out of that diplomatic episode badly bruised , with its president swallowing his human rights claims and bending to the diktat of realpolitik .
In the same vein , there is a mismatch in Sarkozy ’ s approach to Europe between the message and the messenger , between careful diplomacy needed to create a new consensus within the European Commission and with countries like Ireland , and president ’ s rather authoritarian style .
While Sarkozy ’ s popularity remains low , a majority of the French want him to succeed , for he has four more years to go , and there is no alternative around the corner .
The left remains in disarray , caught between its internal feuds and the rise of anti-capitalist extremism at its margins .
For a president bent on implementing reforms , “ less can be more ” – less aggressiveness and less ego .
But can a man act against his deepest nature ?
The answer is probably no .
