Russia \ u0027s Language is in the Soup
Three hundred years ago Peter the Great cut a window into Europe .
Foreign languages flooded into Russia : English , Dutch , French , and Italian .
Today , new words and cultural concepts are also arriving in Russia at breathtaking speed .
Sometimes they add to , sometimes they replace , Russian analogues .
For example , Russia has had " shti " ( cabbage soup ) , " ukha " ( fish soup ) , " pokhlebka " ( everything soup ) , " selyanka " ( peasant soup ) , " botviniya " ( cold beet soup ) , " okroshka " ( spring vegetable soup ) .
Now bullion , consommé , and even simply " soup " have arrived .
There was less , now we have more .
Isn 't this good ?
But somebody thinks that all the old words should be deleted from our memories , that only one word -- soup -- should remain .
Soup ; soup in general , with no variations .
Everything we eat with a spoon is soup ; everything we eat with a fork is not soup .
In all our menus we have soup - just that .
Forget what you 've known , never remember , never try to find out what words like gazpacho or bouillabaisse might mean .
Don 't ask what ingredients are used in making those dishes .
You don 't need to know all this .
In fact , why be concerned about the foreign gazpacho ?
Forget even a simple difference between the " shchi " ( cabbage soup ) and the " borshch " ( beet soup ) .
There is none .
" Ukha " ( fish soup ) , what is " ukha ? "
With all sorts of fish available , let 's eliminate the word for it .
Why use a name when we have a product ?
Let all of those concepts disappear , evaporate ; let only " soup " remain -- eat it , that 's it .
Clothes , too , are now generic in today 's Russia , as in China under Mao--a blue fatigue .
Let 's live in " khroushchobas " ( five-story uniform buildings built in the 1950-1960s during Khrushchev 's leadership ) .
Let all men be Sashas and all women Natashas .
If we need to address them , we can simply say , " Eh ! "
Under free market capitalism we can , at long last , live up to the communist ideal , " The whole Soviet nation like one man ! "
Excellent synonyms like " good , beautiful , valuable , positive , lovely , exceptional , super , enchanted , magic , adorable , remarkable , sweet , perfect , spectacular , fantastic , great , grandiose , irresistible , intriguing , entertaining , luring , incomparable , attractive , striking , divine , " are disappearing .
What do we have nowadays ?
Only " krutoi " ( cool ) , or " klevyi " ( hot ) .
It is really " cool " , for example , to express oneself with just one-syllable words , selectively adopted from all the treasures of the English language .
At this very moment your author is staring with disgust at a cardboard box on which some American has written : " Parm Plus !
New Improved Taste . "
What he really wanted to say , of course , was that " This box contains Parmesan Cheese , which because of the newly added ingredients is infinitely better than other cheeses produced by our vicious competitors . "
This surgery resulted in the amputation of a perfectly healthy part of the word " parmesan , " adding the empty but pompous suffix " plus . "
Think of this action as akin to a surgery that replaces a healthy leg with an artificial limb .
Some inexplicable and unsurpassable force makes our journalists ( especially young television and radio types ) , cut out whole bunches of Russian suffixes and throw them into the trash .
" Blef-klub " ( Bluff Club ) for example is shown on " Kultura " TV .
Its hosts and producers seem deaf to the nauseating connotations - vomit , nausea , and illness - that the word " blef " ( blev ) has in Russian .
We must remember that despite the IMF , the World Banks , and all the market economic phenomena we have experienced in the last decade , Russian bread cannot grow in a foreign style .
Economy of sounds and words does not work for the Russian language .
Using English-speaking models we no longer get the slow , sequential flow of the Russian linguistic stream but a competition for asthmatics .
The new generation , it seems , prefers new models of verbal exchange , not as enchanting as in the past , but perfectly suited to the simple communications required in today 's simplified world .
Everywhere people gripe about how teenagers grunt and do not speak .
Here in Russia , grunting is all we now seem to do .
This is what it a typical modern Russian conversation sounds like .
A restaurant scene ( words used in both Russian and English version are italicized ) :
Client : I want soup .
Waiter : Here is soup .
C : Is soup hot ?
W : Hot plus .
C : ( eating ) Eh ? ! ? !
W : Mhhh ?
C : Soup is not hot .
W : No ?
Not hot ?
Then it 's cool .
C : Not cool .
Soup --out .
W : Well , it 's one buck .
C : Go to hell !
Here is ruble plus .
W : Eh !
Ruble is shit .
Give me a buck .
C : No !
W : I 'll give you a black eye plus .
Give me a buck .
C : Here ( punches a waiter in the eye )
W : Mhhh !
C : I saved a buck ( runs away ) .
This language can be used not only by male silent types , but also by lovely chirping ladies .
Here is a beauty parlor scene ( based on a true story ) .
A lady enters with a fashion magazine .
Hairdresser : So ?
Lady : Cut .
H : How ?
L : Like here .
Boxer -cut .
H : ( approvingly ) Boxer is cool .
L : So ...
H : So how was Cypru s ?
L : ( perking up ) O , Cyprus was cool .
Beach , bar --all plus , juice , gin , drink .
At night--husband into the douche , daughter--out , here is Greek Max -- knock , knock , then sex , cake , bucks , kreks , feks , peks .
So here .
At this point your author runs away , in despair , in search of the few remaining Russians who still converse in their native language .
