Putinomics
WASHINGTON , D.C. - President Vladimir Putin turned Russia ’ parliamentary election into a referendum on himself – and won by a landslide .
But , while he refuses to spell out his plans for remaining in power once his second term expires next spring , his economic policy is clear .
The strangest thing about the Duma election was that Putin lost his nerve .
He over-exposed himself in public appearances that were as aggressive as they were vague in substance .
He ran against the West and the “ chaos ” of the 1990 ’ s , just as he raged against Chechen terrorists in 1999 and against oligarchs in 2003 .
The Kremlin abandoned democratic procedures , controlling which parties were allowed to run and their candidates , while Putin ’ s United Russia monopolized media coverage .
Opposition activists were blocked from most campaigning , and often arrested , while Kremlin-controlled courts denied their complaints .
People were intimidated into voting for United Russia on a mass scale .
Independent election monitors were barred .
As a consequence , the new State Duma has not been elected so much as appointed .
It lacks legitimacy and its members are unknown .
But Putin ’ s legitimacy has also been tainted by the pervasive fraud .
His only “ mass ” meeting in Moscow drew no more than 5,000 people .
The main questions are how authoritarian he will become , or whether this pathetic campaign will weaken him .
Putin ’ s policy is easy to understand if one realizes that he usually does the opposite of what he says .
In his first term , Putin appeared to be an authoritarian reformer , undertaking substantial market reforms , such as introducing a 13 % flat income tax .
But in his second term , Putin was simply authoritarian , undertaking no economic or social reforms worth mentioning .
The expropriation of the oil company Yukos , valued at $ 100 billion , was the signal event , and was followed by rising corruption .
Putin has established a purely personal dictatorship .
He rules through the presidential administration and competing secret police forces without ideology or party .
United Russia is little more than a bunch of state officials .
He has sapped most power from other state institutions .
Personal authoritarianism rarely survives its founder .
Since Putin has created an over-centralized regime that cannot survive without him , he has to stay as president .
Law is of minimal relevance , as he can always order the Constitutional Court to approve his third term .
Putin ’ s regime may be described as a group of clans , consisting of state-dominated corporations , such as Gazprom , Rosneft , Vneshtorgbank , Rosoboronexport , and the Russian Railways , together with the security agencies .
Putin ’ s KGB cronies , usually from St. Petersburg , control these institutions , and tap them for huge kickbacks .
At the same time , Putin has made sure that they all hate one another , so that they need him as arbitrator or godfather .
In a sensational interview before the election in the Russian newspaper Kommersant , one of these previously unknown KGB managers explained how they use state extortion against private enterprises to accomplish their “ velvet re-privatization ” through state corporate raiding .
According to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development , the share of GDP originating in the private sector has declined from 70 % to 65 % under Putin .
Re-nationalization through extortion is likely to accelerate .
This re-nationalization has not been justified ideologically , but rather cynically : the purpose is simply to generate corrupt revenues for top Kremlin officials .
Although corruption has been declining in most of the former Soviet Union , it has surged in Russia since 2004 , becoming more rationalized and concentrated .
None of Putin ’ s KGB kingpins has been arrested or even demoted .
As re-nationalization gained momentum , the public economic rhetoric changed and become statist .
Putin now favors protectionism , state intervention , and subsidies .
In this climate , no progressive structural reforms are likely .
Until recently , Russia has pursued an admirably conservative macroeconomic policy , running up huge budget and current account surpluses .
It has paid off its foreign debt and built up foreign currency reserves of $ 450 billion .
Before the Duma election , however , Putin jeopardized this last vestige of responsible economic policy .
Currently , Russia ’ s greatest economic concern is growing inflationary pressure , driven especially by food prices .
Rising food prices are an international phenomenon , and Russia ’ s inflation is driven by the large current account surpluses and capital inflows .
But Russia ’ s government is no longer trying to mitigate these factors , instead pursuing an inflationary policy .
Monetary policy has been loose for the last year , and before the Duma election the government started pouring huge sums into pensions and other social welfare transfers .
Not surprisingly , inflation has shot up from 7 % last spring to 11 % currently , and may reach 15 % in the spring .
Naturally , monetary and fiscal policy should be tightened , but that is difficult when Putin is trying to placate the population .
He could liberalize the exchange rate and let it float upwards , but he is not even doing that .
Instead , using an old Soviet tactic , Putin has imposed informal price controls , which cannot hold for long in a privatized economy .
Russia ’ s economic growth is still driven by the sound market reforms undertaken in the 1990 ’ s and Putin ’ s first term , together with high oil and gas prices .
But , while growth is not likely to stop any time soon , Russia ’ s economic success increasingly hinges not only on high but rising oil and gas prices .
The main question about economic policy in Putin ’ s third term , then , is how fast it will deteriorate .
