Spain ’ s New Conquistadors
BARCELONA : Espańa va bien ( Spain is doing well ) .
That phrase is on everyone ’ s tongue nowadays .
So it should be .
Spain has not boomed nor felt as self-confident since its Age of Discovery .
Instead of sending out swashbuckling conquistadors , however , Spanish companies are exploring the world in search of new opportunities .
From BSCH and BBVA in banking , Repsol-YPF , Endesa , Iberdrola in energy , and Telefónica in telecoms , Spanish companies have boldly displaced US firms as prime investors in Latin America .
All this activity has put Madrid back on the map , not only as a force in the global marketplace but in diplomacy too .
Liberalization , accompanied by economic growth , is the engine for this overseas expansion .
Spain ’ s economy has grown at over 3 % for the past four years , and is now growing at 4 % .
In that time , the budget deficit was reduced 5 fold , and is now only about 1 % of GDP , with unemployment dropping from 23 % to 15 % .
Not surprisingly , strong growth rekindled inflation , now bumping up against the European Central Bank ’ s tolerance level .
Nonetheless , Spaniards recognize that they have not had it so good for a long time , and recently returned Prime Minister José Maria Aznar to office with both a parliamentary majority no longer dependent on coalition partners and a mandate to modernize Spain even more .
Spain ’ s path to liberalization looks to the liberal British model , not , as is traditional in Spain , to the way things are done in France .
During Prime Minister Aznar ’ s first term his Popular Party privatized most public sector firms and deregulated many service sectors .
His new government vows to continue eliminating the public deficit and lowering unemployment .
It also promises to cut income taxes , put the country ’ s Social Security system on firmer footing and reduce costs of shedding labor .
Introducing real competition in energy and telecoms , lacking in the privatization process until now , is also pledged .
Aznar ’ s program is sensible yet ambitious .
The question is whether his government , which has gone to great lengths to forge a consensus behind its reforms , will carry through on additional measures , the need for which have been hidden by a favorable economy and wage moderation by unions .
As in Thatcher ’ s Britain , one big problem is of the government ’ s making .
Aznar ’ s privatizations maintained and reinforced , at least at first , the old oligopolistic market structure .
This retarded competition .
The government has learned the hard lesson that big privatized companies , when unchecked by truly competitive markets , concentrate too much power .
In a liberalization package just released , the government partially redresses its early mistakes in privatization by clawing back power from the incumbent near monopolies in oil , gas , electricity , and telecoms .
Local access in telecoms , for example , will be open to competition beginning in January 2001 .
Cross-shareholdings that reinforce monopoly power will be strictly limited in these sectors as well .
Encouraging robust competition is essential because Spain must grow faster than Europe and so cannot be content with mimicking dozy Continental methods .
In order to catch up with the rest of the Continent in wealth , Spain must remain daring in four big ways :
- Regulators and competition authorities must be made formally and materially independent of government control .
Such a modern regulatory structure will foster Spain ’ s international role by keeping Spanish multinationals on their toes .
For only vigorous internal rivalry will make Spain ’ s companies nimble enough to prosper in risk-filled emerging economies .
- Because political interference with regulation and competition policy ( once old hat in Spain ) makes companies uncompetitive , government must refrain from using regulation to control inflation as well as corporate activity .
No one gains from the government ’ s ugly struggle with Telefónica that climaxed with the resignation of Telefónica ’ s boss , Juan Villalonga .
That spat not only prevented a merger , apparently welcomed by the market , with the Dutch firm KPN , it put the Spanish Security and Exchange Commission ( CNMV ) in a difficult spot as broker between government and a powerful company boss .
- Spain must decide whether to let other countries innovate or to contribute to and catch up with , today ’ s fast paced global technological innovation .
Without improved research and development ( R & D ) , the gap between Spain and the world leaders will grow .
Even meeting government promises to raise R & D spending from today ’ s 1 % of GDP to 2 % by 2004 may not be enough .
The issue is not only increased investment , but also of a change in the organization of research to reward creativity and excellence as measured by international standards .
- To sustain growth , Spain ’ s welfare state -- basically pensions and health care -- must be overhauled to increase efficiency and promote fairness .
Aznar ’ s current plans are too timid : they tackle only public health expenditures , not the underlying welfare state structure .
Moreover , labor market liberalization must run parallel to welfare state reform .
Without improvement here the benefits of increased commercial competition cannot be fully reaped .
Public administration , too , must be overhauled to promote efficiency by rewarding hard work and quality of service , not seniority and over-manning .
Even if Prime Minister Aznar follows through on these bold reforms , his program might unravel if unmatched by domestic political daring .
Imaginative solutions are needed to make Spain ’ s restless regions , particularly Catalonia and the Basque Country , fit comfortably within Spain .
Without initiative here the prospect of both regions drifting away is real .
Participation of Catalonia in Spain ’ s modernization project would probably be guaranteed if Barcelona were to become , effectively , the second capital of Spain .
