A New Holy Alliance ?
LONDON & # 45 ; & # 45 ; The recent meeting in the Vatican of the “ Custodian of The Holy Places , ” King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia , and Pope Benedict XVI was a seminal event , particularly as it comes at a time when radical Muslims are decrying the role of “ crusaders ” in Middle East politics .
It was also the clearest sign yet of a rising “ Holy Alliance ” among the world ’ s conservative leaders .
For the key audience for this meeting of Muslim king and Roman Catholic Pontiff was not their followers , but another conservative leader , President George W. Bush .
The first “ Holy Alliance ” was a creation of Austria ’ s Prince Metternich following the Napoleonic wars .
It was an attempt to preserve the peace ( and the security of the relatively weak Austrian Empire ) through a coalition of victors upholding shared values .
Metternich ’ s “ Holy Alliance ” was the one original political idea to emerge from Napoleon ’ s defeat .
Behind its exalted name lay an innovation of great diplomatic significance : the introduction of an element of calculated moral restraint into international relations .
The vested interests that the Alliance members – Austria , Prussia , and Russia – had in the survival of their domestic institutions led each to seek to avoid conflicts that , in the past , they would have pursued as a matter of course .
Metternich ’ s system worked through much of the nineteenth century , because it protected a genuine balance of power between countries that shared common values .
But what “ common values ” do King , Pope , and American President share ?
That such a meeting took place is a sign that both Pope and King believed that there was something to achieve .
Indeed , Abdullah , who believes himself to be the paramount leader of the Muslim world , is the first Saudi king to initiate a meeting with a leader of the Christian faith .
The two men met , seemingly as equals , not to express the common values of conservatism , but to confirm and promote their authority to uphold traditional values .
Both agreed that reform must be slow , cautious and that it must never undermine established institutions , especially religion and the patriarchal family .
Abdullah sought the meeting because he believes that the world since 2001 has divided the fraternity of conservatives .
Until then , he and Bush shared a common worldview , emphasizing the importance of religion , the traditional family ( as both countries understood it ) , social discipline , and the state ’ s role in supporting these institutions .
But Bush , following the terrorist attacks of 2001 , turned his back on conservatism . He sought to radically reinvent the Middle East , not only by overthrowing the Taliban regime in Afghanistan and Saddam Hussein ’ s regime in Iraq , but also through his strident calls for democratization .
American radicalism , however , resulted in increasing tensions between religious communities in the Middle East , and the rise of radical Iran with its bid for regional hegemony .
Since 2001 , Christian minorities have been targeted throughout the region , including even Lebanon ’ s Maronite Christian community .
And in Iraq , Sunni Muslims feel under siege from the country ’ s majority and now ruling Shia .
Here is where the Holy Alliance concept of moral restraint comes in .
Abdullah , perhaps earlier than most others , understood that some code of restraint was needed if the entire region was not to descend into a war of all against all .
Moreover , Abdullah understands that his wobbly regime will only be able to withstand the radical gales that are now blowing if it can forge the type of stability-seeking alliance that Metternich built .
The King , like Metternich and the Austrian Kaisers , understands de Tocqueville ’ s dictum that the most dangerous moment for a regime is when it starts to reform .
Having begun , ever so carefully , to politically open his country , the King knows that he needs regional peace and a lowering of Islamic holy rage .
The problem is that Abdullah cannot rely on his domestic conservative allies to give him the time that the Kingdom needs .
The Wahhabi religious establishment , the Saudi state ’ s hidden co-rulers , could very well obstruct Abdullah ’ s attempts at regional religious reconciliation .
Members of the religious police remain adamant that the country ’ s Christian guests must continue to live according to strict Wahhabi rules of behavior .
While the Wahhabis could yet be bribed again with oil money , the sect ’ s power-hungry judges eagerly await the next beheading , stoning , or lashing in Riyadh ’ s public square .
Thus , uniting the forces of status quo conservatism , even if some of those conservatives are Christian , is the only viable diplomatic strategy open to Saudi Arabia .
For conservative rulers usually fall when they fail to grasp their own vulnerability , especially when the revolutionary challenge is cloaked in conservative garb .
After all , few political systems can defend against those , like Saudi Arabia ’ s Islamic radicals , who claim that they can preserve the system and its religious values more effectively than the current rulers .
Only an alliance of conservative leaders and powers ( including a retreat by America from diplomatic radicalism ) , Abdullah believes , can restore some stability to the Middle East .
