Obama ’ s Hardest Choices Lie Ahead
TEL AVIV – It was only natural that Barack Obama , a president whose election was one of the most revolutionary events in American history , should fill his first 100 days in office with a breathtaking , all-embracing agenda .
These are times of trial and upheaval that call for such daring .
Strikingly energetic and self-confident , Obama has set out on a titanic journey to remake America ’ s economy and redress a broken and dysfunctional international system .
It is perhaps especially in Obama ’ s domestic policy – the shift to a more social-democratic tax system and universal health care – that one can best see the new president ’ s ideological drive .
But emphasizing the reduction of social inequalities does not sit easily with America ’ s profoundly individualistic ethos , and the attempt to “ Europeanize ” the nature of the social contract between the state and its citizens might yet crash against the constitutive principles of the American system .
When it comes to salvaging America ’ s collapsing financial system , Obama has been far more interventionist than any European government .
For once , the faltering Czech presidency of the EU reflected a European consensus when it defined Obama ’ s astronomic financial stimulus as a “ road to hell . ”
The unprecedented explosion of America ’ s fiscal deficit raises the risk of high inflation in the future – exactly the kind of scenario that Europeans want to prevent at all cost .
Obama ’ s foreign policy agenda has been no less audacious than his domestic undertakings .
After eight years of American unilateralism that left behind a broken transatlantic alliance , resuscitated the specter of a cold war with Russia , and saw the Middle East decline into a doomsday politics , Obama ’ s injection of new thinking to endemic problems is extremely welcome .
The organizing principle in the new president ’ s foreign policy is one of not having principled , ideological guidelines .
Essentially , his approach to international issues is pragmatic , and , in departing from his predecessor ’ s penchant for machtpolitik , Obama has pledged always to exhaust diplomacy first .
But Obama might soon realize that most of his predecessors started as believers in international cooperation , until events forced them to fall back on a strategy of confrontation .
Not even George W. Bush seemed to be committed to any particular doctrine in foreign affairs before the terrorist attacks of September 11 , 2001 , drove him to unleash his ill-conceived “ global war on terror . ”
The real test of Obama ’ s strategy of dialogue and cooperation will come only when it fails , and tough choices will have to be made .
Repairing old alliances is vital not only for the exercise of American power , but also for Europe ’ s empowerment as a global player .
Yet America ’ s European allies administered Obama ’ s first setback .
They applauded him everywhere on his recent trip to Europe , but sent him home almost empty-handed , resisting the idea of a coordinated fiscal stimulus and , after years of preaching multilateralism , turning down his call for more European troops for Afghanistan .
For many in Europe , it was easier to live against Bush than to make sacrifices with Obama .
Obama also pushed the “ reset button ” with Russia , and suggested that he might freeze Bush ’ s plan to deploy a missile defense system in the Czech Republic and Poland .
The expectation was that Russia would join the United States in putting pressure on Iran to abandon its nuclear ambitions .
But this has not yet happened .
Nor was North Korea impressed by Obama ’ s warnings that America might shoot down its rocket if they went ahead with their launch in defiance of the United Nations .
Shielded behind a protective China , Kim Jong-il launched his rocket anyway , and the US refrained from action .
Iran is another front where Obama might be forced to recognize the limits of his conciliatory approach .
He has waived America ’ s long-standing demand that Iran stop uranium enrichment as a precondition for negotiations , and he has sworn off any idea of regime change .
But the Iranians are the subtlest negotiators to be found anywhere , and will make certain that their nuclear program outpaces the negotiations .
If that happens , then what ?
Nor is it clear what Obama really means by saying that he recognizes Iran ’ s “ rightful place in the community of nations . ”
If this means a special status at the expense of other Middle East powers such as Egypt or the Gulf states , Obama might run into strong opposition from America ’ s traditional allies in the region .
It is right and refreshing that Obama has made clear that America ’ s aspiration is to lead , not dominate .
But even an exercise in modesty and realism requires strong alliances , with partners ready for sacrifices .
Nor would old enemies and competitors like Russia and China readily abandon the benefits of spoiling American plans .
It is when this becomes crystal clear , and also when some worn-out foreign-policy paradigms , such as the fetish of a two-state solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict fail once again , that real choices will have to be made .
