Getting to Yes with Putin
PARIS – In the showdown with Russia over Ukraine , the weaknesses and divisions in European policy have been as encouraging for Russian President Vladimir Putin as America ’ s hesitant approach to Syria was .
If Europe is to act responsibly , three key concepts should define its policy toward Russia : firmness , clarity , and a willingness to find an acceptable compromise .
Without firmness , nothing is possible .
To be sure , Europe and the US made mistakes in the aftermath of the Soviet Union ’ s collapse .
The US , in particular , can be accused of acting arrogantly and unnecessarily humiliating Russia .
But the Soviet Union ’ s demise was the result of a long string of missteps , beginning with pre-Soviet Russia ’ s inability to come to terms with modernity .
Post-Soviet Russian leaders have yet to confront those failures .
By adopting an aggressive , revisionist stance , Putin has made a historic and strategic mistake .
Putin ’ s model should have been Peter the Great .
His ambition should have been to tie Russia ’ s future to that of Europe .
Instead , Putin turned for inspiration to Nicholas I , the most reactionary of Russia ’ s nineteenth-century czars .
The failure of Putin ’ s policy can be seen by comparing Russia with China .
The gap between the two – in terms of each country ’ s behavior and achievements – has never been greater .
At the G-20 Summit in Brisbane this month , China played its hand masterfully , highlighting its goodwill , particularly on the issue of climate change .
Russia , meanwhile , appeared self-isolated – pathetically so , given the impact of its seclusion on its economy .
Russia ’ s stock exchange is collapsing .
Its currency has lost 30 % of its value .
The price of oil and gas – the mainstay of the Kremlin ’ s budget – has fallen by more than 25 % .
In contrast to China , Russia ’ s economy depends heavily on its energy resources , leaving it vulnerable when global energy markets head south .
Putin ’ s only strength lies in Europe ’ s weakness and irresolution .
So Europe ’ s goal must be to set clear limits on Putin ’ s ambitions .
Whether he is seeking to weaken Ukraine or to enlarge Russia ’ s territory , Europe ’ s response must be firm .
Putin must be convinced that he cannot do either without paying a cost that Russians will not willingly bear .
Given the Kremlin ’ s ambiguous behavior – if not its deliberate policy of deceit – it seems obvious that France should not deliver a Mistral-class assault warship , which it previously agreed to sell to Russia .
It is far better for France to be perceived as an unreliable arms dealer than as an irresponsible strategic actor , caring only about its mercantile interests .
Firmness must be accompanied by clarity .
Putin is no longer the leader he was when he came to power in 2000 , nor even the leader he was in 2008 , when he grabbed pieces of Georgia by force .
Under his increasingly centralized and authoritarian rule , he has combined ultra-religious nationalism with Soviet-era tactics and practices .
It is a dangerous and volatile mix , relying on principles and methods that led Russia ’ s empires – Czarist and Soviet – to failure and ruin .
Firmness and clarity are indispensable .
But they are not sufficient to formulate a coherent European policy .
The goal cannot be simply to contain Russia .
A compromise must be reached .
True , Russia lacks the means to achieve Putin ’ s aims .
But the rest of the world nonetheless needs the Kremlin ’ s cooperation and goodwill as it pursues efforts such as the containment of Iran ’ s nuclear ambitions and the fight against the Islamic State .
As long as Russia remains intent on achieving unacceptable outcomes , accompanied by hints of nuclear saber rattling , reaching a compromise will be difficult .
Putin is far from an ideal partner with whom to attempt to reconcile the two key principles of international law : the right of a people to self-determination and the sanctity of national borders .
But doing so is not impossible .
Any compromise will have to address the future of Crimea , now under Russian domination , and maintain Ukraine ’ s independence .
Putin must be convinced that by gaining Crimea , he has lost Ukraine .
For their part , Ukrainian leaders will have to make a commitment not to join NATO , in exchange for Russia ’ s acceptance of Ukraine ’ s right to enter the European Union .
The progressive removal of sanctions would follow , allowing all parties to concentrate their energies on other priorities , be they economic or strategic .
In its negotiations with Russia , Europe holds the stronger cards .
But as long as they are poorly played , as they have been up to now , Putin will continue to win every hand .
