Can Rouhani Deliver ?
NEW YORK – As world powers meet in Geneva to begin nuclear talks with Iran , the world awaits the follow-up to the phone call between Iranian President Hassan Rouhani and US President Barack Obama after Rouhani ’ s visit to the United Nations General Assembly last month .
That brief conversation – the first between the two countries ’ presidents since 1979 – recalls the last attempt to revive bilateral diplomacy , undertaken 12 years ago by Iran ’ s then-President Mohammad Khatami .
In both episodes , a missing handshake symbolized the countries ’ persistent rift .
Back then , Khatami and Foreign Minister Kamal Kharrazi “ went shopping , ” rather than attend a cultural event at the Asia Society and risk crossing paths – and shaking hands – with US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright .
This time , despite Iran ’ s avoidance of a presidential handshake at the UN , Rouhani delivered a major address at the Asia Society asserting that his government would pursue policies of “ moderation and common sense ” and would be willing to work with the West on resolving questions about its nuclear program .
Moreover , handshakes were exchanged by the two countries ’ foreign ministers , when John Kerry and Javad Zarif , joined by the European Union ’ s top diplomat , Catherine Ashton , held a formal meeting to organize the upcoming nuclear negotiations in Geneva .
Kerry and Zarif shook hands again when the two met separately .
So what changed ?
Back then , Iran ’ s supreme leader , Ayatollah Ali Khamenei , had forbidden Khatami to speak with the Americans .
Rouhani , by contrast , proceeded with Khamenei ’ s blessing .
Khamenei , concerned with repairing the damage caused by his acceptance of the fraudulent reelection in 2009 of former President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , was willing to accept the victory in June of Rouhani , a conservative reformist whom he trusted .
He must have calculated that the new president would have to ameliorate the consequences of Ahmadinejad ’ s foreign-policy freelancing and economic mismanagement , which has had as much to do with the collapse of the Iranian economy as US-led international sanctions .
There had been earlier attempts to improve relations with the Americans .
Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani , who became Iran ’ s president after Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini ’ s death in 1989 , sought such an outcome .
In 1995 , he sent clear signals of a desire to restore diplomatic relations .
President Bill Clinton ’ s administration ignored the overtures and allowed the US Congress to take the initiative .
Congress responded by unanimously adopting the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act of 1996 .
Rafsanjani was in a much stronger position vis-à-vis Khamenei , who had just been selected to succeed Khomeini as Supreme Leader , than any of Iran ’ s subsequent presidents .
His trouble was with powerful opponents in Iran ’ s security apparatus , who sabotaged his pragmatic foreign-policy initiatives by staging terrorist attacks in France , Germany , and Argentina .
Khatami ’ s proposal for a “ dialogue among civilizations ” in 2000 was an attempt to open a crack in what he described as the wall of mistrust that continued to separate Iran and the US .
It was only in the last year of his second term that Clinton made a serious effort to respond to Khatami .
But Khatami lacked the support of Khamenei , who firmly opposed his reforms .
The aggressive rhetoric of Clinton ’ s successor , George W. Bush , who called Iran part of an “ axis of evil ” prior to the US-led invasion of Iraq , made Khamenei apprehensive , and he endorsed an initiative for a dialogue with the Americans in 2003 .
The Bush administration , in thrall to the idea of regime change , ignored this initiative and rejected the “ Big Deal ” on nuclear energy negotiated with the EU-3 in Paris in November 2004 by Rouhani , who was then Khamenei ’ s representative and Chairman of Iran ’ s National Security Council .
The formal rejection of the Iran-EU nuclear agreement in February 2005 was an unintended gift to Iran ’ s hardliners , led by Ahmadinejad .
The return of hardliners after the ascendancy of moderates is a little-understood but fairly typical feature of twentieth-century revolutions .
Ahmadinejad ’ s election in 2005 was a throwback to the populism of Khomeini ’ s Islamic Revolution and his cult of revolutionary martyrs .
It went hand in hand with an aggressive foreign policy and a determined nuclear strategy of uranium enrichment that repeatedly frustrated EU negotiators and forced world leaders to fall into line behind America ’ s crippling sanctions regime .
There can be no doubt that before coming to the US , Iran ’ s new president studied Obama ’ s letter to Khamenei , who promised “ heroic flexibility ” in negotiations .
With Khamenei ’ s support , Rouhani will be able to rein in recalcitrant forces in Iran ’ s power structure in a way that his pragmatic predecessors , Rafsanjani and Khatami , could not .
More than any Iranian president since 1979 , Rouhani can deliver his part of the bargain – that is , if and when a bargain is struck .
