Sudan and Africa ’ s Future
JOHANNESBURG – It has been said , correctly , that Sudan is a microcosm of Africa .
For this reason , the entire continent will follow events in Sudan over the next few months with the greatest interest .
On January 9 , 2011 , the people of South Sudan will vote in a referendum to decide whether they will remain part of a united Sudan or form a new independent state .
If they choose the latter option , the new state will come into being on July 9 , 2011 .
During the same period , even as Sudan is addressing the issue of its North-South relations , it will also have to arrive at a comprehensive agreement to end the conflict in Darfur .
During its nearly 55 years of independence , Sudan has experienced a succession of violent conflicts , in the South , the West ( Darfur ) , and the East .
It is commonly accepted that what lay at the root of these conflicts was the failure of independent Sudan – one of Africa ’ s most racially , ethnically , religiously , and culturally diverse countries – to construct a polity informed by the principle and practice of unity in diversity .
This challenge faces almost all African countries as they seek to construct stable and peaceful societies .
Virtually all civil wars and other violent conflicts in post-colonial Africa have occurred because of the failure to manage properly the diversity that characterizes these countries .
These conflicts have taught Africa that , in order to contain the centrifugal pressures that encourage fragmentation within our relatively new states , a conscious effort must be made to nurture and entrench national unity , which must include democratic practices .
Conflict has also communicated the unequivocal message that unity cannot be secured and maintained by force alone .
Rather , it is only by respecting our diversity – ensuring that each social group enjoys a shared sense of belonging , rather than feeling marginalized and excluded – that the state ’ s unity and peace can be guaranteed .
Sudan has learned these lessons through harsh practical experience , including war .
As long ago as 1975 , Gafaar al-Nimeiry , Sudan ’ s military head of state , stated with great prescience what Sudan and Africa needed to do to achieve peace and stability . “ Unity based on diversity has become the essence and the raison d ’ être of the political and national entity of many an emerging African country today .
We take pride in that the Sudan of the Revolution has become the exemplary essence of this new hope .
The Sudan is the biggest country in Africa .
It lies in its heart and at its crossroads .
Its extensive territory borders ( nine ) African countries .
Common frontiers mean common ethnic origins , common cultures , and shared ways of life and environmental conditions .
Trouble in the Sudan would , by necessity , spill over its frontiers , and vice versa .
A turbulent and unstable Sudan would not therefore be a catalyst of peace and stability in Africa , and vice versa . ”
Unfortunately , failure to implement policies based on genuine respect for this perspective plunged Sudan into its second costly North-South war , fueled the violent conflicts in Western and Eastern Sudan , and created the possibility of the South ’ s secession .
Given this history , it is clear that the governments of Sudan and South Sudan , as well as the overwhelming majority of the Sudanese people , have had enough of war and passionately desire peace .
The processes in which the Sudanese parties are currently engaged – the preparations for the South Sudan referendum , negotiations on post-referendum arrangements , and the search for a negotiated settlement in Darfur – are all informed by this desire for peace .
For this reason , Africa is following Sudan ’ s evolution with intense interest – and is eager to see this country “ at the heart and crossroads of Africa ” give substance to al-Nimeiry ’ s vision .
But , regardless of the outcome of the South Sudan referendum , the impending developments in Sudan will result in important changes to the structure of the Sudanese state .
In this context , the Sudanese parties – North and South – have accepted the important principle of establishing “ two viable states ” if the South secedes .
As happens during periods of major and rapid change , the country will experience social tension , uncertainty , and unease .
Africa is keen that the Sudanese leadership cooperate effectively to manage this delicate situation , in the interest of the continent as a whole .
This requires that Sudan ’ s various leadership collectives have sufficient strength and cohesion to bring their constituencies into the settlement , and therefore that no one , from near or afar , does anything to weaken any of these collectives .
It is in Africa ’ s interest to see Sudan ’ s people living together in peace and cooperating with one another for their mutual benefit – fully respecting one another ’ s diverse but not mutually exclusive interests , whether they live in one country or two .
A Sudan that truly embodied “ the exemplary essence ” of respect for diversity of which al-Nimeiry spoke would serve as a catalyst for peace and stability on our continent .
It is to be hoped that the sustained and enormous international focus on Sudan has as its objective providing the necessary support to the Sudanese people to help them achieve this goal , including building two viable states , as may be necessary .
