Arafat \ u0027s Ghost
History gave Yasir Arafat far more time than most leaders to achieve his mission .
After all , at the time of his death he had been leader of the Palestinians for 35 years .
Yet he left his people in a terrible situation , with no state , in the midst of a losing war , and with a bankrupt economy .
Whether his successors can revive and complete the Palestinians ' historic mission depends on how they define their goal .
Looking back at his career , Arafat never really veered from the belief that his life 's mission was to destroy Israel by any means necessary and replace it with a Palestinian Arab state .
An independent Palestinian state that did not include all of Israel held no appeal to him .
He was equally indifferent to his people 's material welfare and anything particular about the design of a viable political and economic system .
Now , in the post-Arafat era , Palestinians must choose one of several strategies .
Unfortunately , most of the alternatives call for the continued use of violence and terrorism .
The moderate strategy seeks an independent Palestine state as quickly as possible , on the assumption that once there is no more Israeli presence or violence , the Palestinians can concentrate on constructive pursuits , including resettling refugees and improving living standards .
But this is the view of only a small minority of leaders , notably former Prime Minister Abu Mazin and Muhammad Dahlan , who heads his own militia in the Gaza Strip .
If Arafat had taken this road - accepting Israel 's existence , ending terrorism , and confronting Palestinian extremists - the conflict would have ended long ago .
But , with no single all-powerful leader , it will be hard for any successor to force through the difficult decisions required by such an orientation .
The
The younger generation of indigenous West Bank Palestinians , whose leaders began political activity in the uprising of the late 1970 's , embraces a
The militants argue that a two-stage strategy is needed to defeat Israel .
First , long-term continuation of violence will force Israel to withdraw from the occupied territories .
Then , with Palestinians gaining the upper hand , they can advance to a second stage in which all of Israel is conquered , implying armed struggle - which often takes the form of anti-civilian terrorism - for many more years .
Finally , there is the
The problem for Palestinian moderates is clear : any leader willing to agree a peace treaty with Israel would be opposed - passionately and even violently - by roughly 80 % of the movement .
A key question is whether the Palestinian masses , fed up with their leadership 's bickering , corruption , and incompetence , could make their wishes known to find an end to a conflict that has cost them so much .
But none of the main leadership factions are proposing that the masses be consulted very much .
Nor did Arafat leave in place any institutional mechanisms for doing so .
Moreover , the popular appeal of radical religion , ideology , and misinformation should not be underestimated .
Few Palestinians are even aware that four years ago Arafat turned down an independent state equal in size to the entire West Bank and Gaza Strip , in addition to more than $ 20 billion in refugee compensation .
The main problem left by Arafat is the lack of any leadership at all .
Rarely in history has a political movement been so deliberately set by its founder on a course toward chaos .
Arafat not only left no successor , but no order .
Over the decades , the movement has developed a political culture of indiscipline .
Arafat presided over a sort of anarchy , encouraging rivalries , undermining other potential leaders , and ensuring that all authority ( and money ) ran through his hands .
Only if the post-Arafat movement decides that it really wants a Palestinian state in exchange for ending the conflict with Israel in every respect will there be a real chance of peace .
Arafat 's death may well mark the beginning of that process , but the transition to a new Palestinian leadership could take years , and there is no assurance that it will be a moderate one .
