The Making of Sputnik
MOSCOW - On October 4 , 1957 , my father , Nikita Khrushchev , awaited a telephone call .
Chief Designer Sergei Korolev was expected to call from the Tyuratam launch site ( later renamed Baikonur Cosmodrome ) in Kazakhstan to report on the launch of the world ’ s first man-made satellite .
Earlier that day , my father was in Kyiv , Ukraine , on military business .
He attended a demonstration of tanks crossing the Dnieper River , then discussed with Soviet generals the fate of Defense Minister Marshal Georgy Zhukov .
( Zhukov was suspected of plotting to seize power , and , before forcing a decorated World War II general to resign , my father and his colleagues enlisted the support of other high-ranking generals , who all agreed with Khrushchev ’ s plan . )
That evening , my father dined with the Ukrainian leaders .
I sat at the end of the table , not paying attention to their conversation .
Everybody was tired , but my father wasn ’ t in a hurry to sleep .
Around midnight , the door opened and the secretary asked my father to take a phone call .
When Khrushchev came back , he was smiling : Sputnik ’ s launch was successful .
Soviet engineers began designing Sputnik in January 1956 .
The plan was to launch it with the R-7 , an intercontinental ballistic missile in development since 1954 .
But the rest of the world paid no attention to the vague pronouncements of a possible launch that had been appearing in the Soviet press ; everybody outside the Soviet Union knew the United States would launch the world ’ s first satellite .
Soviet scientists believed that the Americans would keep their plans secret until after they had succeeded in launching a satellite , so all our efforts were put into beating the Americans to the launch .
In August and September , R-7 missiles were successfully launched twice .
Work went on around the clock .
Sputnik ’ s launch made the front page of Pravda , but just barely .
The story occupied the same amount of space as a report on Zhukov ’ s visit to Yugoslavia , and ran in a less prestigious position .
There were no banner headlines or enthusiastic comments .
The reason was simple .
My father and all the Soviet people thought that Sputnik ’ s success was natural , that , step by step , we were getting ahead of the Americans .
After all , we – not the Americans – had opened the world ’ s first nuclear power plant .
The Soviet MiG set world records in the 1950 ’ s , and the Soviet Tu-104 was the most efficient airliner of its class .
So Sputnik did not surprise us .
Nor did the press report Korolev ’ s name .
The KGB knew that there was really no need to keep his name secret , but , as KGB chief Ivan Serov told me , the enemy ’ s resources were limited , so let them waste their efforts trying to uncover “ non-secret ” secrets .
But the world was desperate to learn his identity .
The Nobel Prize committee decided to give an award to Sputnik ’ s “ chief designer , ” but first it needed the person ’ s name .
The committee requested it from the Soviet government .
My father weighed his response carefully .
The matter was complicated , and his concern wasn ’ t confidentiality .
The Council of Chief Designers was in charge of all space projects .
Korolev was the head of the council , but the other Chief Designers ­ – more than a dozen – considered themselves no less significant .
My father understood that the Chief Designers were ambitious and jealous people .
If the Nobel committee were to give the award only to Korolev , my father thought , the members would fly into a rage .
They would refuse to work with Korolev .
A well-organized team would collapse like a house of cards , and the hopes for future space research and missile design would be dashed , threatening the country ’ s security .
As my father saw it , you could order scientists and engineers to work together , but you couldn 't force them to create something .
In the end , my father told the Nobel committee that all of the Soviet people had distinguished themselves in the work on Sputnik , and that they all deserved the award .
Korolev was offended but kept silent .
The Nobel Prize went to somebody else .
But , despite the pains my father had taken , the other designers expressed growing discontent about Korolev getting all the publicity , even if anonymously .
In their “ secret ” world , it wasn ’ t any secret who was behind the title “ Chief Designer . ”
The first to revolt was engine designer Valentin Glushko , whose RD-170 liquid-propellant engine is used on Russian and some American rockets .
During one council meeting , Glushko said , “ My engines could send into space any piece of metal . ” Korolev was offended ; his rocket wasn ’ t just a piece of metal , and , after his success with Sputnik , he no longer considered Glushko his equal .
The dispute was hushed up , but the resentment lingered .
Soon , Glushko offered his services to other Soviet rocket designers , Mikhail Yangel and Vladimir Chelomei – Korolev 's rivals .
Even my father couldn ’ t make peace between them .
Technically , Glushko , by government order , continued to design engines for Korolev , but the work wasn ’ t good .
So , despite Sputnik ’ s initial triumph , a decade later the Soviets lost the race to the moon to the Americans .
