The Hidden Purposes of High Finance
BERKELEY – No one questions the usefulness of “ low ” finance : the ability to use checks , banknotes , and credit cards rather than having to cart around chests of silver , scales , and reagents to assay purity , and needing armed guards to protect the silver – and more guards to watch the first set of guards – has obvious efficiencies .
So does the ability of households to borrow and lend in order not to be forced to match income and expenditure every day , week , month , or year .
But what use is “ high ” finance ?
Economists ’ conventional description depicts high finance as providing us with three types of utility . First , it allows for many savers to pool their wealth to finance large enterprises that can achieve the efficiencies of scale possible from capital-intensive modern industry .
Second , high finance provides an arena to curb the worst abuses by managers of large corporations .
Shareholder democracy simply does not work , but managers ’ fear that if the stock price drops too low they will be out on their ears provides a useful restraint .
Finally , high finance allows for portfolio diversification , so that individual investors can seek high expected returns without being forced to assume large , idiosyncratic risks of bankruptcy and poverty .
But these are the benefits of high finance as they apply to the ideal world of economists – that is , a world of rational utilitarian actors who are skilled calculators of expected utility under uncertainty , who are masters of dynamic programming , and who breathe stochastic calculus in their daily life .
We do not live in such a world .
Economists have spent their lives attempting to evolve theories that would account for how salient features of reality might emerge if we did live in their ideal world , but since we don ’ t , their theoretical enterprise is of doubtful utility .
It is like describing how one could bake a delicious wedding cake using only honey , bicarbonate of soda , and raw eggplant .
If we take the world as it really is , we quickly see that high finance performs two further tasks that advance our collective economic welfare .
It induces us to save , accumulate , and invest by promising us safe and liquid investments even in extraordinary times .
It also induces us to save and invest as a prerequisite to indulging our love of gambling , and as a byproduct of it .
It is a fact that we are much happier saving and accumulating , and that we are much more likely to do so when we think that the resources we have saved and accumulated are at hand .
It is also true that when we invest our wealth – in Pfizer ’ s intellectual property , factories in Shenzhen , worldwide distribution networks , or shopping malls in Atlanta – it is not , in fact , at hand .
Our invested wealth can only be made to appear liquid to any one of us , and only if there is no general shift in our collective desire for liquidity .
And it is also a fact that we are happier saving and accumulating if we receive positive and negative feedback on our decisions on a time scale that allows us to believe that we can do better next time by altering our strategy – hence marketwatch.com and CNN / Money .
Of course investors who believe that their wealth is securely liquid , and that they are adding value for themselves by buying and selling are suffering from a delusion .
Our financial wealth is not liquid in an emergency .
And when we buy and sell , we are enriching not ourselves , but the specialists and market makers .
But we benefit from these delusions .
Psychologically , we are naturally impatient , so it is good for us to believe that our wealth is safe and secure , and that we can add to it through skillful acts of investment , because that delusion makes us behave less impatiently .
And , collectively , that delusion boosts our savings , and thus our capital stock , which on turn boosts all of our wages and salaries as well .
Seventy-three years ago , John Maynard Keynes thought about the reform and regulation of financial markets from the perspective of the first three purposes and found himself “ moved toward ... mak [ ing ] the purchase of an investment permanent and indissoluble , like marriage ... ”
But he immediately drew back : the fact “ that each individual investor flatters himself that his commitment is ‘ liquid ’ ( though this cannot be true for all investors collectively ) calms his nerves and makes him much more willing to run a risk ... ”
Moreover , for Keynes , “ [ t ] he game of professional investment is intolerably boring and over-exacting to anyone who is entirely exempt from the gambling instinct ; whilst he who has it must pay to this propensity the appropriate toll ... ”
It is for these reasons that we have seemed frozen for the past generation or two whenever we have contemplated reforming our system of financial regulation .
And it is why , even in the face of a severe financial crisis , we remain frozen today .
