The Dear Leader Cleans House for the Young General
SEOUL – There was a time , not long after the Cold War ’ s end , when almost everyone assumed that North Korea would soon collapse .
The sudden death in 1994 of Kim Il-sung , the founder of the tyrannical , economically disastrous North Korean experiment , reinforced this belief .
That was then .
Today , no one can credibly say that North Korea ’ s dynastic regime , now led by “ Dear Leader ” Kim Jong-il , a son of the late “ Great Leader ” Kim Il-sung , is certain to fall .
From insistence that the end of the Kim dynasty was approaching , consensus is emerging on the continued existence of their regime .
Immediately after the stroke that killed his father at an exclusive summer resort villa on a remote mountain , Kim Jong-il consolidated political power by concentrating it in the hands of a very few diehard loyalists – and jailing , torturing , and killing anyone he viewed as a political opponent .
Nevertheless , despite his long tenure , the Dear Leader ’ s hold on power sometimes has been threatened by a small group of dissidents .
And now that poor health has forced him to prepare to hand power to his third and youngest son , Kim Jong-un ( the so-called “ Young General ” ) , opposition has become more visible .
On April 22 , 2004 , a train explosion at Ryongchon killed 160 people and injured 1,300 . Many believe that it was an attempt to assassinate Kim , whose custom-built train passed through Ryongchon a few hours before the blast .
Since then , South Korean intelligence institutions have been assessing Kim Jong-il ’ s ability to organize an orderly dynastic succession .
In particular , they have been monitoring the body count of senior North Korean officials who have suddenly retired , disappeared , or died in automobile accidents .
Indeed , the number of recent changes in the North Korean hierarchy strongly suggests serious domestic opposition to the continuance of Kim ’ s misbegotten rule .
Kim Il-chol , 80 , an admiral and vice-minister for the armed forces , was removed from his post in May .
He was sent into retirement supposedly because of his advanced age , but there are even older figures in North Korea ’ s gerontocracy .
In addition , Pak Nam-gi , the senior finance ministry official considered responsible for North Korea ’ s botched issuance of a new currency last year , has disappeared , and Kim Yong-il , North Korea ’ s prime minister , was fired on June 7 .
Ri Je-gang , a senior Workers ’ Party director , was killed in a bizarre car crash on June 2 .
The most common explanation for all of these changes is that Kim is circling the wagons around himself and the Young General .
A disciplined succession plan is needed because Kim is 68 and in bad health ( and thus unlikely to still be holding power in 2012 , the year he targeted for North Korea to become a “ Strong and Prosperous Country ” ) .
In the meantime , the armed forces appear to remain loyal to Kim , willing to carry out his orders even at the risk of bringing the country to the brink of war , such as by sinking the South Korean naval ship Cheonan in March and warning of “ powerful nuclear deterrence ” against joint South Korean and American military drills .
While the United Nations Security Council debates how to reprimand North Korea for the attack on the Cheonan , few people in South Korea believe that any punishment will deter Kim or shorten the life of his regime .
Moreover , from the beginning South Korea had little faith in the UN even trying to act , due to China ’ s veto in the Security Council .
Indeed , China offered South Korea a veiled warning that it “ should not sweat the small stuff , ” implying that the unprovoked killing of 46 South Korean sailors is a petty matter , and certainly not one that will cause China to rethink its alliance with North Korea .
North Korea ’ s unpredictability and China ’ s cynical irresponsibility appear to be boxing in South Korean President Lee Myung-bak ’ s conservative government .
Lee must not only calculate how tough to be with North Korea in response to the death of the Cheonan sailors , but also find a way to keep working with Kim Jong-il ’ s police state .
He will most likely opt for a tactical retreat in the confrontation .
Instead of pushing for serious UN sanctions , Lee ’ s government will eventually , it seems , focus on reviving the six-party ( South and North Koreas , the United States , China , Japan , and Russia ) talks to end the North ’ s nuclear-weapons program .
There is no way to know what will happen in North Korea when Kim dies .
But it is time for Asia ’ s powers to start thinking creatively and acting cooperatively to prevent a violent implosion .
For now , South Korea will need to rely on lionhearted tolerance in its relations with the North , because there is simply no other viable option at hand .
