Are Terrorists Insane ?
ORLANDO – One of the most common popular misunderstandings about the causes of terrorism is the notion that terrorists must be “ insane ” to behave as they do .
That idea is as wrong as it is comforting .
Conservatives in the United States , for example , frequently rail against the “ madness ” of Islamic terrorists , and regard attempts to understand terrorism as appeasement or liberalism gone wild .
In the wake of September 11 , 2001 , in particular , many on the right mistook the attempt to understand or explain the terrorists ’ actions as an effort to condone them .
We have been here before , though .
After World War II , the myth of the “ mad Nazi ” exerted a forceful grip upon the popular imagination ; surely , only insane individuals could perpetrate something like the Holocaust .
But social science research in the 1940 ’ s and 1950 ’ s , including interviews with surviving Nazi leaders , demonstrated that members of the German governmental hierarchy were not only sane , but also highly intelligent .
Moreover , by the early 1960 ’ s , the social psychologist Stanley Milgram had shown that ordinary Americans would go to extraordinary lengths in obeying malevolent authority .
He famously induced people from a variety of social classes and occupations to administer what they thought were increasingly harsh electrical shocks to a helpless victim ( played by an actor ) sitting in an adjoining room , and his findings have since been replicated around the world .
This was an unpalatable conclusion .
Faced with the horror of what the Nazis had done , most people found it psychologically easier to think of what had happened as the behavior of mentally unhinged individuals , or the result of some sort of collective fugue .
But had vast numbers of Germans suddenly lost their senses overnight , or were they part of a situation in which most of us would simply have done as we were told ?
A similar resistance to noisome conclusions – and similarly understandable from a psychological viewpoint – informs today ’ s thinking about terrorists .
Our default reaction , often reinforced by Western philosophical traditions and simplistic political rhetoric , is that evil acts must be the product of fundamentally evil or insane individuals .
As with the Nazis , the study of modern terrorism began from the starting position that a single disposition – known in the literature as the “ terrorist personality ” – characterizes most or all terrorists .
In the 1970 ’ s and 1980 ’ s , West German authorities allowed psychologists and psychiatrists to interview terrorism suspects then being held in prison or awaiting trial , including members of the Red Army Faction .
A brigade of experts descended on the jails , looking for evidence to justify their own pet theories of terrorist psychology .
Terrorists were all self-serving narcissists , some found after the interviews were done .
Others argued that terrorists were all victims of clinical paranoia or some other psychosis .
Some even suggested , somewhat bizarrely , that terrorists tend to have lost a parent in their childhood years and are acting out the aggression that derives from their resulting frustration with life .
All of these views shared the belief that there was something fundamentally dysfunctional about the “ terrorist personality , ” something warped and unusual that sets “ them ” apart from “ us . ”
Never mind that different researchers found different features of this so-called personality salient , and came to fundamentally different conclusions about it .
In the years since , social science has reinforced skepticism that all terrorists share such essential personality traits .
There is also a growing recognition that the social circumstances to which terrorists are exposed play a significant role .
What we know about the mindset of terrorists tells us that they are mostly not deranged or insane , but have acquired a different set of beliefs and been exposed to social conditions very different from our own .
Put simply , the causes of terror are largely situational , and the situations are themselves as varied as the acts themselves ( members of the IRA , for instance , have obviously been exposed to circumstances very different from members of Al Qaeda ) .
It must be admitted , of course , that our access to real-life terrorists is limited , and we still have much to learn about the kind of environments that foster terroristic behavior .
Arguably , our knowledge of the factors that led to the July 2005 bombings in London , for example , is still far less impressive than our ignorance .
The great contribution of social science to the understanding of human evil has been to expose unpalatable truths .
When we resort to psychologically comforting but misleading assumptions about terrorism , we hamper our own understanding of political violence in general – and hence weaken our ability to avert or minimize it .
