The Ethics of Citizenship Tests
PRINCETON – Can citizenship really be tested ?
An increasing number of countries – especially , but not only , in Europe – seem to think so .
Over the last decade , tests and exams for immigrants have proliferated – but so have controversies about what they may legitimately ask .
Recently , the revelation that the “ Life in the UK ” test tries to instill respect for the practice of queuing – standing in line , that is – caused as much ridicule as indignation .
The British minister responsible for the test justified the idea by claiming that “ the simple act of taking one ’ s turn is one of the things that holds our country together .
It is very important that newcomers take their place in queues whether it is for a bus or a cup of tea . ”
While this might sound like an excerpt from a Monty Python sketch , it raises an important issue : should there be limits as to what prospective citizens are tested for ?
Can testing become counter-productive ?
Critics of the spreading practice of citizenship testing certainly think so ; in fact , they go so far as to lament the rise of a new “ repressive liberalism ” – Western states ’ efforts to achieve democratic and liberal ends with increasingly illiberal means .
Making “ integration courses ” and language instruction compulsory , prohibiting headscarves in schools , as in France , or restricting the rights of immigrants to marry foreigners , as in Denmark , are just some instances of coercive measures adopted in the name of supposedly universal liberal values .
Such measures have the appearance of a ( seemingly self-contradictory ) program to force men and women to be free .
Citizenship tests are an integral part of this program ; and , in the eyes of critics , they resemble “ loyalty oaths ” and other intolerant measures traditionally associated with the anti-communist witch-hunts of McCarthyism in 1950 ’ s America .
But do countries somehow automatically turn illiberal just because they make certain measures mandatory ?
If that were true , “ progressive legislation ” would inevitably be a contradiction in terms .
The real question is whether states purposefully target or even exclude certain groups – while ostensibly applying universal standards .
Think , for example , of a German ( oral ) test which was to apply only to immigrants from states belonging to the Organization of the Islamic Conference ( the test in question was later withdrawn ) , and which asked , among other things , the applicant ’ s opinion about the fact that in Germany homosexuals hold high public office .
Similar tendencies appeared in the Netherlands , which was once committed to multiculturalism , but more recently has sought to confront would-be citizens with images of men kissing and of bare-breasted women emerging from the North Sea – presumably all to get across the point that a true Dutch citizen had better be tolerant .
It is clearly helpful for immigrants to get hints about how to navigate daily life practically – such as norms about standing in line .
But this kind of local knowledge should not be subject to testing .
Most people acquire survival skills – if not more sophisticated forms of savoir-faire – informally , as a quick glance at the immigration experience in the United States demonstrates . They will also come to get the point of more informal social norms – against homophobia , for instance .
The lesson is that national governments should not test the attitudes of immigrants to moral and cultural questions that remain controversial even among established members of the host country .
It would be hypocritical , for example , to pretend that everyone in Western liberal democracies is enthusiastic about gay people or nudists – what matters is that their rights be respected , not that everyone like them .
Tests should communicate lessons about rights and democracy , that is , politics – not about lifestyles or the supposed core content of a “ national culture ” ( on which established members of a host country themselves would probably be hard pressed to reach consensus ) .
Of course , it is true that birthright citizens live their lives – and retain their citizenship – without ever being tested on the basics of their political systems .
But it is a reasonable expectation – often legitimately reinforced through civic education for all children – that citizens know how to participate in public affairs , and especially that they know what their and others ’ rights are .
So , citizenship tests – rather than being repressive – can actually be empowering , if they make immigrants aware of rights and possibilities for participation . They are akin to language requirements – except that the language here is a civic , not a national one , which in the best case allows new citizens to voice their concerns with perfect political grammar .
Tests might also make the passage to citizenship meaningful , a ritual similar to the solemn swearing of an oath of allegiance , which can be integrated as a major event into the story of one ’ s life ( to be sure , some will always dismiss such ceremonies as political kitsch ) .
What these kinds of exams cannot do – and should not attempt to do – is test people ’ s political convictions .
For one thing , such convictions can always be faked by those determined to dissimulate .
At the same time , most would-be citizens will probably feel alienated from a state that suspects political danger emanating from newcomers and consistently sends a message of distrust .
In the end , citizenship exams , rather than really being “ tests ” in any meaningful sense at all , are tools for communication .
And every country should think very carefully about what it wishes to communicate about itself .
