The Battle for Hope
PARIS – Since the arrival of President Barack Obama in the White House , there has been an undeniable rapprochement between Europe and the United States .
But on the deeper and more fundamental level of emotions and values , is it possible that the gap between the two sides of the Atlantic has widened ?
Today , there is much more collective hope and much more individual fear in America in the wake of the global economic crisis .
But the reverse is true in Europe .
Here one encounters less collective hope and less individual fear .
The reason for this contrast is simple : the US has Obama , and Europe has the welfare state .
So what can be done to promote an “ Americanization ” of Europe in political terms and a “ Europeanization ” of America in social terms ?
Comforted by a new President who incarnates a return of hope , who inspires and reassures at the same time , Americans are starting to believe that the worst of the economic crisis is behind them .
What was at the beginning of this spring no more than “ a glimmer of hope , ” to use Obama ’ s phrase , has become a more serious and positive trend .
Animated collectively by a combination of natural optimism and deep nationalism , Americans have made their president ’ s campaign slogan , “ Yes , we can , ” their own .
By contrast , when the personal situations of many individual Americans are examined through European eyes , the extreme individualism that constitutes a key part of American optimism translates into an unacceptable social scandal . “ Cities of Tents are Filling with the Victims of the Economic Crisis , ” read one headline a month ago on the front page of a mass-circulation American newspaper .
Journalists report tragic stories of middle-class Americans losing their jobs and homes , potentially putting their lives at risk without any social protection .
Who will pay for your costly cancer treatment if you lose the health insurance policy that came with your job ?
It is wrong to assume , as some ultra-free marketers do , that the absence of social protection makes you stronger .
The ambition of a country and a society born of the principles of the Enlightenment cannot be to create a people armed to the teeth with guns yet entirely disarmed in the face of illness .
Moreover , in a society that “ lives to work , ” where one ’ s job is such a central component of one ’ s identity , the loss of work is more destabilizing than in a culture where one “ works to live , ” as in Europe .
Americans ’ perspective on retirement is highly revealing : they are afraid of it .
What will they do ?
This perspective is not simply rooted in economics , even if today a large proportion of older Americans are rushing back to work as the downturn wrecks their retirement plans .
The geographic separation of families , owing to America ’ s size and Americans ’ mobility , makes the association between retirement and being a grandparent less practicable in the US than it is in Europe .
In Europe , meanwhile , there is undeniably less collective hope and probably a little less individual fear .
Perhaps because they are older and more cynical , European societies seem to bask in a “ collective moroseness , ” from which they have difficulty emerging .
The record level of abstention in the recent European Parliament elections is further proof of that growing cynicism and alienation .
Of course , it is neither possible nor desirable to “ clone ” Obama in each of the European Union ’ s 27 member states .
But what is needed to reduce the deficit of hope that plagues Europe today ?
The answer is far from obvious .
Europe suffers from a shortage of leaders who can speak in its name ; from a shortage of ambition ( what , after all , is the collective ambition of Europeans now that the EU is perceived more as part of the problem than part of the solution ) .
But , above all , Europe suffers from an identity deficit , for no one seems to know what it means to be a European nowadays .
America , by contrast , seems to have an abundance of all the things Europe lacks .
Formulated in such terms , the European challenge seems even more formidable than the American one .
Nevertheless , it is far from clear that the US will find it easier to reform its health and social security system , and thus alleviate the individual fears of its citizens , than for Europe to inspire its citizens with a sense of collective hope .
In reality , Europe and America should represent a source of mutual inspiration that would reduce the human consequences of inequality in the one , and restore a sense of hope in the other .
