The Renminbi Goes Forth
BEIJING – In June , the Peoples ’ Bank of China ( PBC ) , China ’ s central bank , announced an end to the renminbi ’ s 23-month-old peg to the dollar and a return to the pre-crisis exchange-rate regime adopted in July 2005 .
So far , however , the RMB ’ s appreciation against the dollar has been slow .
Will the pace of appreciation accelerate enough to satisfy American demands ?
If it does , will global imbalances disappear sooner ?
It is hard to argue that the RMB is not undervalued , given China ’ s large and persistent current-account and capital-account surpluses .
But , despite ending the dollar peg , faster appreciation of the RMB seems unlikely for the foreseeable future .
China ’ s official position is that , to avoid the negative impact of a stronger RMB on China ’ s exports and hence employment , appreciation must proceed in an autonomous , gradual , and controllable manner .
The current exchange-rate regime , which links the RMB to a basket of currencies , was designed to give the PBC leeway to control the pace of RMB appreciation , while creating two-way fluctuations in the exchange rate against the US dollar in order to discourage speculators from making one-way bets on the RMB .
RMB appreciation should have started earlier and at a faster pace , when China ’ s trade surplus was much smaller and its growth was much less dependent on exports .
Delay has made current-account rebalancing via RMB appreciation costly .
And now China faces a dilemma .
As a result of the global financial crisis , China ’ s export growth in 2009 dropped by 34 % compared to 2008 .
In the first seven months of 2010 , China ’ s trade surplus was $ 84 billion , down 21.2 % from January-July 2009 .
This large , steady fall in the country ’ s trade surplus makes the Chinese government hesitant to allow the RMB to appreciate significantly , for fear of the lagged impact on the trade balance .
But the PBC is also reluctant to buy dollars constantly .
The PBC knows that rapid deterioration in America ’ s fiscal position and continual worsening in its external balance may create an irresistible temptation for the US to inflate away its debt burden .
The more the PBC intervenes , the larger the national welfare losses that China may suffer in the future .
The Chinese government must , therefore , strike a balance between protecting China ’ s export sector and preserving its national welfare .
The dilemma that officials face is that the impact of a fall in exports as a result of RMB appreciation will be felt acutely and immediately , whereas the large welfare losses due to the evaporation of the value of China ’ s foreign-exchange reserves will be borne by society as a whole – but not immediately .
Moreover , the increase in China ’ s overall price level – and wage levels in particular – has caused the RMB to strengthen steadily in real terms , reducing ( to a certain extent ) the need for nominal RMB appreciation .
True , commerce ministry officials recently declared their wish to see a further fall of China ’ s trade surplus in 2010 .
But RMB appreciation is not the preferred instrument for achieving this goal .
Thus , nothing dramatic will happen to the RMB exchange rate in the near term – unless something dramatic happens .
At the same time , the effect of currency appreciation on the trade balance should not be exaggerated .
The RMB appreciated by 18.6 % in real effective terms , and by 16 % in dollar terms , from June 2005 to August 2008 .
Yet , from 2006 to 2008 , China ’ s annual exports grew 23.4 % , outpacing import growth of 19.7 % .
Exchange rates are just one of many factors that affect trade balances .
For China ’ s , the income effect of global demand is significantly larger than the price effect of the exchange rate .
The fall in China ’ s trade surplus since late 2008 is attributable mainly to the global slowdown and the stimulus package introduced by the Chinese government , rather than to changes in the RMB ’ s exchange rate .
But if the RMB is allowed to float , isn ’ t a balanced trade account likely ?
Probably not .
With a fast-rising RMB , net capital outflows will increase , which is what Japan experienced after the Plaza Accord of 1985 pushed the yen upward .
As a result , balance-of-payments equilibrium would be reached at a certain exchange-rate level , but a current-account surplus ( albeit smaller ) would still exist .
America should not pin too much hope on a weakening dollar to correct its trade imbalances .
For the US , the fundamental cause of imbalances is not a strong dollar , but America ’ s over-consumption and over-borrowing .
A strengthening dollar would worsen the US trade balance , but a weakening dollar could cause panic in capital markets , which might push up risk premia on dollar-denominated assets , including US government securities , in turn leading to an economic slowdown and a further weakening of the dollar .
Of course , RMB appreciation may displace Chinese goods sold in the US .
But if the US fails to narrow its savings gap , its current-account deficit will not disappear , regardless of where the dollar goes .
Whether America can achieve decent growth while keeping its current-account deficit in check depends on whether it can reinvigorate its ability to innovate and create , thereby restoring competitiveness and creating demand at the same time .
For both China and America , the RMB-dollar exchange rate is important for achieving growth and a more balanced current account .
But that dual objective requires structural change in the Chinese and US economies .
