The Middle East ’ s Hair Trigger
TEL AVIV – Across the Middle East , a fatalistic conventional wisdom is taking hold : war is unavoidable .
Some see war as a way of resolving an increasingly deadlocked situation , shaking up a dysfunctional regional order whose main actors are not only at loggerheads , but are also incapable of resolving the legitimacy deficits of their respective regimes .
A volley of incendiary remarks between Israel and both Syria and Hezbollah has fueled anxieties about the possibility of war on Israel ’ s northern border .
The level of sensitivity is such that the latest tension was initiated by the Syrians , who misinterpreted as a threat Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak ’ s call to start peace negotiations precisely in order to prevent “ an all-out regional war . ”
Hezbollah ’ s leader , Hassan Nasrallah , for the first time explicitly warned the Israelis that a new round of conflict would no longer be confined to an Israeli-Lebanese showdown , but would involve the entire regional “ axis of confrontation ” – Syria , Iran , Hezbollah , and Hamas .
This would also be the case if Israel unleashed its Air Force against Iran ’ s nuclear installations .
Moreover , Nasrallah made it clear that Israel ’ s “ Dahyia Doctrine ” of total devastation of Lebanon in case of war would be answered in kind .
The prospect of a Middle East conflagration has prompted an airlift of senior American officials to Israel to warn of the devastating consequences that an Israeli attack on Iran might have .
Indeed , the Obama administration ’ s main challenge these days is not peacemaking , but regional conflict management and preemption .
CIA Director Leon Panetta and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Adm. Mike Mullen have already come and gone , with Vice President Joe Biden and a high-level delegation of the State Department and the National Security Council due in Jerusalem in early March .
But preventing war will not be easy , because Barack Obama ’ s mystique has worn off in the Arab world .
The expectation that he would allow the Arabs , particularly the Syrians and the Palestinians , to recover their land without resorting to arms has been proved , by his own admission , to be unrealistic .
Nor has he been able to rein in Iran ’ s relentless drive for regional hegemony , or convince it to abandon its quest for nuclear arms .
Israel will most likely listen to America ’ s advice and consider a preemptive attack on Iran only after all diplomatic means have been exhausted , and after whatever sanctions are agreed upon fail to cut short Iran ’ s march toward possessing the bomb .
No matter how unjustified Israel ’ s traditional military behavior seems in the eyes of its enemies and critics , it has always aspired to base its military actions on grounds that can be justified .
This would seem to be particularly true when it comes to an attack on Iran ’ s nuclear installations .
Israel would not like to be seen as the spoiler of a diplomatic solution to a dispute that in any case cannot be resolved by military means alone .
Wars in the Middle East , it should be recalled , have started even when the parties did not really want them .
The 1967 war is one example .
Today ’ s anxieties , too , are fed by perceptions and fears , by real and imagined concerns .
The Iranian challenge to Israel ’ s strategic hegemony is presented as a Holocaust-style existential threat , and Israel ’ s other enemies – Hezbollah , which believes that it can bring about “ the end of the Zionist entity , ” and Syria , which publicly boasts of its ballistic missiles ’ capacity to destroy Israel ’ s main urban centers – are similarly viewed as irrational actors .
A covert war between Israel and Iran has been going on for some time now .
The assassinations – allegedly by Israel – of Imad Mughniyah , Hezbollah ’ s military chief and Iran ’ s closest ally in the organization , two years ago , and more recently of Mahmoud al-Mahbouh , Hamas ’ s liaison officer with the Al-Quds force of Iran ’ s Revolutionary Guards , suggest that an unplanned chain of events could trigger a real war .
The Lebanese front may ignite if Hezbollah seeks to avenge Mughniyah ’ s death , or simply as a result of a knee-jerk reaction to a provocation , as in 2006 .
If Iran and Syria then decide to back Hezbollah , a direct Israeli-Iranian showdown could follow .
What Israel planned as a preemptive attack on Iran might then be presented as an act of self-defense .
General James Jones , President Obama 's national security adviser , recently put forward a different , albeit equally ominous , prediction .
Iran 's response to the mounting international pressure might be , he said , to launch an attack on Israel through its proxies , Hezbollah and Hamas .
Such attacks might trigger a wider regional conflagration .
War threats in the Middle East should never be dismissed as hollow .
Prophecies of war , moreover , have too frequently proven themselves to be self-fulfilling .
But America ’ s extraordinary efforts to rein in Israel might not be enough to avert a calamity .
The days of Pax Americana in the region are over , which means that avoiding a regional explosion will require mobilizing the major international actors that favor diplomatic solutions for the Arab-Israeli conflict and for Iran ’ s quest to become a legitimate partner in a new regional system .
