The Price of Clarity
LONDON -- “ Through the contrivance and cunning of stock jobbers there hath been brought in such a complication of knavery and cozenage , such a mystery of iniquity , and such an unintelligible jargon of terms to involve it in , as were never known in any other age or country . ”
Jonathan Swift ’ s eighteenth-century barb resonates in today ’ s world of financial “ intermediation ” : now , as then , finance shrouds its “ complication of knavery and cozenage ” in “ unintelligible jargon . ”
As US President Barack Obama explained in a speech in April : “ Many practices were so opaque and complex that few within these companies – let alone those charged with oversight – were fully aware of the massive wagers being made . ”
But was Swift right to see knavery as the main motive for unintelligibility ?
Obviously , it is a very powerful motive , in politics no less than in finance .
The less people understand about something , the easier it is to fool them .
There has never been a shortage of snake-oil merchants : Donizetti wrote an opera , L ’ Elisir D ’ Amore , about one of them advertising a love potion in a nonsensical patter .
But the intention to deceive , or even to make money , is not necessarily what has driven the recent explosion of financial innovation .
Consider the US Securities and Exchange Commission ’ s current civil suit against Goldman Sachs .
Goldman whiz-kid Fabrice Tourre is charged with having created a complicated security that was designed to fail .
Was his intention to deceive ?
Or was it the intellectual pleasure he got from creating a “ Frankenstein monster ” ( as one of his e-mails described it ) , regardless of the consequences ?
The latter seems the dominant motive .
As another of his e-mails put it : “ The entire system is about to crumble any moment ... the only potential survivor the fabulous Fab ... standing in the middle of all these complex , highly levered , exotic trades he created . ”
Finance has always been opaque , quite apart from the motive of swindling the investing public . “ Double-entry bookkeeping ” is one of the great discoveries of European civilization , but five centuries later most people are still muddled about assets and liabilities .
Without such knowledge , technical terms like “ balance-sheet recession ” and “ rebuilding balance sheets ” are meaningless .
Opacity has grown with complexity .
The explosion of derivative instruments has demanded such an effort at understanding that metaphorical language is needed .
Think of collateral debt obligations ( CDOs ) as poisoned sausages , says the economist Nouriel Roubini , with sub-prime mortgages as the rat meat in them .
With a mental effort , the layperson can then imagine these poisonous sausages , otherwise known as “ toxic assets , ” spreading through the world ’ s banks , ruining their digestions and crippling the economies they are meant to serve .
But complexity is not the only reason for obscurity .
In his famous essay “ Politics and the English Language , ” George Orwell pointed to the widespread use of euphemism , which means not calling a spade a spade .
This , he thought , was due to too many facts in the modern world having become too horrible , or unpalatable , to be stated clearly .
One of his examples was the phrase “ rectification of frontiers ” to sugar-coat forced population movements .
Political correctness is another aspect of this : calling disabled people “ differently abled , ” for example .
As the historian Tony Judt points out : “ It ’ s not a ‘ different ’ ability , it ’ s no ability .
Lousy language ... conceals the effects of real power and capacity , real wealth and influences . ” It enables deep inequality to happen more easily .
As important is a straightforward decline in literacy .
Orwell talked of officials putting together blocks of words like “ prefabricated hen houses . ”
This quality is much in evidence in a recent IMF report :
“ Risks to global financial stability have eased as the economic recovery has gained steam , but concerns about advanced country sovereign risks could undermine gains and prolong the collapse of credit .
Without more fully restoring the health of financial and household balance sheets , a worsening of public debt sustainability could be transmitted back to banking system or across borders .
Hence , policies are needed to ( 1 ) reduce sovereign vulnerabilities , including through communicating credible medium-term fiscal consolidation plans ; ( 2 ) ensure that the ongoing deleveraging process unfolds smoothly ; and ( 3 ) decisively move forward to complete the regulatory agenda so as to move to a safer , more resilient , and dynamic global financial system .
For emerging market countries , where the surge in capital inflows has led to fears of inflation and asset price bubbles , a pragmatic approach using a combination of macroeconomic and prudential financial policies is available . ”
Ironically , the same document is full of demands for greater “ transparency . ”
So let us translate that IMF passage into transparent English :
“ The world economy has become less risky as it has recovered from recession , and as banks and households have reduced their debts .
But fears of government default in rich countries could threaten the recovery by causing interest rates to rise and exchange rates to fall .
So three things are needed : governments must ( 1 ) cut their deficits gradually in a believable way , ( 2 ) keep enough spending going to compensate for increased saving in the private sector , and ( 3 ) press on with bank regulation .
For developing countries , economic policy and bank regulation should be used together to stop inflation and asset bubbles . ”
The greater the distance between the language of elites and ordinary people , the greater the risk of revolt .
To the extent that complexity in finance or politics creates new opportunities to deceive , impedes understanding , or blurs lines of accountability , we should aim to reduce it .
To the extent that such problems reflect decreased ability to express oneself clearly , the remedy is to improve education .
The price of clarity , like the price of liberty , is eternal vigilance , and the two are connected .
