The Right Populism for Poland
Poland ’ s parliamentary and presidential elections this month saw the death of a left-leaning postcommunist party that mostly dominated the country since 1995 .
But the demise of the left does not mean that the right has a coherent economic program .
For the victorious coalition of the Law and Justice ( PiS ) party and Civic Platform ( PO ) is torn between liberal ( PO ) and populist instincts ( PiS ) . & nbsp ;
If PiS ’ s populist slogans become policy , government spending is likely to expand , which will exacerbate Poland ’ s already weak fiscal position and consequently trigger inflationary expectations .
Worse , boosting social spending will contribute little to resolving the country ’ s staggering 17.5 % rate of unemployment – most of it structural – while any hope of quick euro adoption will be dashed .
What Poland needs most is fiscal discipline and market-oriented reforms , including relaxation of the rigid labor laws that are inhibiting job creation .
After all , over the past two decades , the enduring goals of dismantling communism and central planning , as well as joining the European Union , have served as important driving forces of reform .
But can the political will for renewed reform be mustered in a government that is half liberal and half populist ?
A specific commitment to adopt the euro at the earliest possible date could serve as the same sort of springboard as the push to join the EU in the 1990 ’ s .
Such a strategic goal would provide justification for prudent fiscal and monetary policies , and , given Poles ’ desire to consider themselves full Europeans , it would boost political support for such policies .
Only such support can bring the government budget deficit , expected to reach 4.4 % of GDP in 2005 , down to the EU ’ s benchmark of less than 3 % of GDP within the next two years .
Moreover , a commitment to pursue euro membership will have positive spillover effects .
It will reinforce convergence expectations among financial market participants , which will translate into lower risk premia for investors .
Lower risk also will bring inflation expectations down and reduce interest rates , which will in turn speed up the compression of Polish government bond yields to comparable EU levels , increasing financial stability .
While the current yield on 10-year Polish government bonds of 4.7 % appears to be at the edge of meeting the Maastricht long-term interest-rate benchmark , sustainability will depend on the fiscal policy outlook and on the overall credit risk .
More stable financial markets and a less volatile exchange rate relative to the euro will bring many advantages .
Most importantly , lower exchange-rate risk will boost both domestic and foreign direct investment , thereby helping to alleviate unemployment .
So it is imperative that the new government prepares – in cooperation with the National Bank of Poland ( NBP ) – a comprehensive program to steer the course of fiscal and monetary policy toward the goal of euro membership .
Although there is no need immediately to announce a specific exchange rate for the zloty at euro entry , such a program must include among its focal points a formula for determining the rate .
By developing and disclose to the public a compelling rationale for what will determine the exchange rate when the time comes , the financial markets would then be able to forecast the future reference exchange rate more precisely .
This would reduce the potential for speculative currency arbitrage and mitigate exchange-rate risk in the run-up to euro adoption , which would contribute to lower market interest rates , as their level always incorporates the prevalent exchange-rate risk .
There is little doubt among economists that euro membership will bring enduring net benefits to Poland .
It will lower transaction costs and increase labor productivity .
But it will do so only if serious institutional deficiencies are eliminated .
These include legal impediments to labor mobility , reform of a complex tax system beset by excessive rates and porous loopholes , and substandard road infrastructure .
Each should be regarded as an urgent matter by the new government , and each , if handled adroitly , could be “ sold ” to the public as the type of popular reform that people have been demanding .
Poland ’ s new government faces several serious challenges , not the least of which will be to reconcile its liberal and populist tendencies .
Only if populism is put at the service of liberal reform will the government achieve lasting benefits .
