The Prion Puzzle
ZURICH – The outbreak of mad cow disease in the United Kingdom , which ultimately led to the slaughter of 3.7 million cows and severely damaged the British cattle industry , began insidiously .
In 1986 , a UK cow developed an unknown brain disease .
The following year , tests revealed that the brain had been eroded by a myriad of small vacuoles , producing the sponge-like appearance that inspired the disease ’ s scientific name : bovine spongiform encephalopathy .
Within a few months , cases began appearing throughout the country .
A similar disease , called scrapie , was common in sheep , but had not previously been diagnosed in cows .
And a nearly identical , invariably lethal disease , kuru , had ravaged the aboriginal people in Papua New Guinea throughout the twentieth century .
Both kuru and scrapie are infectious .
Kuru was transmitted through cannibalistic rituals that were commonplace in Papua New Guinea until the 1950 ’ s .
Similarly , in the UK and elsewhere , healthy cattle were fed meat and bone meal made from infected cattle .
The resulting epizootic ( animal epidemic ) affected more than 280,000 cows .
At its peak in 1992 , mad cow disease was claiming nearly 1,000 head of cattle weekly .
Faced with a rapidly growing health crisis , the British authorities – equipped with little scientific understanding of the disease , and under pressure from a powerful industrial lobby – made a fatal mistake .
Because scrapie had never been definitively linked to human disease , they assumed that infected cows were also innocuous .
This assumption not only ignored the kuru tragedy ; it also overlooked the hundreds of young people who had died of spongiform encephalopathy after receiving growth hormones extracted from human corpses .
This mixture of hubris , ignorance , and subservience to commercial interests reached peak toxicity in 1990 , when the UK ’ s agriculture minister , John Gummer , televised his daughter eating a hamburger , declaring that British beef was safe .
But British beef was not safe .
In late 1995 , two young people were diagnosed with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease – a rare disease typically seen in elderly patients .
Post-mortem examinations of their brains revealed deposits of prions – the infectious agents that cause scrapie , kuru , and mad cow disease .
But these were not the prions of classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease .
Since then , “ new variant ” Creutzfeltdt-Jakob disease has claimed roughly 300 lives .
As the tragedy unfolded , however , scientists gained a greater understanding of the disease .
Prions seem to defy all conventional wisdom , surviving pressure-cooking , irradiation , and even incineration at 340 ° C for four hours – treatments that are routinely and reliably used to deactivate all known viruses and bacteria .
Furthermore , prions lack their own genes .
The prion gene is provided by the infected individual , in whom it resides in an innocuous state .
The infectious prion then hijacks the body ’ s machinery , reprogramming it into a willing executioner of prion replication .
Since the disease ’ s outbreak , it has been revealed that many common ailments – including Alzheimer ’ s disease and Parkinson ’ s disease – have similar properties .
While no cure has been found , some progress has been made , particularly on early detection of prions , which had been a daunting problem .
Sensitive detection of pathogens , such as HIV , typically relies on the presence of nucleic acids ( DNA or RNA ) , which are absent in prions .
Recently , however , effective methods for amplifying prions have been developed , which could enable detection of the pathogen before it can damage its host .
Moreover , there is hope that an effective vaccination can be developed .
Introducing an innocuous version of a pathogen into the body causes the immune system to produce antibodies , which will neutralize the “ wild ” pathogen if it enters the body later .
A decade ago , my laboratory showed that an anti-prion antibody could significantly delay – and , in some cases , prevent – infection in mice that had been exposed to prions .
But several problems have emerged .
The host ’ s body produces its own version of the prion protein , and it is difficult to create a high-quality antibody against a body ’ s own components .
As a result , rather than trying to induce immunity , researchers must develop prefabricated anti-prion antibodies that can be delivered directly to patients .
This solution might work for related diseases like Alzheimer ’ s , but it has its own array of problems , including the difficulty of driving such antibodies from the injection site to the brain .
Severe side effects in animals , meanwhile , may prohibit the antibodies ’ use in humans altogether .
Another possibility could be to eradicate prion diseases in livestock by removing the host ’ s prion gene .
The Swiss scientist Charles Weissmann demonstrated this using mice in a series of experiments two decades ago .
Using recently developed “ zinc finger nuclease ” technology , any given gene can be removed from an animal ’ s DNA .
In fact , prion-free sheep and cows have already been created .
These animals cannot host infectious prions .
While the quality of their meat remains to be assessed , they can provide a safe source of biological agents – such as therapeutic antibodies and growth factors – for use in human medicine .
