The IMF ’ s Next Mission ?
The world economy is increasingly threatened by volatile market reactions to global imbalances at a time when the IMF has largely lost its original raison d ’ être as the world ’ s central monetary institution .
These two developments should stimulate the Fund to claim a new purpose as the world ’ s reserve manager .
In the 1960 ’ s , the IMF managed the problems of all the major economies , and in the 1980 ’ s and 1990 ’ s , it developed as a crisis manager for emerging markets .
But that job is much harder now , because of the size of some of the big emerging economies .
And , in any case , the focus of financial nervousness is shifting back to the world economy ’ s core countries , such as the United States , the United Kingdom , and Australia , which are funding large current account deficits with surpluses from much poorer countries .
These surpluses reflect high savings rates , both in the private and the public sector , in oil-producing and emerging Asian economies , which have resulted in their rapid accumulation of foreign reserves .
But this is hardly a blessing for these countries .
Their reserves have become so large that even the announcement of a small shift in assets – say , from euros to dollars – can move markets and cause disruptions and panics .
Like past reserve regimes that offered a choice of assets ( for example , the dollar , the pound , and gold in the interwar period ) , instability is inherent .
The new surplus countries ’ attempts to find alternative reserve assets have been problematic .
Most of the attention has been fixed on China ’ s $ 1 trillion in reserves , and its efforts to maintain the value of those assets .
Diversification from US Treasury bills by investing some $ 3 billion in the Blackstone private equity fund this summer was swiftly followed by an embarrassing collapse in value .
On the receiving end , industrial countries ’ governments are anxious that new sovereign wealth funds ( SWF ’ s ) are being used strategically , rather than simply following the logic of the market .
Even the successful model for SWF ’ s , Singapore ’ s Temasek , which for a long time went largely unnoticed , is now attracting a level of attention that its owners and managers never wanted .
The growing anxiety is understandable .
After all , given that emerging market economies ’ central banks and SWF ’ s nowadays effectively dominate capital markets , outcomes no longer result from the interplay of millions of independent guesses , decisions , or strategies .
When entities of such a size make decisions , they are bound to act in a strategic way .
All the parties begin to suspect political manipulation .
But the resulting controversies can be resolved , and the political venom neutralized , through surveillance by multilateral institutions that are committed to achieving an overarching good .
That should be the IMF ’ s core function .
Today surveillance means , in effect , merely giving advice .
But in the 1960 ’ s – when the IMF still supervised the rules of the Bretton Woods order ’ s par value system before its disintegration in 1971 – surveillance was linked to the Fund ’ s effectiveness as a major financial intermediary .
The IMF ’ s ability to give powerful advice to the most important countries , such as the UK , was enhanced by these countries ’ dependence on IMF resources .
It was the IMF ’ s financial power that gave it its bite , and that power was enhanced by Fund borrowing , at first from the G-10 , which established the General Arrangements to Borrow .
In the years after the collapse of Bretton Woods , the IMF reinvented itself as a principle vehicle for managing the surpluses that followed the oil price shocks of the 1970 ’ s .
It borrowed from the new surplus countries , which thus partly managed their new assets through the intermediation of the IMF .
As a result , to the Fund could lend to those countries that suffered shocks from the increase in petroleum prices .
Indeed , a large financial actor can play a stabilizing role .
In the past , the counter-cyclical behavior of large private institutions stabilized market expectations during panics .
The house of Rothschild made the first half of the nineteenth century stable .
In the great panics of 1895-6 and 1907 , J.P. Morgan calmed the US economy .
At the time of the Great Depression in the 1930 ’ s , there was no equivalent power .
In 2007 , there are some signs that Goldman Sachs feels obliged to lean against the wind in order to stabilize markets .
The IMF could be a powerful financial stabilizer if it managed a significant part of the new surplus countries ’ reserve assets , for it would be well placed to take bets against speculators .
This would ultimately benefit the reserve assets ’ owners , who , by virtue of accumulating large surpluses , have a similar interest in world economic and financial stability .
At the same time , the management of reserve assets by an internationally controlled asset manager would remove suspicions and doubts about the use of assets for strategic political purposes .
But , to carry out this completely new task , the IMF would need to regain the trust of its members .
The rise in reserves in many Asian countries was a deliberate response to the 1997 financial crisis , which fueled disillusion with the IMF .
So , before it could assume the role of global reserve manager , new surplus countries would need substantially more influence over the Fund ’ s governance .
Only then could they be confident that they would not be subject to politically motivated manipulation .
