As China Turns
This motto helped catalyze China into becoming what it is today : an increasingly materialistic , money-worshipping society that has lost touch with traditional ethics .
The program ’ s “ hero , ” Guo Haizao , is a fair-skinned and innocent 25-year-old woman living near Shanghai .
Initially she follows in her older sister ’ s footsteps in quest of their common dream , to attend one of China ’ s top universities .
But , even with a university degree , life in go-go Shanghai turns out not to be as she had imagined .
“ Why is the world so full of unfairness , with the limelight only splashing on the prettiest spots in the city ? ” she wonders one night , as she worries about her and her sister ’ s struggle to buy a home .
As Song Siming , a handsome , successful , and Audi-driving – but also married – secretary to the Mayor , tells her , “ On those unsightly corners in the dark where dirt , flies , and rats wander , nobody 's paying attention . ”
Song is a resourceful man who oozes charm . Guo soon becomes intoxicated by his air of can-do and success .
When problems arise , he makes a quick phone call and gets things “ settled . ”
Little by little , Guo finds herself taken in by his charm and ability to get things done .
Before long , she is cheating on her boyfriend and swooning into Song ’ s arms and bed .
When Guo overhears fights between her sister and brother-in-law in their crammed rented room , her aspirations to get an apartment through hard work , and to start a family with her boyfriend and soon-to-be husband , begin to fade .
She is tempted by the shortcut Song promises and allows herself to be seduced by him in turn for a large sum of cash and luxury apartment .
Soon she is even pregnant .
Song certainly knows how “ to catch mice ” !
“ Wo Ju ” is an adaptation of a novel about recent skyrocketing housing prices in Chinese cities – especially in Shanghai – and the effect of real-estate fever on young Chinese men and women in today ’ s get-rich-by-any-means China .
Through the soap opera , viewers get a sense of how the Chinese dream has begun to center around property ownership rather than education or love , and how this change has been transforming Chinese society , sometimes in startling ways .
These changes have created a new kind of hope and despair among the generation of Chinese now coming of age .
But , of course , the sub-text is that if this fixation on property has also led to greater pragmatism in affairs of the heart , it has also led to a worrisome property bubble that many economists now fear could soon burst .
Then , because this is a soap opera , Song suddenly dies in a car crash , just as he is rushing to the hospital – while being chased by corruption investigators ! – to check on his sweetheart and their unborn baby boy .
But , as it happens , only days before Guo secretly had an abortion , right after a dramatic fight with Song ’ s wife .
As fantastic and convoluted as the plot sometimes gets , “ Wo Ju ” offers a truthful look at what animates contemporary Chinese society : property , money , sex , cars , and power .
Perhaps because it captures the zeitgeist so well , the program has become hugely popular , so much so that it has recently caught the attention of media censors .
Indeed , its realistic use of profanity and its depiction of the spiritual vacuum that grips China got it banished from one of Beijing ’ s TV channels .
While the official media are flooding television and cinema screens with propaganda about Confucius , ancient fairytales , and kung fu epics , “ Wo Ju ” engages a broad cross-section of contemporary society , which sees in it troubling aspects of their own lives : official corruption , mistresses , even house slaves .
As Song arrogantly says to Guo before he dies , “ As long as it ’ s a problem that we can solve with money , then it ’ s not a big problem . ”
The program has caused a tsunami of online reflection .
Many Web sites and bulletin boards have run surveys with questions like , “ If you were Guo Haizao , would you choose Song Siming and an apartment or Xiaobei ( the dumped boyfriend ) and true love ? ”
On one of China ’ s largest sites , 46 % picked Song , while only 22 % chose the young boyfriend , a choice that suggests where the new generation ’ s values now lay .
The traditional virtues of “ true love ” have been replaced by pragmatism and a willingness to become a mistress before youth expires and all chances of getting a good apartment are lost .
After all , many netizens now argue , does not such a practical course of action save many years of hard work ?
One recent Internet match-making effort attracted applications from more than 10,000 young women , all seeking a chance to marry a Shenzhen multi-millionaire sight unseen .
That was not the first lottery marriage in today ’ s China , and it surely will not be the last .
The most interesting thing about “ Wo Ju ” may be that most viewers do not dislike Song , the string-pulling mayor ’ s secretary .
Indeed , while Song may be cast as an anti-hero , in contemporary China , he is considered a “ good catch . ”
More and more young women are making just such practical choices : putting an apartment before love and pragmatism before principle .
