The Great Escapism
NEW YORK – Barack Obama , however mixed his accomplishments to date as US president , has sought to rebrand America and reclaim its former signature asset : its ability to embody universally admired values . As popular culture is usually the way those values are transmitted , it is worth considering what it is about American cinema , music , and popular literature that makes them so compelling to many other parts of the world .
After all , much of what America once monopolized in Hollywood movies and other pop-culture exports is now being reproduced locally .
Bollywood competes with California in terms of glamorous stars and big production numbers ;
Japan and South Korea mint their own pop singers and fashion trends .
But consider Entourage , the American TV show that centers on a rising male film star and his posse of dudes . Or a recent article in The New Yorker about two scruffy young chefs who have set out across the country to start the great adventure of running their own crazy restaurant , called Animal .
Or Swingers , the 1996 worldwide hit movie about a twenty-something guy in Hollywood and his band of male friends who drag him to Las Vegas to mend his broken heart .
One of America ’ s last competitive cultural exports , it seems , is the post-adolescent male escape fantasy .
Ever since Huck Finn took his friends down the Mississippi River on a raft , American men have created and consumed fantasies of setting out with their males friends for parts unknown , or of traveling in an all-male group to have adventures closer to home .
In the 1950 ’ s , Jack Kerouac took his buddy careening across the country in On the Road .
A decade later , Ken Kesey took his buddies , the Merry Pranksters , across the country in the other direction in their painted bus ( granted , with female hangers-on ) .
From Easy Rider in the 1960 ’ s to the Harold and Kumar movies today , the “ buddy film ” – typically involving travel-based adventure – has become an established genre .
Savvy American politicians even make use of it for their own purposes .
Both John McCain and George W. Bush cleverly tapped into this fantasy – with its easy bonhomie and absence of wives and kids – to capture the hearts of the male journalists aboard their campaign buses , who could imagine themselves once again as tough , unfettered , and venturesome Kerouac figures .
President Obama even gave the actor who played Kumar a job in the White House ( which he has now left to return to Hollywood ) .
As you survey the rest of global culture , the male-escape scenario is hard to spot emerging from any other place .
Save for the recent hit film 3 Idiots , Bollywood doesn ’ t send groups of Indian guys off on merry , irresponsible adventures .
Male protagonists in French films don ’ t take off together in convertibles for the Pyrenees ; they stay home and urbanely have affairs .
Nor does Japanese pop culture manufacture escape fantasies aimed at Japanese men .
Yet men all over the world tune in to American-made fantasies of male bonding and male escape – escape from the bonds of work and domesticity , and , if only for a youthful period of the male lifespan , from long-term commitment to women themselves .
This fantasy , derived , no doubt , from American history – from westward expansion and Manifest Destiny , from the Gold Rush and a settlement policy that valorized staking a claim to the wilderness and subduing it – is powerfully appealing to men in general , and to many women as well .
Indeed , American women have recently begun to film and export their own versions of this fantasy – starting with the groundbreaking 1991 film Thelma and Louise and continuing in a growing trend of girl-group travel and escape packages .
Other countries ’ lack of male escape fantasies in their popular culture may be no less historically rooted : less transient , more traditional societies will not warmly welcome homegrown films and pop songs about local young men taking off and fleeing their responsibilities .
But , judging by the appetite shown worldwide for this narrative , it seems clear that identification with such adventures is almost universal .
It seems to speak to a deep longing in men – and in the women who also enjoy these films and TV shows – for a time in one ’ s life when one could dash toward freedom , adventure , and self-reinvention , unencumbered by social ties and family obligations .
At its best , this genre is part of America ’ s gift to the rest of the world .
At its worst , it is part of America ’ s curse .
That whiff of careening , heedless adolescent fecklessness is part of what makes the archetypal American male presence alarming when he is equipped with a global cudgel .
To the rest of the world , those same qualities are part of his charm only so long as he stays safely up on the screen .
