The American Hangover
NEW YORK – As turmoil stalks America ’ s financial markets and protests fill its streets , Americans ’ lifestyle choices are evolving in a telling way : once seen by the rest of the world as an exuberant teenager – the globe ’ s extrovert , exporter of rock ’ n ’ roll and flashy Hollywood movies – Americans are now becoming decidedly withdrawn , or at least inward-looking .
Trends in leisure activities reflect that change : frugality and making do are in ; gaudy consumerism is out .
This change is due to the fragile economy , of course , but I believe that it is also psychological .
After two wars and a half-dozen undeclared conflicts in the past decade , America has entered a period of unprecedented cultural hibernation .
Gardening , scrapbooking , knitting , and cooking have all become newly , shabbily chic . & # 160 ; In the urban neighborhoods to which the young and hip are moving , city garden plots and heirloom tomatoes grown in window boxes have replaced Lexuses and Priuses .
Other young hipsters have moved farther out into the country in search of an idyllic new narrative fantasy .
The young couple – he with a beard and she in a sundress and rubber boots – are homesteading in the Hudson River Valley with a flock of chickens , or in New Mexico in an ecofriendly straw-bale house .
They have replaced the young couple of five years ago – he with the hedge fund , she with interior decorators – in a McMansion in Westchester County .
The food sections of urban newspapers that , five years ago , would have covered the latest fusion cuisine , now run dreamy profiles of the guy with the Ivy League degree who has stepped off the grid , and done fine for himself by starting a line of homemade pickles .
Farmers ’ markets , wood stoves , solar panels , and Agway farm-supply stores are the new focus of aspirational dreams for people who not long ago were high on boundless credit , consuming luxury brands scaled down for the middle class , and fantasizing about the kind of life on display in glossy magazines .
Even Hollywood story lines now echo this desire to escape to a “ simpler life , ” with its aversion to excessive wealth and indulgence .
In the soon-to-be-released “ We Bought a Zoo , ” a single father heals his family by moving to the country and homesteading with a menagerie of wild animals – shabby house and spectacular natural vistas guaranteeing a redemptive setting for domestic life .
Other films cast excess as nauseating .
The blockbuster “ The Hangover Part II ” depicts three young male friends engaged in a night of carousing in Thailand , in which they are free to satisfy every appetite – from transsexual sex workers to drugs and chaos of all kinds . At the end , however , the lead character indulges his longing for marriage , family , and the quiet life of a dentist .
In a parallel plot aimed at women , the movie “ Bridesmaids ” features a bride-to-be who is about to get “ everything ” – in the guise of a dull but extremely affluent groom – but flees the excess around her and escapes to her humble apartment .
After bank bailouts , Bernard Madoff-type financial scandals , and a housing bubble that left Americans high and dry , it is as if the collective unconscious is recasting life on yachts and perfectly manicured golf courses as distasteful , and thrifty , often rural simplicity as a virtuously cleansing relief .
Not surprisingly , the last time American culture had such a reversal of iconography was during the Great Depression , when films like “ The Grapes of Wrath ” cast down-to-earth simplicity – versus the corruption of wealthy elites – as a shining virtue .
( “ Whenever there ’ s a cop beating up a guy , I ’ ll be there … .wherever people are eatin ’ the stuff they raise and livin ’ in the houses they build , I ’ ll be there , too , ” as Tom Joad said ) .
Ronald Reagan asserted in 1980 that it was “ morning in America , ” but in America now , it is the morning after .
This drive toward an off-the-grid , eat-what-you-raise , bike-there-on-your-own , solar-powered collective fantasy is inevitable : Americans were pumped full of hope that more consumption would make them happier , and instead were left with a pile of debt .
They were asked to admire the top of the income pyramid , only to find that they were looking at a pyramid scheme .
It is no wonder therefore , that a kind of survivalist chic has become the updated version of the radical , communal chic of the 1960 ’ s .
Americans have lost their faith in those who , in the boom times , purred , “ Trust us . ”
The new American dream – a flock of chickens and a jar of pickles – represents the insight that the only people whom Americans can trust in a crisis are themselves .
