The Government Debt Bomb
STANFORD – As economies around the world return to growth after the deepest recession in a generation , renewed attention is being paid to enormous fiscal deficits and vast expansions of government debt .
This year ’ s projected deficits ( as a share of GDP ) are estimated to be a remarkable 13.5 % for the United States , twice the previous record at the depth of the horrific early 1980 ’ s recession .
Among other major economies : the United Kingdom , 14.4 % ;
France , 8.2 % ;
India , 8.0 % ;
Japan , 7.4 % ;
Italy , 5.4 % ;
Germany , 4.7 % ;
China 4.2 % ; and Canada , 2.4 % .
In addition to the automatic decline in tax revenues and increase in social-welfare spending during a recession , many nations added large spending increases and / or tax cuts to try to stimulate their economies .
The increase in the deficit is the sum of these “ automatic stabilizers ” and discretionary programs .
The discretionary policy response has been largest in the US , at a cumulative 4.8 % of GDP , and China , at 4.4 % , over 2008-2010 , while it has been modest in Germany and Canada , and smaller in the UK , France , and India .
The automatic increase in the deficit has also been largest in the US , modest in the UK and Germany , and smaller in Japan , India , Canada , China , France , and Italy .
These automatic effects should soon begin to reverse as economic activity recovers , but there is much debate , including at the G-8 and G-20 meetings , over whether the discretionary stimulus should be extended or ended , repeated or reversed .
Since every dollar , euro , yen , rupee , or yuan borrowed today requires the same present value in future interest payments – and therefore future taxes – there are important long-term costs to balance against whatever benefits the deficits create today ; there is no fiscal free lunch .
Some politicians , for example President Barack Obama in the US , herald their fiscal stimulus programs as effective responses to the economic crisis .
They pledge allegiance to long-term fiscal responsibility , yet propose budgets with large deficits for years to come and big hikes in the debt-GDP ratio .
Politicians from political parties out of power denounce the deficits and debt as a horrific legacy for our children and an insurmountable burden on the economy .
In the US in the 1980 ’ s , Democrats excoriated President Ronald Reagan on deficits ; Republicans now excoriate President Obama on his much larger deficits and debt .
Deficits are convenient for politicians as they hide and delay the true tax cost of spending .
But when are deficits desirable , and when are they damaging ?
The impact of the economy on the budget balance is swifter , surer , and larger than the impact of the budget balance on the economy .
All economists agree that we should allow the automatic stabilizers to work .
Discretionary fiscal policy is often clumsy in responding to recession , given the usual lags in legislative and administrative implementation and the politics of pork and special interests surrounding spending and tax decisions .
The current US stimulus has been much slower to enter the economy than promised .
Indeed , most of the stimulus money will be spent after the recession “ appears to have ended , ” and the evidence is that so far it has had little effect .
It is appropriate to finance ( some ) long-lived public-capital investment by government borrowing , since the benefits will accrue for many years , and future taxpayers might equitably bear part of the burden .
This is standard practice for US state and local governments .
It is also more efficient to keep tax rates stable over time , and thus to finance with debt temporary large spending needs such as military buildups during war ( or to prevent war ) , while reversing the debt buildup thereafter .
The US federal government ’ s borrowing exceeded tax revenues in every year since the end of World War II .
Such debt finance is both equitable and efficient .
But little in the current stimulus programs is justifiable on either of the grounds mentioned above .
The level , composition , and growth of spending and taxes are the fundamental fiscal indicators .
Even with a balanced budget , there is still the issue of the effectiveness and efficiency of spending , as each dollar of government revenue costs the economy about $ 1.30 , given the distortions to private decisions caused by taxes .
Large deficits shift the bill for today ’ s consumption to future generations and can crowd out private investment , thereby slowing the improvement of living standards .
Deficits are riskier if the level of the national debt , the accumulation of all previous deficits , is high or rapidly rising relative to GDP .
The debt-GDP ratio varies a lot by country .
It will double in the US unless President Obama reverses course , as President Bill Clinton did when he and a Republican Congress balanced the budget .
Deficits are problematic if they finance consumption , not productive public investment on infrastructure .
The crisis funding of the modest delayed infrastructure component of most stimulus programs suggests that much of it would not pass a rigorous cost-benefit test .
Some US federal agencies are trying to spend ten times their previous budgets – not a recipe for efficiency or speed .
And deficits can lead to inflation if central banks monetize the government debt , a serious concern in financial markets , as China has warned America .
These concerns require that fiscal exit strategies be planned , announced , and implemented soon , before the stimulus programs become permanently entrenched , develop powerful dependent constituencies , and greatly increase the risk of rising interest rates , inflation , and taxation .
On this score , citizens everywhere , from Boston to Berlin , Mumbai to Moscow , are right to be appalled at the explosion of government debt .
