The Battle for Bahrain
MANAMA - The fervor for change that inspired revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt is now rocking Bahrain . But the uprising in Manama differs from the mass protests that turned out longtime rulers in North Africa . Indeed , sectarian fault lines , together with the security forces ’ complete fealty to the monarchy , seriously diminish the likelihood of peaceful regime change .
Whereas Tunisia and Egypt are relatively homogeneous countries – Sunni Muslims constitute more than 90 % of their inhabitants – Bahrain ’ s Sunnis , including the royal family and the country ’ s political and economic elite , comprise only about one-third of the population .
The rest are Shia .
Each of these groups is making different , if not contradictory , demands .
The Shia focus on political reforms that would reflect their majority status . Aggrieved Sunnis , however , want socio-economic changes , such as affordable housing . And , whereas Egyptian protesters of all types found common ground in insisting that President Hosni Mubarak resign , Bahrainis will find it almost impossible to agree on a rallying cry .
The ruling al-Khalifa family will not relinquish its power willingly . To preserve itself , the regime relies on imported security forces that are beholden only to the royal family . Drawn from Jordan , Pakistan , and Yemen , they are not reluctant to beat and kill protesters , for they know that any change at the top would mean defeat not only for the al-Khalifas , but for themselves as well .
Indeed , Bahraini security forces have been ruthless in their attacks against demonstrators , killing six .
Given this alignment of forces , and the bloodshed that has already occurred in Manama ’ s Pearl Square , the scenes from Cairo of protesters arm-in-arm with soldiers and hugging tank crews are unlikely to be replayed here .
Moreover , whereas in Egypt , historically a stable country , 18 days of chaos were enough to convince the military to restore order by ousting Mubarak , Bahrainis have greater experience with social unrest than Egyptians or Tunisians do .
Political instability is a way of life in Bahrain .
From the turmoil in the 1920 ’ s , following administrative reforms , to labor protests in the 1950 ’ s , the country is accustomed to agitation . As a result , factional strife is unlikely to panic the rulers and is even less likely to persuade them that the king must abdicate to save the country .
The legislature ’ s role and influence in these three countries also vary . In Tunisia and Egypt , authoritarian regimes allowed no political space for dissenting voices .
When Mubarak felt his power was slipping and reached out to his adversaries , he found disorganized opposition parties with little political experience and no support in society . They could not formulate coherent positions and practical demands .
Instead , they clung to hard-line positions , leaving Mubarak unable to find a solution to the impasse .
But here in Bahrain , the situation is different . Opposition parties have been active for almost a decade , and have significant representation in the legislature .
The leading opposition group , al-Wifaq , has 18 seats in the 40-member parliament . In talks with the opposition , the monarchy will find seasoned politicians ready to bargain over long-held demands . And , with widespread support among its constituents , al-Wifaq can do much to reduce tensions .
King Hamad has a number of other options available to him . Because citizens have so many grievances , he can do much to placate them . He can address Shia claims of discrimination by offering them more jobs in government ministries . He can promise to invest state funds in their run-down communities . He can mollify both Shia and Sunnis by granting them affordable housing . He can appease both factions by ending a naturalization policy that confers citizenship on foreign-born Sunnis , eroding the Shia majority .
And he can dismiss the prime minister , Khalifa bin Salman al-Khalifa , who has exhausted many on both sides of the sectarian divide during his 40 years in power .
In short , Bahrain ’ s rulers have many cards to play – and the international response to the uprising seems likely to strengthen the regime further . Bahrain is , after all , a key American ally , hosting the United States Navy ’ s Fifth Fleet , which patrols the Persian Gulf and keeps Iran in check . While the US has urged the Bahraini government to rein in its security forces , it is evidently unwilling to press for regime change .
Keeping its naval bases will be a top US priority – one that will ultimately shape its response to the situation in Bahrain .
Saudi Arabia , too , can be expected to do everything in its power to prevent the al-Khalifas ’ fall . Bahrain is the Kingdom ’ s most loyal ally in the region , and the Saudis fear that sectarian unrest could spread to the country ’ s eastern region , where a Shia-minority nurses long-held grievances .
For years , the Saudis have propped up the Bahraini regime by providing free oil and funding its budget . When unrest erupted , Saudi Arabia reportedly dispatched military units to bolster Bahrain ’ s paltry armed forces .
Change may be coming to much of the Middle East .
But , with Bahrain ’ s social fault lines too wide to bridge , the regime willing to resort to brutal violence to crush any uprising , and the international community prepared to look the other way , the protesters in Manama should be prepared for defeat .
