Why India Slowed
NEW DELHI – For a country as poor as India , growth should be what Americans call a “ no-brainer . ”
It is largely a matter of providing public goods : decent governance , security of life and property , and basic infrastructure like roads , bridges , ports , and power plants , as well as access to education and basic health care .
Unlike many equally poor countries , India already has a strong entrepreneurial class , a reasonably large and well-educated middle class , and a number of world-class corporations that can be enlisted in the effort to provide these public goods .
Why , then , has India ’ s GDP growth slowed so much , from nearly 10 % year on year in 2010-11 to 5 % today ?
Was annual growth of almost 8 % in the decade from 2002 to 2012 an aberration ?
I believe that it was not , and that two important factors have come into play in the last two years .
First , India probably was not fully prepared for its rapid growth in the years before the global financial crisis .
For example , new factories and mines require land .
But land is often held by small farmers or inhabited by tribal groups , who have neither clear and clean title nor the information and capability to deal on equal terms with a developer or corporate acquirer .
Not surprisingly , farmers and tribal groups often felt exploited as savvy buyers purchased their land for a pittance and resold it for a fortune .
And the compensation that poor farmers did receive did not go very far ; having sold their primary means of earning income , they then faced a steep rise in the local cost of living , owing to development .
In short , strong growth tests economic institutions ’ capacity to cope , and India ’ s were found lacking .
Its land titling was fragmented , the laws governing land acquisition were archaic , and the process of rezoning land for industrial use was non-transparent .
India is a vibrant democracy , and , as the economic system failed the poor and the weak , the political system tried to compensate .
Unlike in some other developing economies , where the rights of farmers or tribals have never stood in the way of development , in India politicians and NGOs took up their cause .
Land acquisition became progressively more difficult .
A similar story played out elsewhere .
For example , the government ’ s inability to allocate resources such as mining rights or wireless spectrum in a transparent way led the courts to intervene and demand change .
And , as the bureaucracy got hauled before the courts , it saw limited upside from taking decisions , despite the significant downside from not acting .
As the bureaucracy retreated from helping businesses navigate India ’ s plethora of rules , the required permissions and clearances were no longer granted .
In sum , because India ’ s existing economic institutions could not cope with strong growth , its political checks and balances started kicking in to prevent further damage , and growth slowed .
The second reason for India ’ s slowdown stems from the global financial crisis .
Many emerging markets that were growing strongly before the crisis responded by injecting substantial amounts of monetary and fiscal stimulus .
For a while , as industrial countries recovered in 2010 , this seemed like the right medicine .
Emerging markets around the world enjoyed a spectacular recovery .
But , as industrial countries , beset by fiscal , sovereign-debt , and banking problems , slowed once again , the fix for emerging markets turned out to be only temporary .
To offset the collapse in demand from industrial countries , they had stimulated domestic demand .
But domestic demand did not call for the same goods , and the goods that were locally demanded were already in short supply before the crisis .
The net result was overheating – asset-price booms and inflation across the emerging world .
In India , matters were aggravated by the investment slowdown that began as political opposition to unbridled development emerged .
The resulting supply constraints exacerbated inflation .
So , even as growth slowed , the central bank raised interest rates in order to rebalance demand and the available supply , causing the economy to slow further .
To revive growth in the short run , India must improve supply , which means shifting from consumption to investment .
And it must do so by creating new , transparent institutions and processes , which would limit adverse political reaction .
Over the medium term , it must take an axe to the thicket of unwieldy regulations that make businesses so dependent on an agile and cooperative bureaucracy .
One example of a new institution is the Cabinet Committee on Investment , which has been created to facilitate the completion of large projects .
By bringing together the key ministers , the committee has coordinated and accelerated decision-making , and has already approved tens of billions of dollars in spending in its first few meetings .
In addition to more investment , India needs less consumption and higher savings .
The government has taken a first step by tightening its own budget and spending less , especially on distortionary subsidies .
Households also need stronger incentives to increase financial savings .
New fixed-income instruments , such as inflation-indexed bonds , will help .
So will lower inflation , which raises real returns on bank deposits .
Lower government spending , together with tight monetary policy , are contributing to greater price stability .
If all goes well , India ’ s economy should recover and return to its recent 8 % average in the next couple of years .
Enormous new projects are in the works to sustain this growth .
For example , the planned Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor , a project with Japanese collaboration entailing more than $ 90 billion in investment , will link Delhi to Mumbai ’ s ports , covering an overall length of 1,483 kilometers ( 921 miles ) and passing through six states .
The project includes nine large industrial zones , high-speed freight lines , three ports , six airports , a six-lane expressway , and a 4,000-megawatt power plant .
We have already seen a significant boost to economic activity from India ’ s construction of its highway system .
The boost to jobs and growth from the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor , linking the country ’ s political and financial capitals , could be significantly greater .
To the extent that democratic responses to institutional incapacity will contribute to stronger and more sustainable growth , India ’ s economic clouds have a silver lining .
But if India ’ s politicians engage in point-scoring rather than institution-building , the current slowdown may portend stormy weather ahead .
