A Death in Galway
NEW YORK – The case of Savita Halappanavar , a 31-year-old dentist from India who had moved , with her husband , to Ireland , continues to reverberate around the world .
Halappanavar , an expectant mother , died after her doctors , citing Ireland ’ s legal prohibition of abortion , refused to remove her 17-week-old fetus , despite allegedly acknowledging that the fetus was not viable and placing Halappanavar in an intensive-care unit as her condition deteriorated .
Indian activists are outraged .
“ While there is no single law specific to men that states when , where , or how medical care should be provided , governments enact laws that prescribe , confuse , and curtail a woman ’ s access to safe abortion services , ” Anjali Sen , the South Asia director of the International Planned Parenthood Federation , pointed out .
“ Right and necessary care could have saved her life .
It is inexcusable that doctors , instead of undertaking efforts to save her , watched her die . ”
Halappanavar suffered extreme pain on October 21 .
She was miscarrying , and , according to her husband , repeatedly asked for a termination after being told that the fetus would not survive .
But Halappanavar and her husband were then informed that Ireland is a Catholic country ; the fetus still had a heartbeat , so the procedure was out of the question .
Halappanavar died from septicemia , which her family is certain would not have developed if the termination had been carried out .
Protests in Ireland have put Prime Minister Enda Kenny on the spot , with activists there , like those in India , arguing that Halappanavar died because of a theocratic approach to health care .
Irish abortion-rights activists point out that , legally , the life of the fetus does not take precedence over the life of the mother in their country , but it does take precedence over the health of the mother – a distinction that American abortion opponents have long sought to replicate in the United States .
The Halappanavar case thus reverses the Western stereotype of Eastern societies as preserves of superstition and religious extremism .
Halappanavar ’ s death resulted from the fanatical , atavistic behavior of a Western theocracy , while Indian protesters and lawmakers have upheld the scientific , rationalist ethos of the Enlightenment .
We in the West are so used to “ our ” religious fanatics that we rarely view them as we do the East ’ s religious fanatics .
But Halappanavar ’ s death leaves us with no choice .
A non-Catholic , slowly being poisoned by a fetus that was no longer viable , was asked to accept that care would be withheld from her because the Pope , acting on the orders of St. Paul , was staying the hand of her doctors .
One can imagine the furor if a Western , non-Muslim woman had died because an Imam had refused her medical care for religious reasons .
The fact that the uproar has extended to India illuminates the many ways in which one can view abortion – even from a religious perspective .
As I noted almost 20 years ago , the Western Christian / Catholic view of abortion is not the only religious interpretation of the issue .
In Hinduism , abortion is considered bad karma ; but that is not the same as the Manichean view defended by fundamentalist Christians and the Catholic Church .
Hindu medical ethics calls for ahimsa , or “ non-harming ” ; that is , a doctor ’ s duty is to do the least harm possible in the situation .
So a Hindu perspective on the Halappanavar case would dictate saving the mother ’ s life if the fetus were endangering it .
In this respect , Hinduism resembles Judaism , even Orthodox Judaism , in which “ the mother ’ s life is more important than that of the fetus . ”
Abortion , while seen in a negative light , is not illegal in India , probably because it is viewed as an issue of personal morality – one ’ s karma shouldering the burden of what we in the West would call “ choice . ”
( Indeed , the abortion problem in India lies at the other end of the spectrum : pervasive termination of female fetuses , owing to a cultural preference for sons , a situation that I would argue inflicts violence against mothers as well . )
The cultural battle over Halappanavar ’ s death is far from settled .
Irish women are certainly right to wonder anew if next time it will be they who are endangered by a religious viewpoint that has nothing to do with their medical needs .
But it is the outcry in India , where protesters are demanding that abortion in Ireland be treated as a private medical decision between a woman and her health-care providers , that may point the way ahead – to a global dialogue about the universal right of women to reproductive health and freedom .
Such a global dialogue initiated in “ the East ” would not be unique .
The growing international demand for the rule of law and human rights was on display recently when Afghan lawmakers tried – futilely , but honorably – to explain the principles of the US Constitution to occupying Americans , who had sought to establish a system of detention without due process .
It is healthy when the West is asked to live up to its own self-image as the bastion of reason and human liberty .
Facing up to its own lapses into fanaticism or barbarity would be a good place to start .
