The Allure of Asia
President Bush is in Asia to attend the Asian Pacific Economic Council in China , but he should pay attention to another Asian summit to which he was not invited .
In December , Malaysia will host an East Asian meeting that deliberately excludes the United States .
According to many close observers , America ’ s attractiveness is declining in the region where the allure , or “ soft power , ” of others has increased .
Asian countries have impressive potential resources for soft power .
The arts , fashion , and cuisine of Asia ’ s ancient cultures have had a strong impact on other parts of the world for centuries , but Asia went through a period of relative decline as it lagged behind the industrial revolution in the West , and this undermined its influence .
In the 1950 ’ s , Asia conjured up images of poverty and starvation .
There was a brief political infatuation among some Westerners in the 1960 ’ s with Nehru jackets and Maoist revolution , but it was brief .
As John Lennon sang in 1968 , “ if you go carrying pictures of Chairman Mao , you ain ’ t gonna make it with anyone anyhow . ”
Asia ’ s resurgence began with Japan ’ s economic success .
By the end of the century , Japan ’ s remarkable performance not only made the Japanese wealthy , but also enhanced the country ’ s soft power .
As the first non-Western country that drew even with the West in modernity while showing that it is possible to maintain a unique culture , Japan has more potential soft-power resources than any other Asian country .
Today Japan ranks first in the world in the number of patents , third in expenditure on research and development as a share of GDP , second in book sales and music sales , and highest for life expectancy .
It is home to three of the top twenty-five multinational brand names ( Toyota , Honda , and Sony ) .
The decade-long economic slowdown of the 1990 ’ s tarnished Japan ’ s reputation , but it did not erase Japan ’ s soft-power resources .
Japan ’ s global cultural influence grew in areas ranging from fashion , food , and pop music to consumer electronics , architecture , and art .
Japanese manufacturers rule the roost in home video games .
Pokemon cartoons are broadcast in 65 countries , and Japanese animation is a huge hit with filmmakers and teenagers everywhere .
In short , Japan ’ s popular culture was still producing potential soft-power resources even after its economy slowed down .
Now , with signs of a reviving economy , Japan ’ s soft power may increase even more .
But there are limits .
Unlike Germany , which repudiated its past aggression and reconciled with its neighbors in the framework of the European Union , Japan has never come to terms with its record in the 1930 ’ s and 1940 ’ s .
The residual suspicion that lingers in countries like China and Korea sets limits on Japan ’ s appeal that are reinforced every time the Japanese prime minister visits the Yasukuni Shrine .
Japan also faces serious demographic challenges .
By mid-century , Japan ’ s population could shrink by 30 % unless it attracts 17 million immigrants – a hard task in a country historically resistant to immigration .
Moreover , the Japanese language is not widely spoken , and Japan ’ s meager English-language skills make it difficult to attract international talent to its universities .
Japan ’ s culture remains inward-looking .
Looking ahead , China and India are the looming giants of Asia , with their huge populations and rapid economic growth rates .
Not only are their military , or “ hard power , ” resources growing ; there are signs that their soft-power resources are increasing , too .
In 2000 , Chinese novelist Gao Xingjian won China ’ s first Nobel prize for literature , followed a year later by the Indian diaspora writer V.S. Naipaul .
The Chinese film “ Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon ” became the highest grossing non-English film , and Indian movies like “ Monsoon Wedding ” were global box-office successes .
Indeed , “ Bollywood ” produces more movies every year than Hollywood .
The list goes on .
Yao Ming , the Chinese star of the National Basketball Association ’ s Houston Rockets , could become another Michael Jordan , and China is set to host the 2008 Summer Olympics .
Large expatriate communities in the US – 2.4 million Chinese and 1.7 million Indians – have increased interest in their home countries among other Americans .
Moreover , transnational connections in the information industry are close , as Western high-tech companies increasingly employ affiliates in Bangalore and Shanghai to provide real-time services .
But the real promise for China and India lies in the future .
A country ’ s soft power rests upon the attractiveness of its culture , the appeal of its domestic political and social values , and the style and substance of its foreign policies .
In recent years , both China and India have adopted foreign policies that have increased their attractiveness to others .
But neither country yet ranks high on the various indices of potential soft-power resources that are possessed by the US , Europe , and Japan .
While culture provides some soft power , domestic policies and values set limits , particularly in China , where the Communist Party fears allowing too much intellectual freedom and resists outside influences .
Both countries have a reputation for corruption in government .
India benefits from democratic politics , but suffers from overly bureaucratized government .
In foreign policy as well , both countries ’ reputations are burdened with the problems of longstanding disputes over Taiwan and Kashmir .
Moreover , in the US , the attraction of an authoritarian China is limited by the concern that it could become a future threat .
The soft power of Asian countries , then , lags behind that of the US , Europe , and Japan , but it is likely to increase .
Indeed , if the US continues to pursue unattractive policies , it may find that its absence from the summit in Malaysia in December is a harbinger of things to come .
