The Big Easing
BRUSSELS – More than three years after the financial crisis that erupted in 2008 , who is doing more to bring about economic recovery , Europe or the United States ?
The US Federal Reserve has completed two rounds of so-called “ quantitative easing , ” whereas the European Central Bank has fired two shots from its big gun , the so-called long-term refinancing operation ( LTRO ) , providing more than € 1 trillion ( $ 1.3 trillion ) in low-cost financing to eurozone banks for three years .
For some time , it was argued that the Fed had done more to stimulate the economy , because , using 2007 as the benchmark , it had expanded its balance sheet proportionally more than the ECB had done .
But the ECB has now caught up .
Its balance sheet amounts to roughly € 2.8 trillion , or close to 30 % of eurozone GDP , compared to the Fed ’ s balance sheet of roughly 20 % of US GDP .
But there is a qualitative difference between the two that is more important than balance-sheet size : the Fed buys almost exclusively risk-free assets ( like US government bonds ) , whereas the ECB has bought ( much smaller quantities of ) risky assets , for which the market was drying up .
Moreover , the Fed lends very little to banks , whereas the ECB has lent massive amounts to weak banks ( which could not obtain funding from the market ) .
In short , quantitative easing is not the same thing as credit easing .
The theory behind quantitative easing is that the central bank can lower long-term interest rates if it buys large amounts of longer-term government bonds with the deposits that it receives from banks .
By contrast , the ECB ’ s credit easing is motivated by a practical concern : banks from some parts of the eurozone – namely , from the distressed countries on its periphery – have been effectively cut off from the inter-bank market .
A simple way to evaluate the difference between the approaches of the world ’ s two biggest central banks is to evaluate the risks that they are taking on .
When the Fed buys US government bonds , it does not incur any credit risk , but it is assuming interest-rate risk .
The Fed acts like a typical bank engaging in what is called “ maturity transformation ” : it uses short-term deposits to finance the acquisition of long-term securities .
With short-term deposit rates close to zero and long-term rates at around 2 % the Fed is earning a nice “ carry , ” equal to about 2 % per year on bond purchases totaling roughly $ 1.5 trillion over the course of its quantitative easing , or about $ 30 billion .
Any commercial bank contemplating a similar operation would have to take into account the risk that its cost of funds increases above the 2 % yield that it earns on its assets .
The Fed can determine its own cost of funds , because it can determine short-term interest rates .
But the fact that it would inflict losses on itself by increasing rates is likely to reduce its room for maneuver .
Its recent announcement that it will keep interests low for an extended period thus might have been motivated by more than concern about a sluggish recovery .
By contrast , the ECB does not assume any maturity risk with its LTRO , because it has explicitly stated that it will charge banks the average of the interest rates that will materialize over the next three years .
It does , however , take on credit risk , because is lending to banks that cannot obtain funding anywhere else .
The large increase in the ECB ’ s balance sheet has led to concern that its LTRO might be stoking inflation .
But this is not the case : the ECB has not expanded its net lending to the eurozone banking system , because the deposits that it receives from banks ( about € 1 trillion ) are almost as large as the amounts that it lends ( € 1.15 trillion ) .
This implies that there is no inflationary danger , because the ECB is not creating any substantial new purchasing power for the banking system as a whole .
The banks that are parking their money at the ECB ( receiving only 0.25 % interest ) are clearly not the same ones that are taking out three-year loans at 1 % .
The deposits come largely from northern European banks ( mainly German and Dutch ) , and LTRO loans go largely to banks in southern Europe ( mainly Italy and Spain ) .
In other words , the ECB has become the central counterparty to a banking system that is de facto segmented along national lines .
The real problem for the ECB is that it is not properly insured against the credit risk that it is taking on .
The 0.75 % spread between deposit and lending rates ( yielding € 7.5 billion per year ) does not provide much of a cushion against the losses that are looming in Greece , where the ECB has € 130 billion at stake .
The ECB had to act when the eurozone ’ s financial system was close to collapse at the end of last year .
But its room for maneuver is even more restricted than that of the Fed .
Its balance sheet is now saddled with huge credit risks over which it has very little control .
It can only hope that politicians deliver the adjustments in southern Europe that would allow the LTRO ’ s recipient banks to survive .
