The Paranoid Style in Economics
NEW DELHI – Why do high-profile economic tussles turn so quickly to ad hominem attacks ?
Perhaps the most well-known recent example has been the Nobel laureate Paul Krugman ’ s campaign against the economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff , in which he moved quickly from criticism of an error in one of their papers to charges about their commitment to academic transparency .
For those who know these two superb international macroeconomists , as I do , it is evident that these allegations should promptly be dismissed .
But there is the larger question of why the paranoid style has become so prominent .
Part of the answer is that economics is an inexact science , with exceptions to almost every pattern of behavior that economists take for granted .
For example , economists predict that higher prices for a good will reduce demand for it .
But students of economics will no doubt remember an early encounter with “ Giffen goods , ” which violate the usual pattern .
When tortillas become more expensive , a poor Mexican worker may eat more of them , because she now has to cut back on more expensive food like meat .
Such “ violations ” occur elsewhere as well .
Customers often value a good more when its price goes up .
One reason may be its signaling value .
An expensive handcrafted mechanical watch may tell time no more accurately than a cheap quartz model ; but , because few people can afford one , buying it signals that the owner is rich .
Similarly , investors flock to stocks that have appreciated , because they have “ momentum . ”
The point is that economic behavior is complex and can vary among individuals , over time , between goods , and across cultures .
Physicists do not need to know the behavior of every molecule to predict how a gas will behave under pressure .
Economists cannot be so sanguine .
Under some conditions , individual behavioral aberrations cancel one another out , making crowds more predictable than individuals .
But , under other conditions , individuals influence one another in such a way that the crowd becomes a herd , led by a few .
The difficulties for economic policymakers do not stop there .
Economic institutions can have different effects , depending on their quality .
In the run-up to the 2008 financial crisis , macroeconomists tended to assume away the financial sector in their models of advanced economies .
With no significant financial crisis since the Great Depression , it was convenient to take for granted that the financial plumbing worked in the background .
Models , thus simplified , suggested policies that seemed to work – & # 160 ; that is , until the plumbing backed up .
And the plumbing malfunctioned because herd behavior – shaped by policies in ways that we are only now coming to understand – overwhelmed it .
So , why not let evidence , rather than theory , guide policy ?
Unfortunately , it is hard to get clear-cut evidence of causality .
If high national debt is associated with slow economic growth , is it because excessive debt impedes growth , or because slow growth causes countries to accumulate more debt ?
Many an econometrician ’ s career has been built on finding a clever way to establish the direction of causality .
Unfortunately , many of these methods cannot be applied to the most important questions facing economic policymakers .
So the evidence does not really tell us whether a heavily indebted country should pay down its debt or borrow and invest more .
Moreover , what seem like obvious , commonsense policy solutions all too often have unintended consequences , because a policy ’ s targets are not passive objects , as in physics , but active agents who react in unpredictable ways .
For example , price controls , rather than lowering prices , often cause scarcity and the emergence of a black market in which controlled commodities cost significantly more .
All of this implies that economic policymakers require an enormous dose of humility , openness to various alternatives ( including the possibility that they might be wrong ) , and a willingness to experiment .
This does not mean that our economic knowledge cannot guide us , only that what works in theory – or worked in the past or elsewhere – should be prescribed with an appropriate degree of self-doubt .
But , for economists who actively engage the public , it is hard to influence hearts and minds by qualifying one ’ s analysis and hedging one ’ s prescriptions .
Better to assert one ’ s knowledge unequivocally , especially if past academic honors certify one ’ s claims of expertise .
This is not an entirely bad approach if it results in sharper public debate .
The dark side of such certitude , however , is the way it influences how these economists engage contrary opinions .
How do you convince your passionate followers if other , equally credentialed , economists take the opposite view ?
All too often , the path to easy influence is to impugn the other side ’ s motives and methods , rather than recognizing and challenging an opposing argument ’ s points .
Instead of fostering public dialogue and educating the public , the public is often left in the dark .
And it discourages younger , less credentialed economists from entering the public discourse .
In their monumental research on centuries of public and sovereign debt , the normally very careful Reinhart and Rogoff made an error in one of their working papers .
The error is in neither their prize-winning 2009 book nor in a subsequent widely read paper responding to the academic debate about their work .
Reinhart and Rogoff ’ s research broadly shows that GDP growth is slower at high levels of public debt .
While there is a legitimate debate about whether this implies that high debt causes slow growth , Krugman turned to questioning their motives .
He accused Reinhart and Rogoff of deliberately keeping their data out of the public domain .
Reinhart and Rogoff , shocked by this charge – tantamount to an accusation of academic dishonesty – released a careful rebuttal , including online evidence that they had not been reticent about sharing their data .
In fairness , given Krugman ’ s strong and public positions , he has been subject to immense personal criticism by many on the right .
Perhaps the paranoid style in public debate , focusing on motives rather than substance , is a useful defensive tactic against rabid critics .
Unfortunately , it spills over into countering more reasoned differences of opinion as well .
Perhaps respectful debate in economics is possible only in academia .
