Why Pay More ?
PRINCETON – When Radosław Sikorski , Poland ’ s foreign minister , went to Ukraine for talks last month , his Ukrainian counterparts reportedly laughed at him because he was wearing a Japanese quartz watch that cost only $ 165 .
A Ukrainian newspaper reported on the preferences of Ukrainian ministers , several of whom have watches that cost more than $ 30,000 .
Even a Communist member of Ukraine ’ s parliament , the Rada , was shown wearing a watch that retails for more than $ 6,000 .
The laughter should have gone in the opposite direction .
Wouldn ’ t you laugh ( maybe in private , to avoid being impolite ) at someone who pays more than 200 times as much as you do , and ends up with an inferior product ?
That is what the Ukrainians have done .
They could have bought an accurate , lightweight , maintenance-free quartz watch that can run for five years , keeping virtually perfect time , without ever being moved or wound .
Instead , they paid far more for clunkier watches that can lose minutes every month , and that will stop if you forget to wind them for a day or two ( if they have an automatic mechanism , they will stop if you don ’ t move them ) .
In addition , the quartz watches also have integrated alarm , stopwatch , and timer functions that the other watches either lack , or that serve only as a design-spoiling , hard-to-read effort to keep up with the competition .
Why would any wise shopper accept such a bad bargain ?
Out of nostalgia , perhaps ?
A full-page ad for Patek Philippe has Thierry Stern , the president of the company , saying that he listens to the chime of every watch with a minute repeater that his company makes , as his father and grandfather did before him .
That ’ s all very nice , but since the days of Stern ’ s grandfather , we have made progress in time-keeping .
Why reject the improvements that human ingenuity has provided to us ?
I have an old fountain pen that belonged to my grandmother ; it ’ s a nice memento of her , but I wouldn ’ t dream of using it to write this column .
Thorstein Veblen knew the answer .
In his classic The Theory of the Leisure Class , published in 1899 , he argued that once the basis of social status became wealth itself – rather than , say , wisdom , knowledge , moral integrity , or skill in battle – the rich needed to find ways of spending money that had no other objective than the display of wealth itself .
He termed this “ conspicuous consumption . ”
Veblen wrote as a social scientist , refraining from rendering moral judgments , though he left readers in little doubt about his attitude toward such expenditure in a time when many lived in poverty .
Wearing a ridiculously expensive watch to proclaim that one has achieved an elevated social standing seems especially immoral for a public official in a country where a significant portion of the population still lives in real poverty .
These officials are wearing on their wrists the equivalent of four or five years of an average Ukrainian ’ s salary .
That tells Ukrainian taxpayers either that they are paying their public servants too much , or that their public servants have other ways of getting money to buy watches that they would not be able to afford otherwise .
The Chinese government knows what those “ other ways ” might be .
As the International Herald Tribune reports , one aspect of the Chinese government ’ s campaign against corruption is a clampdown on expensive gifts .
As a result , according to Jon Cox , an analyst at Kepler Capital Markets , “ it ’ s no longer acceptable to have a big chunky watch on your wrist . ” The Chinese market for expensive watches is in steep decline .
Ukrainians , take note .
Wearing a watch that costs 200 times more than one that does a better job of keeping time says something else , even when it is worn by people who are not governing a relatively poor country .
Andrew Carnegie , the richest man of Veblen ’ s era , was blunt in his moral judgments .
“ The man who dies rich , ” he is often quoted as saying , “ dies disgraced . ”
We can adapt that judgment to the man or woman who wears a $ 30,000 watch or buys similar luxury goods , like a $ 12,000 handbag .
Essentially , such a person is saying ;
“ I am either extraordinarily ignorant , or just plain selfish .
If I were not ignorant , I would know that children are dying from diarrhea or malaria , because they lack safe drinking water , or mosquito nets , and obviously what I have spent on this watch or handbag would have been enough to help several of them survive ; but I care so little about them that I would rather spend my money on something that I wear for ostentation alone . ”
Of course , we all have our little indulgences .
I am not arguing that every luxury is wrong .
But to mock someone for having a sensible watch at a modest price puts pressure on others to join the quest for ever-greater extravagance .
That pressure should be turned in the opposite direction , and we should celebrate those , like Sikorski , with modest tastes and higher priorities than conspicuous consumption .
