A Crisis in Two Narratives
CHICAGO – With the world ’ s industrial democracies in crisis , two competing narratives of its sources – and appropriate remedies – are emerging .
The first , better-known diagnosis is that demand has collapsed because of high debt accumulated prior to the crisis .
Households ( and countries ) that were most prone to spend cannot borrow any more .
To revive growth , others must be encouraged to spend – governments that can still borrow should run larger deficits , and rock-bottom interest rates should discourage thrifty households from saving .
Under these circumstances , budgetary recklessness is a virtue , at least in the short term .
In the medium term , once growth revives , debt can be paid down and the financial sector curbed so that it does not inflict another crisis on the world .
This narrative – the standard Keynesian line , modified for a debt crisis – is the one to which most government officials , central bankers , and Wall Street economists have subscribed , and needs little elaboration .
Its virtue is that it gives policymakers something clear to do , with promised returns that match the political cycle .
Unfortunately , despite past stimulus , growth is still tepid , and it is increasingly difficult to find sensible new spending that can pay off in the short run .
Attention is therefore shifting to the second narrative , which suggests that the advanced economies ’ fundamental capacity to grow by making useful things has been declining for decades , a trend that was masked by debt-fueled spending .
More such spending will not return these countries to a sustainable growth path .
Instead , they must improve the environment for growth .
The second narrative starts with the 1950 ’ s and 1960 ’ s , an era of rapid growth in the West and Japan .
Several factors , including post-war reconstruction , the resurgence of trade after the protectionist 1930 ’ s , the introduction of new technologies in power , transport , and communications across countries , and expansion of educational attainment , underpinned the long boom .
But , as Tyler Cowen has argued in his book The Great Stagnation , once these “ low-hanging fruit ” were plucked , it became much harder to propel growth from the 1970 ’ s onward .
Meanwhile , as Wolfgang Streeck writes persuasively in New Left Review , democratic governments , facing what seemed , in the 1960 ’ s , like an endless vista of innovation and growth , were quick to expand the welfare state .
But , when growth faltered , this meant that government spending expanded , even as its resources shrank .
For a while , central banks accommodated that spending .
The resulting high inflation created widespread discontent , especially because little growth resulted .
Faith in Keynesian stimulus diminished , though high inflation did reduce public-debt levels .
Central banks then began to focus on low and stable inflation as their primary objective , and became more independent from their political masters .
But deficit spending by governments continued apace , and public debt as a share of GDP in industrial countries climbed steadily from the late 1970 ’ s , this time without inflation to reduce its real value .
Recognizing the need to find new sources of growth , towards the end of Jimmy Carter ’ s presidency , and then under Ronald Reagan , the United States deregulated industry and the financial sector , as did Margaret Thatcher in the United Kingdom .
Productivity growth increased substantially in these countries over time , which persuaded Continental Europe to adopt reforms of its own , often pushed by the European Commission .
Yet even this growth was not enough , given previous governments ’ generous promises of health care and pensions – promises made even less tenable by rising life expectancy and falling birth rates .
Public debt continued to grow .
And the incomes of the moderately educated middle class failed to benefit from deregulation-led growth ( though it improved their lot as consumers ) .
The most recent phase of the advanced economies ’ frenzied search for growth took different forms .
In some countries , most notably the US , a private-sector credit boom created jobs in low-skilled industries like construction , and precipitated a consumption boom as people borrowed against overvalued houses .
In other countries , like Greece , as well as under regional administrations in Italy and Spain , a government-led hiring spree created secure jobs for the moderately educated .
In this “ fundamental ” narrative , the advanced countries ’ pre-crisis GDP was unsustainable , bolstered by borrowing and unproductive make-work jobs .
More borrowed growth – the Keynesian formula – may create the illusion of normalcy , and may be useful in the immediate aftermath of a deep crisis to calm a panic , but it is no solution to a fundamental growth problem .
If this diagnosis is correct , advanced countries need to focus on reviving innovation and productivity growth over the medium term , and on realigning welfare promises with revenue capacity , while alleviating the pain of the truly destitute in the short run .
For example , Southern Europe ’ s growth potential may consist in deregulating service sectors and reducing employment protection to spur creation of more private-sector jobs for retrenched government workers and unemployed youth .
In the US , the imperative is to improve the match between potential jobs and worker skills .
People understand better than the government what they need and are acting accordingly .
Many women , for example , are leaving low-paying jobs to acquire skills that will open doors to higher-paying positions .
Too little government attention has been focused on such issues , partly because payoffs occur beyond electoral horizons , and partly because the effectiveness of government programs has been mixed .
Tax reform , however , can provide spur retraining and maintain incentives to work , even while fixing gaping fiscal holes .
Three powerful forces , one hopes , will help to create more productive jobs in the future : better use of information and communications technology ( and new ways to make it pay ) , lower-cost energy as alternative sources are harnessed , and sharply rising demand in emerging markets for higher-value-added goods .
The advanced countries have a choice .
They can act as if all is well , except that their consumers are in a funk , and that “ animal spirits ” must be revived through stimulus .
Or they can treat the crisis as a wake-up call to fix what debt has papered over in the last few decades .
For better or worse , the narrative that persuades these countries ’ governments and publics will determine their future – & nbsp ; and that of the global economy .
