The Nemesis of Turkish Power
PARIS – A few days ago , Turkey ’ s Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan told Al Jazeera , the pan-Arab television network , that he would use his warships to prevent Israeli commandos from again boarding Gaza-bound ships , as they did last year .
And in a speech in Cairo , he declared support for the United Nations ’ recognition of a Palestinian state “ an obligation . ”
So , will a “ Turkish Summer ” be the first , if not the main , strategic result of the “ Arab Spring ” ?
Is the Middle East faced with a neo-Ottoman Turkey ’ s irresistible rise to regional power ?
And could the world be witnessing the “ Orientalization ” of Turkey ?
The Arab revolutions , following on the European Union ’ s resounding “ No , Yes , But ” to Turkey ’ s membership bid , have reinforced among Turks the attraction of the Orient while liberating their mix of nationalistic and religious impulses .
Indeed , Erdoğan makes more references to God in his public statements nowadays than he ever did in the past .
Over the last few years , the Western world has been asking itself , with a mixture of guilt and apprehension , “ Who lost Turkey ” ? But is Turkey , enthralled by its economic and diplomatic successes , now running the risk of losing itself ?
Turkey ’ s government was no better at anticipating the changes in the Arab world than were local regimes and Western powers .
At the end of 2010 , Erdoğan was the ( last ) recipient of a human-rights prize granted by Libya ’ s Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi .
Turkey has also tried , desperately at times , to maintain good relations with Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime in Syria , despite the Syrian government ’ s abominable behavior .
Turkey ’ s position was , to say the least , perceived badly by the “ Arab street . ”
A major reason for Turkey ’ s tougher position towards Israel , one suspects , is Erdoğan ’ s attempt to rebalance the country ’ s regional image .
Despite its difficulty in grasping the reality and depth of the Arab revolutionary process , Turkey is nonetheless more than ever a key player in the region .
It may not be a model in the strict sense of the term , but it is at least a source of inspiration throughout the region , even though much of its record is ambiguous in both essence and performance .
In seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Europe , the “ exoticism ” of the Ottoman Empire was used as a mirror to project Europeans ’ own shortcomings and insecurities .
In France , one spoke of “ Turqueries , ” such as in Moliere ’ s play “ The Bourgeois Gentilhomme . ”
Today , it is the Arab world that tends to use Turkey the way that Europe did in the past .
This time , however , it is modernity , not exoticism , that is the source of fascination .
But , because of its secular tradition ( now being challenged by the current regime ) , its non-Arab identity , its behavior towards its Kurdish minority , and the ambivalence of the Ottoman legacy , Turkey is as much a counter-model as a model .
It is a mirror in which the Arab world projects its fears , as well as its hopes .
At a strategic level , Turkey is correct in thinking that the Arab revolutionary process has weakened its direct rivals .
Iran , for example , is on the verge of losing the faithful junior partner that it had in Syria .
But what will happen if Turkey has to live next to a nuclear-armed Iran ?
Will it have to get the bomb , too ?
Likewise , while Egypt is in the midst of a messy revolution , and must give priority to internal change , it also intends to regain a more visible and influential role within the Palestinian national movement ( s ) and in the region as a whole .
The “ Middle Empire ” of the Middle East will no longer remain a sleeping giant .
Of course , Turkey is less destabilized than its Arab rivals and partners by a revolutionary process that does not directly challenge it .
After all , Turkey is already a functioning democracy .
Turkey is also much less worried about its future than Israel is .
Compared with the small Jewish state , Turkey has an expanding population and a deep awareness of its historical , religious , and cultural affinities with its neighbors .
These important assets make Turkey an “ indispensable nation ” in the region .
So , what threatens Turkey today is Turkey itself .
Turkey is not “ Asian ” only in terms of economic energy and rapid growth : it is also Asian in a more political sense , with the rising temptation of a form of “ Oriental despotism . ”
Indeed , for many years , domestic critics of Erdoğan ’ s government have been denouncing what they describe as the “ Putinization ” of the regime .
Turkey , not the European Union , is currently making its presence felt in the world .
But the course of history may change rapidly .
In reality , Turkey needs Europe as much as Europe needs Turkey .
Europe is for Turkey “ a principle of moderation ” and an enticement to remain democratic .
Turkey is for Europe , beyond its demography , “ a principle of energy ” and a cure for pessimism – even if , as Erdoğan is showing , self-confidence can easily turn into hubris .
