The Pig , the Wolf , and the Dragon
HONG KONG – Political mayhem has broken out in Hong Kong , and has caught China ’ s government , already in the midst of a delicate political transition of its own , completely unprepared .
The 1,200 privileged delegates carefully screened by China to “ elect ” Hong Kong ’ s next Chief Executive ( CE ) on March 25 would normally take their cues from China ’ s rulers .
Indeed , the original electoral script was a one-act , one-star play .
Henry Tang , unkindly nicknamed “ Pig ” by the Hong Kong press for his unimpressive intellect , and a heretofore supporting actor , C. Y. Leung , nicknamed “ Wolf ” for his perceived chilly ruthlessness , were the entire cast .
Both men have impeccable pro-China credentials , a prerequisite to becoming CE .
While there is a third , pro-democracy , candidate standing somewhere in the wings , he doesn ’ t stand a chance , because China would never allow him to get the 601 votes needed to win .
Tang , the preferred candidate of the local business elite and the civil service he once headed , promises to preserve the status quo , which is music to the ears of Hong Kong ’ s “ haves . ”
But a plot twist has complicated his shoo-in campaign , with both Tang and Leung now improvising their lines – peppered with frequent insults – and each consulting the director ( China ) at every turn .
At the same time , the audience , the people of Hong Kong , are howling , hissing , and throwing bottles at everyone on stage – and sometimes at each other .
So , what was supposed to be a boring bit of set-piece theater has become a sensational hit .
Tang , the mild-mannered scion of a textile magnate whose father is a confidant of China ’ s former leader , Jiang Zemin , committed two elementary mistakes .
The first was not confessing quickly enough to his having mistresses , one of whom has a college-age offspring whose father is probably Tang .
Of course , Hong Kong ’ s citizens are far from being puritans , and the sex lives of their leaders are not a primary concern .
But they also understand that anyone running for office should have been prepared for such revelations .
Tang was not .
Instead , it was left to the tabloids to reveal his mistresses , one by one , week after week , like peeling an onion in front of his wife , Hong Kong ’ s people , and the Chinese leadership .
The second error was even more inane .
Local papers discovered that he had illegally built a large , deluxe wine cellar with a spa beneath one of his mansions .
As a senior public servant , he knew that the construction was illegal , and that he should have taken remedial steps to legalize his actions or to abandon it – a matter merely of money , of which he has plenty .
To everyone ’ s disbelief , Tang insisted that he did not have a wine cellar , just a storage room .
Then he trotted out his already-humiliated wife , half in tears , to face the press , blaming her for building the cellar without his prior knowledge while “ gallantly ” assuming responsibility .
Tang ’ s popularity sank , and headed towards single digits .
If China still insists on anointing him , more mayhem is likely to follow .
Leung , however , is also a deeply divisive figure – a man who comes across as someone waiting to settle scores , though no one really knows which ones .
Hong Kong ’ s tycoons , press , intelligentsia , and civil servants , who normally agree on little , find themselves in complete agreement where Leung is concerned : they do not want him as Hong Kong ’ s next leader , despite his favorable popularity ratings .
The tycoons fear that Leung ’ s deeply old-fashioned communist values would hurt their oligopolies .
The press finds him evasive .
The intelligentsia is wary of him as an underground Communist Party member , something that he has denied .
And civil servants believe that Leung harbors resentment of Hong Kong ’ s British colonial legacy , of which the civil service is the most visible .
Not even senior Communist officials in charge of the Hong Kong portfolio wanted Leung , despite his being a suspected “ sleeper ” cadre in the territory .
Locally recruited members do not enjoy seniority in the 70-million-strong Chinese Communist Party .
So , if Leung became Hong Kong ’ s CE , he would jump ahead of many of his seniors in China .
To complicate China ’ s predicament further , Hong Kong ’ s next leader will assume office tainted by retiring CE Donald Tsang ’ s undignified and possibly corrupt links with the city ’ s tycoons .
The press calls him the “ petty greedy CE . ”
Some legislators have called for his impeachment before he leaves office .
Tsang has been a beneficiary of favors by some of Hong Kong ’ s second-tier billionaires who run regulated businesses , such as radio stations and the cross-harbor tunnels .
Sir Donald enjoys riding on their private jets and luxury yachts while on personal holidays abroad .
Before he was shamed into giving it up , he rented a triplex penthouse for his retirement , leased to him at below-market rates by a wealthy businessman , who reportedly threw in a couple of million dollars worth of interior decoration .
Hong Kong ’ s citizens expect their leader to be a fair arbiter of conflicting public and private interests , not an obsequious toady to the rich .
But the most pathetic aspect of Tsang ’ s behavior is his failure to understand that Hong Kong ’ s rich , whose company he pathologically craved to keep , respect only those who are richer , smarter , and perhaps more ruthless than they are .
They despise those who lack serious money and can be seduced by breadcrumbs .
Deng Xiaoping promised “ one country , two systems ” as he negotiated Hong Kong ’ s return to China three decades ago .
But , because China has never succeeded in overcoming its inner control freak , it has backed leaders who are incompetent , corruptible , or universally feared and scorned .
Hong Kong ’ s upcoming “ election ” will be no different .
