The Re-Education of Hong Kong
HONG KONG – After less than 100 days in office , C.Y. Leung , Hong Kong ’ s new Chief Executive , is already in political intensive care .
In record time , he has managed to lose his veneer of competence , credibility , and steely leadership .
One of his cabinet appointees was arrested for corruption within two weeks of Leung ’ s assumption of his official duties .
Another was found to have been a slumlord who owned illegal cage-like flats that he blamed entirely on his wife , denying any involvement whatsoever .
Leung himself was caught with several illegal structures in his house , a violation that he exploited successfully against his rival , Henry Tang , in the election campaign .
Leung has also distinguished himself by inciting a large swathe of school teachers and students to stage massive street protests against his hasty effort to insert a “ national education ” program into the school curriculum in order to “ reconnect ” Hong Kong ’ s young people with the motherland .
For tens of thousands of student protesters , many with their parents in tow , the potential death of an honest education was too much to bear .
The goal of the program , inherited from the previous administration , is a good one : expand knowledge among the young about modern China .
But , as Tang correctly pointed out in response to a question about the protests , the “ devil is in the details . ”
What triggered the uproar was the appearance of a “ model ” textbook , financed by the government and published by a pro-China think tank .
The textbook contains mostly propaganda , including assertions that China ’ s one-party system is wonderful , whereas multiparty democracy as practiced in the United States has created harmful social turbulence .
It offers no discussion of the lethal policies since 1949 that led to the persecution and starvation of tens of millions of Chinese .
Nor does it mention the fratricidal political movements from the Great Leap Forward to the Cultural Revolution .
The program was clearly meant to indoctrinate , not educate .
Massive protests forced Leung to withdraw a deadline to implement the new curriculum .
He has also given the schools flexibility concerning when and perhaps how to introduce it .
Since nearly all schools are dependent on government subsidies , the grant of flexibility is widely perceived to be a tactical delay .
With the job security of schoolmasters at risk , most are sure to implement the program .
The protesters , led by a 15-year-old student , now a folk hero , have retreated , but that , too , is a tactical decision .
The students have promised to continue to fight the program until it is scrapped .
But why does China ’ s government seek to impose the curriculum in the first place ?
After all , Hong Kong has one of the world ’ s most educated populations : the city has , in per capita terms , perhaps more graduates of the world ’ s top 20 universities than anywhere outside of Manhattan .
Nevertheless , after more than 60 years in power , the Chinese Communist Party ( CCP ) continues to retain a deep sense of insecurity .
The Internet may be ubiquitous in modern China , but YouTube and Facebook , so accepted as a part of normal life around the world , are still banned , and the Public Security Bureau has built a vast Internet monitoring system to filter and censor whatever China ’ s leaders believe they must fear .
While dissent is the lifeblood of any open society , for China it is a dangerous poison .
Moreover , China fears that Hong Kong , with a population of less than eight million , might present a systemic problem as an alternative form of government , even though many Communists and their allies hold key positions in Hong Kong ’ s private and public sectors .
Instead of accepting that “ love ” cannot be enforced and must be won , Hong Kong ’ s over-zealous “ patriots ” cannot wait to show their loyalty by trying to mandate primitive propaganda .
Few in Hong Kong are buying the political elite ’ s mantra that the national education program is the “ right ” thing to do .
They know that practically all of the ruling elite ’ s children attend expensive schools in the United States and the United Kingdom , where they would be shielded from the mindless drivel at home .
Leung ’ s son , for example , is reportedly a student at Winchester College , one of the UK ’ s most exclusive boarding schools .
And most , if not all , of the children of the ruling elite in Beijing are in a similar position .
The daughter of Xi Jinping , the presumptive future leader who has now reemerged from an unexplained absence , is attending Harvard under an assumed name .
Disgraced ex-Politburo member Bo Xilai ’ s hard-partying son , Bo Guagua , attended Harrow , Winston Churchill ’ s alma mater , then Oxford and Harvard .
Their parents clearly know that “ national education ” is not needed for a good education .
Unfortunately , Hong Kong ’ s younger generation is losing confidence in democracy .
Popular elections do not translate into representation in a system designed by China to ensure that its allies win a majority every time .
As a result , more and more young people are turning to street demonstrations to make their voices heard .
And , while no one in Hong Kong wants independence from China , continued strong-arm tactics to force Hong Kong to “ love ” China could begin to inspire such sentiments .
Leung ’ s tone-deafness to popular feeling revives one of the main issues that he managed to dodge during the election campaign .
At the time , he denied vehemently that he was a member of the CCP .
He claimed that he had only Hong Kong ’ s interest in mind within the limits of China ’ s “ one country , two systems ” formula .
So far , however , he seems inclined to make one of those systems resemble the other .
But China ’ s national interest is to ensure that Hong Kong remains a first-rate city , modern and open .
Pulling Hong Kong down , in the name of patriotism , can only impede the advance to modernity that all of China needs to become truly great .
