The Hydrogen Solution
RHINECLIFF , NY – Around the world , governments and businesses are constantly being called upon to make big investments in solar , wind , and geothermal energy , as well as biofuels .
But , in the United States , unlike in Europe and Asia , discussion of hydrogen energy and fuel cells as systemic , game-changing technologies is largely absent .
That needs to change : these clean , renewable energy sources promise not only zero-emission baseload power , but also a zero-emission fuel for cars and trucks , the biggest polluters of them all .
By now , many have heard about plans by big carmakers – including Honda , Toyota , and Hyundai – to launch hydrogen fuel-cell cars commercially around 2015 .
Daimler , Ford , and Nissan plan to launch such cars around 2017 .
Germany plans to build at least 50 hydrogen fueling stations by 2015 as the start of a countrywide network .
Japan and Korea have announced similar plans .
But a bigger , largely unreported , message is that some European countries , especially Germany , have launched projects that combine renewables like solar and wind with hydrogen for energy storage , implying clean , zero-emission , stable power grids that require no coal , oil , or nuclear power .
Indeed , the bottom line of a new study by two American researchers , Willett Kempton and Cory Budischak , is that the combination of renewables and hydrogen storage could fully power a large electricity grid by 2030 at costs comparable to those today .
Kempton and Budischak designed a computer model for wind , solar , and storage to meet demand for one-fifth of the US grid .
The results buck “ the conventional wisdom that renewable energy is too unreliable and expensive , ” says Kempton . “ For example , ” according to Budischak , “ using hydrogen for storage , we can run an electric system that today would meet a need of 72 gigawatts , 99.9 % of the time , using 17 GW of solar , 68 GW of offshore wind , and 115 GW of inland wind . ”
Their study lends scientific supportto several such projects underway in Europe aimed at proving that hydrogen gas , converted from water via electrolysis – think of it as natural gas minus the polluting carbon – and stored , for example , in subterranean salt caverns , can smooth out fluctuations inherent in solar and wind energy .
It builds in part on two recent studies at Stanford University and the Carnegie Institution , which conclude that , as Carnegie atmospheric scientist Ken Caldeira put it , “ there is more than enough energy available in winds to power all of civilization . ”
The latest effort , scheduled to get underway outside Brussels this year , is the delightfully named “ Don Quichote ” project ( “ Demonstration of New Qualitative Innovative Concept of Hydrogen Out of wind Turbine Electricity ” ) , designed to highlight utility-scale energy storage and transport , and to provide power for fuel-cell forklift trucks .
The project ’ s partners are a Belgian grocery chain , the European Commission , and various European organizations and companies .
Canada ’ s Hydrogenics is providing the electrolyzer and a fuel cell .
Meanwhile , near Berlin , five companies launched a € 10 million ( $ 13 million ) pilot project at Berlin ’ s main airport in Schoenefeld in December , expanding and converting an existing hydrogen fueling station to CO2 neutrality by linking it to a nearby wind farm .
Earlier last year , two German utilities , Thüga and E.ON , announced two gas demonstration plants .
And the world ’ s first renewable energy / hydrogen hybrid power plant , producing both electricity and hydrogen as car fuel , started production in the fall of 2011 .
The previous year , German Chancellor Angela Merkel laid the plant ’ s cornerstone herself , sending a strong signal of her seriousness about Germany ’ s shift to clean , renewable energy .
Indeed , the much-noted Energiewende , or energy turnaround , that she announced in 2010 is arguably one of the most audacious acts of environmental statesmanship yet .
According to the author and environmentalist Bill McKibben , Germany is in the international forefront of fighting climate change : “ The clear alternative and the best news from 2012 came from Germany , the one big country that ’ s taken climate change seriously .... There were days last summer when [ Germans ] generated more than half the power that they used from solar panels . ”
In fact , hydrogen technology will be an integral part of Germany ’ s evolving renewable / alternative energy-based system .
Germany ’ s move toward renewable energy is likely to have a much broader positive impact .
A six-article series , “ The German Nuclear Exit , ” in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientist argues that the move away from nuclear energy is already “ yielding measurable economic and environmental benefits . ”
More broadly , Lutz Mez , a political scientist at Berlin ’ s Free University , argues that the country ’ s shift has “ observably decoupled energy supply from economic growth , ” and that the “ evolving Energiewende , rather than the nuclear phase-out ” implies “ continuing reforms of social , economic , technological , and cultural policy in Germany . ”
What , one wonders , are lagging nations waiting for ?
