The Endgames in Iraq and Afghanistan
NEW YORK – For nearly a decade , American foreign policy has been dominated by the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan .
As 2011 begins , with 50,000 US soldiers still in Iraq and another 100,000 in Afghanistan , it may not look like that era is coming to an end .
But it is .
Iraq , the second most expensive “ war of choice ” ( after Vietnam ) in American history , is for the United States reaching a level of effort that will no longer absorb substantial military and economic resources or garner significant domestic political attention .
All US troops are due to leave Iraq by the end of 2011 . & # 160 ;
Even if , as seems likely , several thousand soldiers remain , the number will be small and their role limited to advising and training Iraqi military and police forces and conducting missions against terrorists .
Eight years , 4,300 lost American lives , and more than a trillion dollars later , it will be , for better or worse , mostly Iraqis who determine their country ’ s future .
The initial performance of an Iraq run by Iraqis is less than encouraging .
To be sure , there have been a number of relatively fair elections , political life is active , and the economy is growing .
But Iraqi leaders ’ difficulty in forming a government following last spring ’ s elections bodes poorly .
Indeed , a political culture of compromise has not taken root , and the country continues to be divided by geography , ethnicity , religion , and politics .
There is no consensus on how to share the potential wealth from Iraq ’ s vast energy resources .
The Kurdish north is largely autonomous ; where its writ ends and the central government ’ s begins is unsettled .
Iranian influence is pervasive in the south and extensive in the center .
Moreover , the country still experiences regular bombings , and millions of Iraqis are either internally displaced or refugees .
In short , conditions in Iraq , while significantly better than five years ago , are more likely to deteriorate than improve .
Afghanistan is moving at a much slower pace when it comes to US troop reductions .
The Obama administration is likely to remove a small number of US soldiers in July , the date selected by the president for the beginning of the American military drawdown .
But it will be only the beginning of an extended , gradual process of American military reduction , one that looks like it will take four years – and quite possibly longer .
What the US will have to show then for more than a decade of sacrifice and investment in Afghanistan is anybody ’ s guess .
The sum total of the US effort in terms of American money and lives will likely be less than in Iraq , but still substantial .
And it is difficult to be optimistic about Afghanistan , given the Taliban ’ s resilience , the weakness and corruption that plague the government , and the reality that Pakistan will continue to be a sanctuary for the Taliban and other armed groups seeking to gain a foothold ( or more ) in Afghanistan .
An Afghanistan that resembles a normal country is virtually impossible to foresee .
Nevertheless , the decisions to scale back American involvement decisively in Iraq , and gradually in Afghanistan , will ultimately have significant consequences for the US – many of them welcome .
One is financial .
Current US policy toward Iraq and Afghanistan costs roughly $ 150 billion per year , which is more than 20 % of total US defense spending .
Cutting this sum will free up much-needed money for other defense needs and for deficit reduction , arguably the principal national security challenge facing the US .
Troop reductions in Iraq and Afghanistan will also allow the US military to begin to recover from these two conflicts .
Neither soldiers nor equipment can sustain the performance that has been demanded of them .
Recruitment and retention of highly skilled individuals in the US armed forces will increase as the level of effort in the two conflicts winds down , and a great deal of deferred military modernization will occur . & # 160 ; & # 160 ;
More fundamentally , reducing US involvement in Iraq and Afghanistan will permit a rebalancing of US foreign and defense policy .
The two conflicts have absorbed a disproportionate share of the country ’ s resources – military and economic to be sure , but also the time and attention of policymakers and diplomats .
In the short run , doing less in Iraq and Afghanistan will allow the US to concentrate on the two most immediate external threats to US interests : Iran and North Korea .
In the long run , the US needs to generate domestic and international support for regional and global arrangements designed to manage the defining problems of this era , from the spread of nuclear materials and terrorism to maintaining an open world economy and slowing climate change .
This will require a foreign policy that focuses on the emerging powers of the twenty-first century , many of which are in Asia . & # 160 ; & # 160 ; & # 160 ;
The US largely squandered the opportunity to shape the international system in the first decade of the new century .
Iraq and Afghanistan proved to be strategic distractions , and , & # 160 ; particularly in Afghanistan , the US should resist pressures to prolong a substantial military presence .
There is now an opportunity to reorient American foreign policy to concentrate on what matters most .
It is in the interest of the US and the world that this opportunity not be missed .
