The Problem of Priorities
COPENHAGEN – This decade has seen remarkable progress against humanity ’ s greatest challenges .
Consider the declaration of victory over polio in India , which seemed impossible ten years ago .
January marked one year since the country ’ s last reported case .
Or look at the strides made against malaria : over the past decade , the number of cases has been reduced by 17 % , and the number of deaths has dropped by 26 % .
Despite global population growth and economic crisis , absolute poverty – the proportion of people living on less than $ 1.25 a day – is falling in every region of the world .
In fact , the United Nations Millennium Development Goal of cutting extreme poverty in half has been achieved five years ahead of time .
Just a few years ago , the use of male circumcision as a tool in the fight against HIV / AIDS was largely unknown .
Today , UNAIDS and the World Health Organization recommend it as a means to combat HIV / AIDS , and more than ten African countries are implementing strategies to increase its availability . Similarly , the concept of using geo-engineering to respond to climate change has moved from science fiction to an area of serious research .
This decade has also witnessed a 60 % increase in global development aid .
Bill Gates ’ s Giving Pledge challenge has graduated from concept to campaign , with at least $ 125 billion promised to good causes .
But , while the last decade has given much reason for cheer , there are areas in which we cannot claim such success .
Climate change has emerged as one of the most talked-about problems , yet global negotiations have fallen apart , and we are barely any closer to cutting carbon emissions than we were ten years ago .
Similarly , violent conflicts continue to take a toll that is far too high .
And , while the world met the Millennium Development Goal for providing clean drinking water five years early , the provision of sanitation has fallen behind : an astonishing one-third of the world ’ s population , 2.5 billion people , lack access to basic sanitation , and more than one billion people defecate in the open .
Other problems have emerged and grown over the decade .
If current patterns continue , tobacco use may account for some 10 million deaths per year by 2030 , with most occurring in low- and middle-income countries : we might see roughly one billion tobacco-related deaths in this century , compared to 100 million in the twentieth century .
Cardiovascular diseases account for 13 million deaths in low- and middle-income countries each year , more than a quarter of the entire death toll , and risk factors are growing .
The state of challenges facing humanity changes rapidly .
So does our knowledge of how best to respond .
Policymakers and philanthropists need access to regularly updated information on how to use limited funds effectively .
The Copenhagen Consensus project , which I direct , provides a link between academic research and concrete economic analysis that can be used by decision-makers in the real world .
Every four years , researchers and Nobel laureates work to identify the smartest responses to the biggest problems facing humanity .
In 2004 , the Copenhagen Consensus highlighted the need to prioritize measures to control and treat HIV / AIDS .
More money and attention was soon devoted to HIV prevention and treatment .
In 2008 , the Copenhagen Consensus focused the attention of policymakers and philanthropists on investments in micronutrient provision . Public acceptance of this idea led to an increase in efforts to reduce “ hidden hunger ” – that is , people suffering from not getting the nutrients that they need .
This May , more than 30 Nobel laureates and researchers will work together once again to identify the smartest ways to respond to global challenges , based on the latest information about the toughest problems facing our world .
Since 2008 , the global economic crisis has made it even more necessary to ensure that development and aid spending is used wisely , where it can make the biggest difference .
The Copenhagen Consensus project carries out the difficult task of comparing one set of initiatives with another by using fundamental economic tools and principles .
First , teams of world-renowned expert economists write research papers on the costs and benefits of a range of investments that address specific challenges .
Debate and discussion is encouraged by ensuring that three papers are written for each topic , so that a range of expert opinions is available .
This provides a framework with which we can see the full price tag , incorporating all of the costs , benefits , and spin-offs to society from using a limited amount of money in a particular way .
All of this research constitutes a valuable contribution to international development and aid policy .
But the project goes a step further .
A panel of the world ’ s top economists – including four Nobel laureates – test and debate the experts ’ recommendations , and identify the most attractive possibilities .
Alongside the research papers , the Nobel laureates ’ prioritized list provides an important input for policymakers and philanthropists .
While the past decade has witnessed much progress and reason for hope , there are still many important problems to tackle : malnutrition , sanitation , education , civil conflicts , climate change , and natural disasters , to name some of the most prominent .
But are the most prominent problems necessarily those that we should address immediately ?
The research and the prioritized list make us consider the reasons for our current priorities , and challenge us to spend limited resources to do the most good first .
And what are the best things to do first ?
We find out in May .
