Big Banks ’ Tall Tales
WASHINGTON , DC – There are two competing narratives about recent financial-reform efforts and the dangers that very large banks now pose around the world .
One narrative is wrong ; the other is scary .
At the center of the first narrative , preferred by financial-sector executives , is the view that all necessary reforms have already been adopted ( or soon will be ) .
Banks have less debt relative to their equity levels than they had in 2007 .
New rules limiting the scope of bank activities are in place in the United States , and soon will become law in the United Kingdom – and continental Europe could follow suit .
Proponents of this view also claim that the megabanks are managing risk better than they did before the global financial crisis erupted in 2008 .
In the second narrative , the world ’ s largest banks remain too big to manage and have strong incentives to engage in precisely the kind of excessive risk-taking that can bring down economies .
Last year ’ s “ London Whale ” trading losses at JPMorgan Chase are a case in point .
And , according to this narrative ’ s advocates , almost all big banks display symptoms of chronic mismanagement .
While the debate over megabanks sometimes sounds technical , in fact it is quite simple .
Ask this question : If a humongous financial institution gets into trouble , is this a big deal for economic growth , unemployment , and the like ?
Or , more bluntly , could Citigroup or a similar-size European firm get into trouble and stumble again toward failure without attracting some form of government and central bank support ( whether transparent or somewhat disguised ) ?
The US took a step in the right direction with Title II of the Dodd-Frank reform legislation in 2010 , which strengthened the resolution powers of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation . & # 160 ;
And the FDIC has developed some plausible plans specifically for dealing with domestic financial firms .
( I serve on the FDIC ’ s Systemic Resolution Advisory Committee ; all views stated here are my own . )
But a great myth lurks at the heart of the financial industry ’ s argument that all is well .
The FDIC ’ s resolution powers will not work for large , complex cross-border financial enterprises . & # 160 ;
The reason is simple : US law can create a resolution authority that works only within national boundaries .
Addressing potential failure at a firm like Citigroup would require a cross-border agreement between governments and all responsible agencies .
On the fringes of the International Monetary Fund ’ s just-completed spring meetings in Washington , DC , I had the opportunity to talk with senior officials and their advisers from various countries , including from Europe .
I asked all of them the same question : When will we have a binding framework for cross-border resolution ?
The answers typically ranged from “ not in our lifetimes ” to “ never . ”
Again , the reason is simple : countries do not want to compromise their sovereignty or tie their hands in any way .
Governments want the ability to decide how best to protect their countries ’ perceived national interests when a crisis strikes .
No one is willing to sign a treaty or otherwise pre-commit in a binding way ( least of all a majority of the US Senate , which must ratify such a treaty ) .
As Bill Dudley , the president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank , put it recently , using the delicate language of central bankers , “ The impediments to an orderly cross-border resolution still need to be fully identified and dismantled .
This is necessary to eliminate the so-called ‘ too big to fail ’ problem . ”
Translation : Orderly resolution of global megabanks is an illusion .
As long as we allow cross-border banks at or close to their current scale , our political leaders will be unable to tolerate their failure .
And , because these large financial institutions are by any meaningful definition “ too big to fail , ” they can borrow more cheaply than would otherwise be the case .
Worse , they have both motive and opportunity to grow even larger .
This form of government support amounts to a large implicit subsidy for big banks .
It is a bizarre form of subsidy , to be sure , but that does not make it any less damaging to the public interest .
On the contrary , because implicit government support for “ too big to fail ” banks rises with the amount of risk that they assume , this support may be among the most dangerous subsidies that the world has ever seen .
After all , more debt ( relative to equity ) means a higher payoff when things go well .
And , when things go badly , it becomes the taxpayers ’ problem ( or the problem of some foreign government and their taxpayers ) .
What other part of the corporate world has the ability to drive the global economy into recession , as banks did in the fall of 2008 ?
And who else has an incentive to maximize the amount of debt that they issue ?
What the two narratives about financial reform have in common is that neither has a happy ending .
Either we put a meaningful cap on the size of our largest financial firms , or we must brace ourselves for the debt-fueled economic explosion to come .
