The Dirge of Cyprus
PRINCETON – Europe can choose its own musical accompaniment to its latest crisis .
In Berlin , 50 Cent ’ s “ All Things Fall Apart ” has just had its premiere , so that soundtrack might be appropriate .
Or the continent can reach back to Giuseppe Verdi , born two hundred years ago , whose penultimate , and probably greatest , operatic achievement starts on the coast of Cyprus with a storm of fantastic violence and the opening words of its hero , Otello : Esultate , rejoice !
The war has been won ; but Otello ’ s achievement is later destroyed by his jealousy .
Today , Cyprus appears to have been rescued .
But the rescue has fueled a growing rift that jeopardizes the future of European integration , partly owing to the way that the upheaval of the early twentieth century – especially the Great Depression – has been reenacted in the debates about the post-2008 financial meltdown and the subsequent euro crisis .
The interwar economic slump became intractable because it was also a crisis of social stability , democracy , and the international political order .
Widespread bankruptcy and unemployment increased social tension , ultimately making normal democratic politics impossible .
In Germany , the epicenter of democracy ’ s collapse , radicals on both the right and the left raged against the postwar peace settlement and the Versailles Treaty .
In the last years of the increasingly unstable Weimar Republic , as democracy was fraying , German governments started to use their opponents ’ radicalism in an effort to extract security concessions from the Western powers .
Domestic political pressure became a source of heightened international tension .
That is true in today ’ s Europe as well .
Democracy has become a central target of complaints by the European elite .
Luxembourg ’ s prime minister , Jean-Claude Juncker , a former chairman of the Euro group , has lamented that European leaders know what the right policies are , but do not know how to be reelected after implementing them .
Similarly , after his recent crushing election defeat , Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti wistfully explained that Italy ’ s voters were too impatient to bear reforms whose benefits would only become evident beyond the electoral cycle .
Events in Cyprus have exposed two other dimensions to the clashes over Europe ’ s dual sovereign-debt and banking crisis .
First , the discussion of a levy on bank deposits , and whether small customers should be exempted , put class conflict front and center .
Second , the question of foreign , and especially Russian , depositors – along with proximity to Syria – has turned the rescue of the Cypriot banking sector into an international relations problem .
The initial proposal to impose a one-time tax on accounts holding less than € 100,000 came not from the European Union or from Germany , but from the Cypriot government , which must have known that it was likely to generate outrage , and that the Cypriot parliament would never vote for it .
Perhaps the government believed that mass protests – with placards denouncing the EU as a fig leaf for revived German domination of Europe – would strengthen its hand .
After all , even moderate Cypriots were outraged by the bullying of their small island by Germany and by Europe .
The other side in the negotiations also played class politics .
At one of the tensest moments , as Cyprus was seeking an alternative rescue package from Russia , the German Bundesbank announced the results of a new European Central Bank study indicating that average German wealth was lower than in the southern European states , largely because fewer Germans own their own houses .
The message seemed clearly intended to influence the negotiations : Why should poorer Germans be expected to sacrifice to support Mediterranean millionaires ?
In the aftermath of the financial crisis , income and wealth distribution have moved to the center of political debate .
Even the Catholic Church seems to reflect the new mood : The election of Jorge Mario Bergoglio as Pope Francis is a clear reference to St. Francis of Assisi and the Church ’ s mission to stand up for the poor .
On the international-relations front , after 2010 , as deposits from Europe left Cypriot banks , deposits from Russian businesses and individuals increased – and Russia has many reasons to use money as a way of buying political control .
Cyprus is a crucial staging post for American security operations in the eastern Mediterranean , and the gas fields off the Cypriot coast might be developed as an energy source that would – at least after 2017 – reduce European dependence on Russian supplies .
In an earlier phase of the crisis , Russia gave Cyprus a $ 3 billion credit .
Now , however , a new credit would serve only to make the burden of government debt unsustainable ; what is needed is a purchase of all or some of the problematic Cypriot banks .
In the aftermath of a crisis that has been intensified by the rhetoric of class conflict , Russia might be able to extend its control more significantly , and at a lower price .
Deepening social polarization , its use in financial negotiations , and the intrusion of a new security element provide further evidence of what most economists and commentators on Europe have long argued : a monetary union is impossible to sustain in the absence of a political union .
A state , especially in the modern form of the European welfare state , depends on effective mechanisms for arbitrating and resolving social disputes – mechanisms that , as the turmoil surrounding Cyprus has shown , the EU lacks .
As long as that remains true , European integration may be doomed by the time the music stops .
