The Federal Reserve ’ s Relevance Test
NEW YORK – With interest rates near zero , the US Federal Reserve and other central banks are struggling to remain relevant .
The last arrow in their quiver is called quantitative easing ( QE ) , and it is likely to be almost as ineffective in reviving the US economy as anything else the Fed has tried in recent years .
Worse , QE is likely to cost taxpayers a bundle , while impairing the Fed ’ s effectiveness for years to come .
John Maynard Keynes argued that monetary policy was ineffective during the Great Depression .
Central banks are better at restraining markets ’ irrational exuberance in a bubble – restricting the availability of credit or raising interest rates to rein in the economy – than at promoting investment in a recession .
That is why good monetary policy aims to prevent bubbles from arising .
But the Fed , captured for more than two decades by market fundamentalists and Wall Street interests , not only failed to impose restraints , but acted as cheerleaders .
And , having played a central role in creating the current mess , it is now trying to regain face . & nbsp ;
In 2001 , lowering interest rates seemed to work , but not the way it was supposed to .
Rather than spurring investment in plant and equipment , low interest rates inflated a real-estate bubble .
This enabled a consumption binge , which meant that debt was created without a corresponding asset , and encouraged excessive investment in real estate , resulting in excess capacity that will take years to eliminate .
The best that can be said for monetary policy over the last few years is that it prevented the direst outcomes that could have followed Lehman Brothers ’ collapse .
But no one would claim that lowering short-term interest rates spurred investment .
Indeed , business lending – particularly to small businesses – in both the US and Europe remains markedly below pre-crisis levels .
The Fed and the European Central Bank have done nothing about this .
They still seem enamored of the standard monetary-policy models , in which all central banks have to do to get the economy going is reduce interest rates .
The standard models failed to predict the crisis , but bad ideas die a slow death .
So , while bringing down short-term T-bill rates to near zero has failed , the hope is that bringing down longer-term interest rates will spur the economy .
The chances of success are near zero .
Large firms are awash with cash , and lowering interest rates slightly won ’ t make much difference to them .
And lowering the rates that government pays has not translated into correspondingly lower interest rates for the many small firms struggling for financing .
More relevant is the availability of loans .
With so many banks in the US fragile , lending is likely to remain constrained .
Moreover , most small-business loans are collateral-based , but the value of the most common form of collateral , real estate , has plummeted .
The Obama administration ’ s efforts to deal with the real-estate market have been a dismal failure , perhaps succeeding only in postponing further declines .
But even optimists don ’ t believe that real-estate prices will increase substantially any time soon .
In short , QE – lowering long-term interest rates by buying long-term bonds and mortgages – won ’ t do much to stimulate business directly .
It may help , though , in two ways .
One way is as part of America ’ s strategy of competitive devaluation .
Officially , America still talks about the virtues of a strong dollar , but lowering interest rates weakens the exchange rate .
Whether one views this as currency manipulation or as an accidental by-product of lower interest rates is irrelevant .
The fact is that a weaker dollar resulting from lower interest rates gives the US a slight competitive advantage in trade .
Meanwhile , as investors look outside the US for higher yield , the flood of money out of the dollar has bid up exchange rates in emerging markets around the world .
Emerging markets know this , and are upset – Brazil has vehemently expressed its concerns – not only about the increased value of their currency , but that the influx of money risks fueling asset bubbles or triggering inflation .
The normal response of emerging-market central banks to bubbles or inflation would be to raise interest rates – thereby increasing their currencies ’ value still more .
US policy is thus delivering a double whammy on competitive devaluation – weakening the dollar and forcing competitors to strengthen their currencies ( though some are taking countermeasures , erecting barriers to short-term inflows and intervening more directly in foreign-exchange markets ) . & nbsp ;
The second way that QE might have a slight effect is by lowering mortgage rates , which would help to sustain real-estate prices .
So QE would produce some – probably weak – balance-sheet effects .
But potentially significant costs offset these small benefits .
The Fed has bought more than $ 1 trillion of mortgages , the value of which will fall when the economy recovers – which is precisely why no one in the private sector wants to buy them .
The government may pretend that it has not experienced a capital loss , because , unlike banks , it is not required to use mark-to-market accounting .
But no one should be fooled , even if the Fed holds the bonds to maturity .
The attempt to ensure that the losses are not recognized might tempt the Fed to rely excessively on untested , uncertain , and costly monetary-policy tools – like paying high interest rates on reserves to induce banks not to lend .
It is good that the Fed is trying to make amends for its dismal pre-crisis performance .
Regrettably , it is far from clear that it has changed its thinking and models , which failed to maintain the economy on an even keel before – and are certain to fail again .
The Fed ’ s previous mistakes proved extraordinarily costly .
So will the new mistakes , even if the Fed strives to hide the price tag .
