The Economic Consequences of Silvio Berlusconi
MILAN – Silvio Berlusconi has survived a confidence vote , but his government is virtually dead .
One cannot rule a country with so scant a majority .
Not for long . & # 160 ;
The one important decision that this , Berlusconi ’ s fourth government , ever bothered to take was a decision not to decide .
Two years ago , when financial crisis shook the world , Berlusconi ’ s choice was to avoid any policy intervention to counteract the Great Recession .
This contributed to the deepest fall in output in Italy ’ s postwar history , with a cumulative 6.5 % decline in GDP .
Within the G-20 , only Japan did worse .
Remarkably , Italy had twice the fall in output seen in France , another large OECD country that , like Italy , had avoided the root causes of the crisis : a housing boom-bust sequence and a serious bank crisis .
The paradox is that the Berlusconi government ’ s inaction did prevent a major deterioration in the public deficit .
In light of the current debt crisis roiling the eurozone , the advantages of a policy of inertia are easy to appreciate .
Italy ’ s position today could have been much worse than it is .
The Italian economy ’ s problems , and the major issues concerning the sustainability of the country ’ s huge public debt , are rooted in low growth of potential output .
As is also revealed by the term structure of credit-default swaps for Italian debt , investors are not worried about , say , the 2011 budget law .
Instead , they are worried about Italy ’ s economic conditions in 5-10 years .
It is these medium-run problems that Berlusconi ’ s government has overlooked .
None of the structural reforms essential to improving Italy ’ s growth potential – for example , labor-market and unemployment benefit reforms , product market liberalizations , improvements of the education system , reforms of the public administration in the South & # 160 ; – & # 160 ; has been carried out , even though Berlusconi could count on solid majorities in both chambers of Parliament .
Why did Berlusconi ’ s government choose such a passive economic policy ?
One reason is that the level of Italian debt did not leave much room for countercyclical fiscal policy .
But some effort to stimulate the economy at the outset of the crisis could have been attempted .
For instance , it would have been possible to provide income support to job losers – which would have been useful after the crisis as well – by reforming the system of unemployment benefits .
A possible explanation for the government ’ s inaction over the past two and half years is that the measures agreed upon within the coalition that won the 2008 elections were not tailored to a country entering a major recession .
There was no leadership over economic policy defining new priorities and measures to meet the changed macroeconomic conditions .
In its first month after coming to power , the government did actually try to do something for the economy .
It took three decisions , all of which were soon revealed to be utterly wrong .
The first decision was to reduce taxes on overtime work , a measure clearly aimed at increasing the number of hours worked .
Needless to say , as unemployment rose and many other countries decreased hours worked in order to contain job losses , tax reductions on overtime were phased out and the scope of short-time work was enhanced .
A similar fate occurred to a Robin Hood tax , which , according to Finance Minister Giulio Tremonti , should have forced banks and oil producers to provide resources for the poor .
The tax on banks had to be transformed into a commitment to provide fresh money to troubled financial institutions via the so-called “ Tremonti Bonds . ”
And the increase in the tax on oil producers , implemented when the oil price stood at $ 160 per barrel , had to be postponed when the price per barrel fell to $ 30 .
The last measure taken was the dismantling of the real-estate tax , a major source of revenue for local governments .
This tax has not yet been restored , but the government is planning to introduce a number of new levies on housing , which would ultimately restore the lost revenues .
In this way , Italy lost 30 months without enacting the structural reforms that it so badly needs to restore the country ’ s growth potential .
True , such reforms are particularly difficult during bad times , but a large number of them have been carried in the European Union precisely during recessions .
The fact of the matter is that downturns are times of “ extraordinary politics , ” in which it is possible to create larger coalitions for far-ranging economic-policy changes .
A government pursuing a reform agenda should , under these circumstances , make the public aware of the emergency conditions and appeal to the responsibility of the opposition .
But the Berlusconi government , and the media directly or indirectly controlled by the prime minister , chose a different communication strategy .
They constantly underplayed the extent of the crisis , and tried to sell the idea that Italy had largely been insulated from the global recession .
This strategy may have prevented the dramatic fall in popularity experienced by other governments in the middle of the Great Recession , but sooner or later will backfire . The disappointment of the majority of Italians with Berlusconi ’ s rule will be even larger when they realize that this government never presented the facts as they are .
