The Dark Side of Defending Freedom
BRUSSELS – The price of freedom , it is said , is eternal vigilance .
But that price can take the form of morally squalid decisions in which innocent people bear the brunt of the cost of freedom ’ s defense .
Under the cover of the Cold War , Western governments were regularly forced to make many strategically realistic but morally noxious decisions .
Dictators like Zaire ’ s Mobuto and Indonesia ’ s Suharto were embraced on the principle that “ he might be a bastard , but at least he ’ s our bastard . ”
In addition , all sorts of dubious “ freedom fighters , ” from the Contras in Nicaragua to Hissene Habré in Chad to Jonas Savimbi in Angola received Western arms and political backing .
Even the genocidal Khmer Rouge were , for a brief time , partly defended by the US in their forest redoubts after their eviction from Phnom Penh .
Twenty years after the Cold War ’ s end , the West has at times recognized its duty to make amends to those who were , in a very real sense , the “ collateral damage ” of that ideological struggle .
For example , the countries that were consigned by Roosevelt and Churchill to Stalin ’ s un-tender mercies are now mostly part of the European Union .
But there are other , untold stories of people who paid a heavy price for the West ’ s freedoms that have not gained much attention .
The fate of the Chagossians , the former residents of the Chagos Islands in the Indian Ocean , is particularly harrowing .
The way in which the inhabitants of this archipelago were systematically dispossessed and thrown off their land in the name of Western strategic interests is a human tragedy for which the West can and should make restitution .
Between 1968 and 1973 , British Labour and Conservative governments organized the removal of everyone living on the 55 islands that now constitute the British Indian Ocean Territory ( BIOT ) , and that were split off from Mauritius at the time of its independence .
This was done at the behest of the United States , which at the time was embroiled in the Vietnam War and required , for understandable security reasons , the use of the island of Diego Garcia as an air and naval base .
The British Foreign Office claimed at the time that the Chagos Islands had no settled population .
The Chagossians were shipped off to the Seychelles and Mauritius , where they were deposited and left to fend for themselves .
They were ostracized and isolated .
Many succumbed to mental illness , drug addiction , and alcoholism .
Despite the tragic impact of this compulsory removal , the islanders never gave up their campaign to win the right to return home .
Many Chagossians eventually moved away from the Seychelles and Mauritius .
Some settled in London ( my European Parliament constituency ) .
They have been a persistent thorn in the side of successive British governments , but at long last Prime Minister David Cameron ’ s coalition government seems to be seeking to conclude this matter in a fair , humane , and just way .
The Chagossians want to return to the outer islands of the Chagos archipelago .
They have never sought to resettle on Diego Garcia , which remains off-limits and leased to the US government until 2016 – and continues to play a vital role in Western security and defense .
Given Cameron ’ s determination to place the US-UK relationship on a more equal footing than it was under Labour , I hope he will feel free to raise this issue with the Obama administration ; indeed , a deal between the late UK Foreign Secretary Robin Cook and former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright was apparently very nearly closed some years ago .
Despite claims to the contrary , there is no possible threat to US interests from the islanders ’ return to the outer islands , hundreds of kilometers away from Diego Garcia .
Ten years ago , the Chagossians won a tremendous victory in the British High Court , which ruled that the islanders ’ expulsion had been unlawful , and that they should be allowed to return .
Initially , the government accepted the ruling , but it was overturned by an Order-in-Council ( an executive order from the Queen and not a law passed by Parliament ) in 2004 .
Now is not the time to discuss how appropriate Orders-in-Council are for lawmaking in a twenty-first-century democracy , but this move showed disregard for the Chagossians ’ basic human rights .
Earlier this year , we saw this cynicism in action once again , when David Miliband , foreign secretary in the previous Labour government , declared the Chagos Islands to be a protected marine zone , thereby preventing the islanders – if eventually they do return – from making their living from fishing .
The British Foreign Office has often used the excuse that resettling the Chagossians would be prohibitively expensive .
But , when answering a parliamentary question that I put to the European Commission recently , the commissioner responsible for development policy , Andris Piebalgs , indicated that the Commission would consider any request from the UK for co-financing the Chagossians ’ repatriation , which the EU fully and rightly accepts as a sovereign UK matter .
Ten years after the Chagossians ’ Pyrrhic legal victory – a victory that seemed merely to strengthen the Foreign Office ’ s resolve to stop them from returning to the Islands – they have taken their campaign to the European Court of Human Rights , which has suggested that the case be withdrawn in favor of a “ friendly settlement . ”
Many Chagossians who have settled in the UK would go back immediately – if only the government would let them .
