The Road to Fiscal Crisis
WASHINGTON , DC – It has become fashionable among Washington insiders – Democrats and Republicans alike – to throw up their hands and say : We ultimately face a major budget crisis in the United States , particularly as rising health-care costs increase the fiscal burden of entitlements like Medicare and Medicaid .
But then the same people typically smile and point out that investors from other parts of the world still want to lend the US vast amounts of money , keeping long-term interest rates low and allowing the country to run big deficits for the foreseeable future .
This view is seriously flawed .
It implies that the US can kick the can down the road as long as the dollar remains the world ’ s preeminent reserve currency , and America offers the best safe haven for skittish capital owners .
By 2015 , according to this logic , politicians will have done nothing to raise taxes and very little to cut expenditure , so the US will still have a budget deficit of around $ 1 trillion , and will finance a substantial portion of it by selling government bonds to foreigners .
By 2050 , there will undoubtedly be a fiscal problem – but , again , there is plenty of time to ignore it .
This logic , supported by the clear intention of the Federal Reserve to keep all interest rates low , suggests that benchmark US interest rates – for example , on the 10-year Treasury – will remain below 4 % ( and perhaps under 3.5 % ) in the near term .
This week , such government debt paid around 3.2 % , which is very low by historical standards .
If the “ Washington Fiscal Consensus ” proves correct , when benchmark rates eventually edge upwards , they will move slowly .
But this consensus misses an important point : the financial sector in the US and globally has become much more unstable in recent decades , and there is nothing in any of the reform efforts undertaken since the near-meltdown in 2008 that will make it safer .
People sometimes talk about “ systemic risk ” as if it were intrinsic to the financial system . But modern financial history , including in emerging markets , strongly indicates otherwise .
When banks and other financial institutions get into trouble , private losses are transferred – explicitly or implicitly – to the government ’ s balance sheet . Dangerous financial systems pose big fiscal risks .
The three people who have articulated this problem most clearly include two of the world ’ s leading central bankers .
Before Ben Bernanke became Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board , he was rightly renowned for his academic work on the Great Depression , which showed how , under the right ( or wrong ) conditions , the financial sector could act as a form of accelerant for developments in the real ( nonfinancial ) economy .
The Fed ’ s efforts in the past three years to stabilize banks and other parts of finance have no doubt been motivated in large part by this insight .
Anat Admati , a professor at Stanford ’ s Graduate School of Business , focuses on bank capital – specifically , the incentives that banks have to fund their activities with very high leverage – little equity and a great deal of debt .
In my view , she has the single most important page on the Web today ( http : / / www.gsb.stanford.edu / news / research / admati.etal.mediamentions.html ) , containing both original research by her , Peter deMarzo , Martin Hellwig , and Paul Pfleiderer and their many interventions in the policy debate .
The insight of Admati and her collaborators is simple and very powerful .
Higher leverage allows bankers to earn more money , but it can easily become excessive for shareholders – because it makes the banks more vulnerable to collapse – and it is terrible for taxpayers and all citizens , as they face massive downside costs .
In the US , the costs include more than eight million jobs lost since 2007 , an increase in government debt relative to GDP of around 40 % ( mostly due to lost tax revenue ) , and much more .
Mervyn King , a former academic who is currently Governor of the Bank of England , and his colleagues have a vivid name for the toxic cocktail that results : “ doom loop . ”
The idea is that every time the financial system is in trouble , it receives a great deal of support from central banks and government budgets .
This limits losses to stockholders and completely protects almost all creditors .
As a result , banks have even stronger incentives to resume heavy borrowing ( as Admati argues ) , and , as rising asset prices lift the economy in the recovery phase , it becomes possible for them to borrow even more ( as Bernanke knows ) . But what this really amounts to is taking on more risk , typically in an unregulated , unsupervised way – and with very little effective governance within the banks themselves ( again , Admati explains why bank executives like it this way ) .
The Bernanke-Admati-King view suggests that the Washington Fiscal Consensus is seriously deficient .
The US and global economy will recover , to be sure .
But that recovery will be just another phase in the boom-bust-bailout cycle .
America ’ s too-big-to-fail banks are well on their way to becoming too big to save .
That point will be reached when saving the big banks , protecting their creditors , and stabilizing the economy plunges the US government so deeply into debt that its solvency is called into question , interest rates rise sharply , and a fiscal crisis erupts .
In other words , the “ doom loop ” isn ’ t really a loop at all .
It does end eventually , as it has – just for starters – in Iceland , Ireland , and Greece .
