A Breach in the Eurozone Dike
PRINCETON – While all eyes have been on the European periphery , has the core been cracking ?
The Bundesbank has lowered its forecast for German annual GDP growth in 2013 to 0.4 % .
The Central Bank of the Netherlands expects Dutch GDP to shrink by -0.5 % this year – & # 160 ; following a contraction of about 1 % in 2012 .
The eurozone crisis may be entering its third stage .
In the first stage , beginning in the spring of 2008 , the locus of the North Atlantic crisis moved from the United States to the eurozone .
Banks in the eurozone came under pressure , and interbank tensions increased .
In the second stage , starting in the spring of 2009 , the crisis spread to the sovereigns , as investors grew increasingly worried that propping up banks would strain government finances .
In turn , sovereign weakness made the banks appear riskier , and the banks and their home governments became joined at the hip .
Throughout the crisis , it has been widely assumed – at least so far – that the eurozone core would remain solid , and would continue to write the checks for the periphery ’ s distressed governments and banks .
That assumption appeared plausible .
A “ two-speed ” Europe was the new normal .
In particular , Germany stood above the fray .
Following strong performance in 2010 , Germany ’ s GDP exceeded pre-crisis levels by early 2011 , a somewhat better achievement than that of the US .
Indeed , given Germany ’ s surprisingly impressive employment performance , another Wirtschaftswunder appeared to be in the making .
Then a subtle change occurred .
The US – despite a historically slow return to normalcy – & # 160 ; pulled ahead of Germany .
Absent a prolonged fiscal-cliff and debt-ceiling mess , the US may be cobbling together a sustainable recovery .
Following the German economy ’ s sharp contraction in the last quarter of 2012 , the question for the country today is whether it can avoid a technical recession ( defined as two consecutive quarters of economic contraction ) .
Europe does not have its own growth engine .
The German rebound was initially robust because world trade rose rapidly after a precipitous fall .
China ’ s voracious appetite for German cars and machines provided the needed boost , even as Germany ’ s traditional trade partners in Europe struggled .
Since then , however , Chinese demand growth has slowed , and Germany ’ s European trading partners are in even deeper trouble .
Fiscal austerity in the periphery requires cutting back on imports ; hence , the countries exporting to the periphery need to curtail their own imports – and so the process cascades .
This trade multiplier is causing European economies to drag each other down , and the rest of the world is feeling the effects .
The Dutch economy ’ s poor prospects are similarly alarming .
The Netherlands is second only to Germany in the volume of credit that it channels through the so-called “ Target 2 ” system to the eurozone periphery , and it is the periphery ’ s largest creditor in per capita terms .
Economic forecasters continue to promise that growth will revive .
Things will begin to look up in the second half of 2013 , we are told .
But the track record of charting this recovery has been discouraging .
In his book The Signal and the Noise , the American statistician Nate Silver says that forecasters perform worst when faced with a circumstance that they have not encountered before .
This is such a circumstance .
In April 2010 , the International Monetary Fund ’ s World Economic Outlook projected 1.8 % annual GDP growth in Germany and the Netherlands in 2013 .
In October of last year , the IMF lowered its 2013 growth forecast for Germany to 0.9 % and to 0.4 % for the Netherlands .
And , a mere two months later , both countries ’ central banks report that even these reduced expectations are too optimistic .
Who is to say that the second half of 2013 will bring more hope and cheer ?
The European crisis-management process has been predicated on the Scarlett O ’ Hara principle that “ tomorrow will be a better day . ” Although everyone knows that postponing hard decisions only makes the problem larger , they could still believe that there would always be a firm line of defense .
That may be changing .
The third stage of the eurozone crisis will arrive when the economic strength of the core is in doubt .
Those very doubts undermine the credibility of the safety net that has been supporting the European periphery .
A solution to the eurozone crisis that relies on Germany has always been politically uncertain .
