The Crises of Summer
PRINCETON – Europe ’ s crisis is now poised at the moment that divides recovery and renewal from decline and death .
Whereas a few weeks ago , commentators and financial analysts argued that only a few months remained to rescue Europe , leading politicians , lurching from summit to summit , have recently talked in terms of days .
Summer crises are a familiar feature of European history – and of financial history .
Indeed , the twentieth century was shaped by three summer crises , whose seriousness was heightened in each case by the absence of major policymakers , who were on vacation .
In two years , Europeans will commemorate the centennial of the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand on June 28 , 1914 , and the subsequent “ July crisis ” that triggered World War I that August .
On July 13 , 1931 , the German banking system collapsed , ensuring that what was previously an American economic downturn became the worldwide Great Depression .
On August 15 , 1971 , President Richard M. Nixon ended the United States ’ commitment to a fixed gold price , leading to a decade of global currency instability .
Each of these crises involved a highly technical issue , but also a much broader set of political problems .
And , in each case , the intertwining of the technical and the political produced disaster .
In July 1914 , diplomats were trying to devise a solution that would permit the Habsburg Empire to deal with the cross-border police investigation that was inevitable after a terrorist attack .
Political leaders were thinking about national revival and assertion .
In 1931 , the experts were preoccupied with the complexities posed by the combination of reparations and war debts arising out of World War I with large private-sector indebtedness .
Populist political movements in many countries were still thinking about national revival and assertion .
In 1971 , the technical issue concerned the role of the dollar in the international monetary system .
But politicians in other countries also felt uncomfortable about the continuing centrality of the US in the postwar order .
In each of these summer crises , addressing the technical issue was not enough to solve the problem .
That is true today as well .
Indeed , Europe ’ s current crisis reflects exactly the same mixture of elements , each requiring a different type of solution .
On the one hand , a complex set of national fiscal crises and Europe-wide banking problems calls for a comprehensive and detailed rescue operation .
On the other hand , an underlying European governance problem – at both the national level and that of supranational European Union institutions – has been intensifying since the early 1990 ’ s .
What is now required to resolve the technical issue is some mechanism for assuming existing debt and preventing excessive borrowing in the future .
In the US , Alexander Hamilton famously negotiated the federal assumption of states ’ debt in 1790 , but many states behaved badly in the early nineteenth century , with multiple bankruptcies , until they adopted laws or amendments to their constitutions requiring balanced budgets .
The EU needs some fiscal authority of its own if it is to make Europe ’ s economic and monetary union work .
It is already a profound peculiarity that customs duties in a customs union are still administered nationally .
Hamilton made federal customs houses the key element of his proposal .
A Europeanization of some part of value-added tax would be a tremendous advance in combating the massive fraud that the existing system nurtures .
Labor mobility is also incomplete without a common pensions and benefits system : under current arrangements , a worker who spends five years in France , five years in Greece , and five years in Germany is left with a fragmented collection of small entitlements .
The crisis has already increased the extent of such migration within Europe .
But any solution will be unacceptable unless it finds broad acceptance across Europe , in debtor and creditor countries alike .
There is no reason why a constitutional solution that involves debt limitation should not command a large measure of public acceptance , especially in debtor countries , which have experienced the political and economic damage caused by previous profligate governments .
What has produced the populist backlash is the spectacle of political authorities devising technically complicated solutions that lack credibility .
Simply put , the experts need to stop treating Europe ’ s citizens as if they were stupid .
That is why Europe needs a longer-term constitutional renewal , through new treaties , as much as it desperately needs a short-term fix .
Working around existing treaties just looks like more of the same old recipe – a denial of a massive problem that everyone sees .
The public can be forgiven for choking on this kind of stuff .
Consider the European crises that produced good outcomes .
On June 16 , 1940 , Winston Churchill proposed a Franco-British political union in the aftermath of the German invasion of France .
A decade later , West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer proposed a Franco-German political union .
That is the kind of boldness that is now needed .
In the past , it was war , immense dislocation , and suffering that could weld nations .
Is Europe ’ s current crisis severe and dislocating enough to generate an analogous effect ?
The more Europe suffers , the more its people will correctly perceive an incrementalist agenda for reform as nothing more than an exercise in futility .
