Vladimir Putin ’ s Potemkin Love Life
MOSCOW – From Russia with love ?
Not in Vladimir Putin ’ s Russia .
In recent days , Putin decided to reaffirm the Russian-Syrian geopolitical marriage of convenience by following through on a sale of deadly arms to Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime , enabling Assad ’ s army to slay his opponents with greater precision and resolve .
Putin then decided to disavow his own marriage to Lyudmila Shkrebneva , his wife of 29 years , announcing the divorce in as publicly humiliating a way as possible – his wife was standing by his side – for a reserved Russian woman .
For years , rumors had persisted about & # 160 ; the failed state of Putin ’ s marriage .
His alleged mistresses were named and proclaimed ; one , it is said , sits in the Duma ( parliament ) as a member of Putin ’ s tame political party United Russia .
But , until now , it was taboo to discuss Putin ’ s private life publically .
A few newspaper editors , indeed , have been known to lose their jobs for publishing even the slightest hints about Putin ’ s family life .
Vladimir & # 160 ; and Lyudmila have rarely been seen together over the past decade , so there was plenty of gossip in Moscow and Saint Petersburg .
A few years ago , social media stoked rumors that Putin was in fact already divorced and had remarried the gymnast Alina Kabaeva , who had given birth to his son .
( He has two grown daughters , twins , with Lyudmila . )
So the appearance of the couple together at a ballet in the Kremlin was a unique event , and Putin milked it for all it was worth .
A journalist , probably in connivance with Putin , had the temerity to ask him about the state of his marriage .
He said it was over , with his stone-faced wife on hand to confirm with a silence that spoke louder than words .
Why make such a public and staged announcement ?
After all , in Putin ’ s Russia , the latter-day czar can do whatever he wants , whenever he wants .
One suggestion is that Putin is seeking to divert attention from his support for Syria ’ s government and from increased repression of his domestic opponents ( as the leading economist Sergei Guriev ’ s recent flight from Russia , following police harassment , demonstrated anew ) .
With a woman who , unlike Lyudmila , will be regularly seen at his side in the future , Putin will present a gentler image at home and abroad .
If Russians – particularly provincial Russian women – believe that a new First Lady will provide some humanizing , empathetic influence on the hard man of the Kremlin , they may be more inclined to give him the benefit of the doubt .
This could prove important as he initiates yet another bogus show trial – this time of the anti-corruption activist Aleksei Navalny , now accused of embezzlement .
But whether a new woman will help to soften foreigners ’ perception of Putin ’ s cynical diplomacy and increasingly brutal rule is open to question .
Or , it is said , perhaps Putin plans to use next year ’ s Winter Olympics in Sochi as a grandiose setting for a marriage proposal – and perhaps a wedding – to whoever comes next , possibly Kabaeva .
Another suggestion is that Putin , like many Russians , is partial to all things French .
He wants to show that , like France ’ s most famous politicians , he is a worldly dragueur who can “ pull ” beautiful women .
If former French President Nicolas Sarkozy could divorce and remarry a world-famous model and singer while in office , a Russian president can , too .
And Putin has already taken beauty tips from another leading West European Lothario , former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi , with Putin ’ s 2010 facelift making his visage as smooth as that of the frequently Botoxed Berlusconi .
Yet , Italian machismo , with its polished shoes and shiny suits , is different from the more rough-hewn Russian version .
And no amount of European male panache can mask Putin ’ s inner brute .
Indeed , one indication of the openness of a political system is whether or not a leader appears at public functions with his or her spouse .
It is a demonstration of modernity and equality that even the secretive Chinese and North Korean leadership appear to have learned of late .
The “ first lady ” institution is a sign that democracies see power as something to be shared , as , say , Bill Clinton or Barack Obama do .
Dictators like Hitler , Stalin , and Kim Il-sung , as iron men of destiny , must stand alone .
When the Bolsheviks replaced Russia ’ s oppressive monarchy with communism in 1917 , Vladimir Lenin ’ s “ dictatorship of the proletariat ” still left room for the leader not only to have a wife , but to let her have a public role .
Nadezhda Krupskaya , the first Soviet First Lady , performed a suffragist function .
By contrast , the suicide in 1939 of Stalin ’ s wife , Nadezhda Allilueva , underscored the reign of terror in the country .
Nikita Khrushchev ’ s 1950 ’ s thaw allowed for his wife , Nina , to accompany him on trips abroad , presenting a homey image of communism with a human face .
But , with Khrushchev ’ s fall , Soviet first ladies returned to the dacha .
Leonid Brezhnev concealed his wife , Viktoria , from public view throughout the 1970 ’ s , and Yuri Andropov ’ s wife , Tatyana Filipovna , was scarcely known until his funeral in 1984 .
As with everything else in Russia , change in women ’ s status came with the onset of Mikhail Gorbachev ’ s perestroika .
Gorbachev ’ s wife , Raisa , stunned the nation not only by appearing in public , but by being fashionable and expressing opinions of her own .
Boris Yeltsin ’ s accession to power in independent Russia saw only a partial reversal , with his peasant-gowned wife , Naina , making public appearances at his side every now and then .
Just as Putin has created a “ managed ” democracy , Russians can now look forward to a “ managed ” Kremlin marriage – one that will attempt to flatter and sweeten their kitschy authoritarian leader in his dotage .
