Are the Barbarians at the EU Gates ?
BRUSSELS – The euro area confronts a fundamental crisis that attacks on financial speculators will do nothing to resolve .
The European Council of Ministers had to promise hundreds of billions of euros to its financially imperiled member countries , even though the European economy as a whole is not really in crisis .
On the contrary , most surveys and hard economic indicators point to a strong upswing , with the one country that is in really serious trouble , Greece , representing only 3 % of the area ’ s GDP .
Nevertheless , the crisis poses an almost existential challenge to the European Union – and has required such huge sums – because it directly implicates the key underlying principle of European governance : the nature of the state .
The case of Greece has raised the simple but profound question : can a member state of the EU be allowed to fail ?
One view is that the state is sacrosanct : the EU has to intervene and help any errant member to get back on its feet .
But this view assumes that all member states adhere to the Union ’ s underlying economic values of fiscal prudence and market reform .
Problems could arise only because of unanticipated shocks , temporary local political difficulties , and – the favorite culprit – irrational markets .
Applied to Greece , this view implies that the country ’ s fiscal crisis resulted from an overreaction by world financial markets to local political difficulties ( excessive spending by the Greek government before last year ’ s elections ) .
Moreover , it implies that the crisis is fully under European control , and that the European authorities have elaborated a comprehensive plan that will resolve all of Greece ’ s fiscal and structural problems .
Hence the official – let ’ s say “ Southern ” – refrain : “ The IMF / EU plan will succeed .
Failure is not an option . ”
The alternative view is more pragmatic and rules-based .
This “ Northern ” view starts from the premise that member states remain sovereign units , and that it is possible that a member country does not implement a necessary economic-adjustment program .
This view is embodied in the “ no bailout ” clause in the euro ’ s founding document , which stipulates that each country is responsible for its own public debt .
Failure then becomes an option if the country concerned violates the single currency ’ s basic rules .
Financial markets do not participate directly in this debate .
But they have much skin in this game .
Any holder of Greek debt , especially long-term debt , must calculate the likelihood that Greece ’ s political system will prove strong enough to push through the reforms needed to enable the country to service its debt fully ( and on time ) .
The collective judgment of financial markets on any government ’ s economic and fiscal policy is expressed in the risk premium that the government must pay on its external debt .
Doubts in financial markets lead to higher risk premia , which make it even more difficult to finance a government that is already facing financial problems .
Financial markets are often wrong in their judgments .
But they are a fact of life that cannot just be wished or regulated away .
One might object that the distinction between Southern and Northern views is academic nowadays , because failure really isn ’ t an option , given that it would trigger a disastrous reaction in global financial markets .
But the European Council also created a Task Force under President Herman Van Rompuy to elaborate concrete proposals for reforming the monetary union .
The key choice for this group is simple : should they direct their efforts solely at preventing failure ( including open-ended fiscal support ) , or should they also prepare for the failure of a member state in order to mitigate the consequences if that should happen ?
The first choice is bound to imply elaborate measures designed to deliver “ more of the same ” – a strengthening of the Stability and Growth Pact , for example , with more provisions for economic policy surveillance and cooperation .
But this approach has no answer to the fundamental question : What if the framework does not work ?
So long as EU leaders cannot answer that question , financial markets will continue to harbor doubts about the euro ’ s long-term stability .
The eurozone cannot stabilize in political and economic terms without a solid framework for crisis resolution and an ability to deal with sovereign default by a member state . The view that member states cannot be allowed to fail logically implies that a political or at least a fiscal union must underpin the euro .
This is the choice that European leaders now confront : a radical step forward toward political or policy integration , or a clear framework to deal with the consequences of a member country ’ s failure to abide by the fundamental rules of the monetary union .
No amount of money will allow European leaders to fudge this issue .
