The Cycles of Economic Discontent
FLORENCE – The nineteenth century was mesmerized by the cyclical behavior of business .
The French economist Clement Juglar became famous for establishing that business cycles ran for around nine or ten years .
We have recently had our own cycles of exuberance and disintegration .
But they are very different .
In the nineteenth-century world , people rapidly picked themselves up after downturns and went back to business as usual .
In that sense , the phenomenon of the business cycle looked relatively permanent and unchanging .
Nowadays , however , a cyclical collapse comes as a great surprise .
In its aftermath , we start to reinvent our view of economics .
Every ten years or so , we think that a particular model of growth is so broken that it cannot be resurrected .
The world needed to be rethought in 1979 , 1989 , 1998 , and 2008 .
Keynesianism definitively ended in 1979 , following the second oil-price shock of the decade .
The coincidental combination of the election of Margaret Thatcher in the United Kingdom and Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker ’ s interest-rate shock of October 1979 ended an era in which inflation had been seen as a solution to social problems .
State action and monetary expansion as a means of buying off discontent were discredited , as was the West European welfare state .
The association of Europe – and of European social democracy – with Keynesian demand stimulus was more than a little unfair , in that the greatest proponent of the Keynesian view was the Republican American President Richard Nixon .
But the political shift of 1979-1980 , culminating in the election of Ronald Reagan , brought about a new opposition of the free market and innovation to social-democratic corporatism and centrism .
Ten years later , in 1989 , the Soviet model of economic planning and modernization through centrally directed growth was discredited .
In its last phases , it had taken on large quantities of foreign debt , and over-indebtedness finally sunk a model that had fundamentally failed long before that .
The next beautiful idea that failed , in 1997-1998 , was the concept of a particular “ Asian miracle ” ( as it had been dubbed in the title of an influential World Bank publication ) .
Asian economies were supposedly better coordinated because of strategic interventions by the government along the lines of the initial postwar practices of Japan ’ s MITI .
But , like the Soviet Union and its satellites , the smaller and dynamic Asian economies had taken on too much debt .
The response to the economic crisis in Thailand and Korea in the late 1990 ’ s was emphatic preaching about the inherent superiority of the so-called Anglo-Saxon economic model .
But this vision , in turn , also became problematic , and it was unambiguously discredited in 2007-2008 , amid a massive outbreak of European and Asian Schadenfreude .
Then it became clear that the rest of the world was badly affected by the fallout from the financial crisis , and a more sinister interpretation became popular .
Many people in many countries interpreted a crisis that unambiguously began in the United States , but affected some other countries more harshly , as evidence of a fundamentally malign US plan .
The Chinese search for a replacement of the US dollar by a synthetic reserve currency is driven by a political backlash against the perceived iniquities of US financial and economic preeminence .
The cycle in which political models are torn up appears to be accelerating .
The emerging-market boom already looks as if it is the next vision to be cast in the garbage can of history .
The ratings agency Moody ’ s is preparing warnings about the extent and quality of Indian private-sector debt .
Chinese investors are worried about inflationary overheating .
The phase of revulsion and rejection is never complete , but the bold visions never recover their original splendor .
The European social-democratic model survived the 1970 ’ s in a bedraggled form .
The idea of strong Asian economic growth as a permanent feature of the world economy returned with a vengeance only a few years after the Asia crisis .
If the major English-speaking economies remain open and do not close themselves off to trade and immigration , they will also see a return to growth .
But each wave of collapse breeds a greater degree of disillusion about particular institutions , which are blamed for the outcome .
It may be the welfare state in the 1970 ’ s , the Communist Party apparatus in the 1980 ’ s , the Asian industry and trade ministries in the 1990 ’ s , or the nexus of the US Treasury and Wall Street in the 2000 ’ s .
As each institution is eroded , there is less and less left in the way of alternatives .
That is also true of currencies .
The dollar has been knocked off its pedestal by the crisis , but any conceivable substitute is obviously even more flawed and more problematical .
The euro is the composite currency of an area with a poor growth record and an inadequate response to the economic crisis .
The renminbi is still non-convertible .
So there is no master currency at all any more .
The dissident Chinese artist Ai Weiwei sums up the new mood of universal and unmitigated cynicism . To make the point that all institutions are equally suspect , he created an exhibition entitled “ Fuck off , ” in which he shows photographs of himself with an obscene hand gesture in front of famous monuments : the Doge ’ s palace in Venice , once the commercial capital of the world , the Eiffel Tower , the White House , and the Forbidden City in Beijing .
His latest exhibition ’ s title mocks the recent ( and almost universal ) tendency of governments to offer meaningless apologies for past mistakes : it is called “ So sorry . ”
