The Balkans on Trial
Serbia ’ s long tragedy looks like it is coming to an end .
The death of Slobodan Milosevic has just been followed by Montenegro ’ s referendum on independence .
Independence for Kosovo , too , is inching closer .
The wars of the Yugoslav succession have not only been a trial for the peoples of that disintegrated country ; they also raised huge questions about the exercise of international justice .
Do international tribunals of the sort Milosevic faced before his death promote or postpone serious self-reflection and reconciliation in damaged societies ?
Do they strengthen or undermine the political stability needed to rebuild wrecked communities and shattered economies ?
The evidence on these questions is mixed .
Indeed , the record of the International War Crimes Tribunal for Former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) , based in The Hague , may be instructive in judging the credibility of the strategy of using such trials as part of the effort to end civil and other wars .
In 13 years , the ICTY , with 1,200 employees , spent roughly $ 1.25 billion to convict only a few dozen war criminals .
Moreover , whereas members of all ethnic groups committed crimes , in its first years , the ICTY indicted and prosecuted far more Serbs than others , fueling a perception , even among opponents of Milosevic ’ s regime , that the tribunal was political and anti-Serbian .
We may regret that Milosevic ’ s own trial ended without a conclusion .
But a conviction only of Milosevic , however justified , without parallel penalties for his Croat , Bosniak , and Kosovo-Albanian counterparts would hardly have contributed to serious self-reflection within the post-Yugoslav nations .
To be sure , the arrest of General Ante Gotovina , adored by many Croats as a hero , but responsible for the brutal expulsion of a quarter-million Serbs from Croatia and north-west Bosnia – the biggest ethnic cleansing in Europe since WWII – improves the ICTY ’ s standing .
But Milosevic ’ s Croatian and Bosniak counterparts , Franjo Tudjman and Alija Izetbegovic , respectively , remained unindicted when they died .
So , too , the main commanders of the Kosovo Liberation Army ( UCK ) .
Ramush Haradinaj , the prime minister of Kosovo , was accused but later released from detention .
I have always been convinced that Milosevic should have been put on trial in Belgrade .
After all , Milosevic ’ s critics and political rivals such as the journalist Slavko Curuvija and Milosevic ’ s former mentor , Ivan Stambolic , were assasinated by Serb police agents , who also tried three times to murder the opposition leader Vuk Draskovic .
There was , moreover , ample evidence of corruption among Milosevic ’ s inner circle , including members of his immediate family .
Holding the trial in Belgrade might have served better to catalyze a sober examination of the past .
The atmosphere was certainly favorable .
The majority of Serbs hold Milosevic responsible for the decline of their society .
Even before his fall , the opposition controlled most big Serbian cities , and in 2000 he lost the election that he called to shore up his authority .
The relatively small turnout at his funeral confirmed that only a minority of Serbs considers him a national hero .
Meanwhile , with the exception of Slovenia , the democratic transformation in the post-Yugoslav region remains uneasy .
Wars , ethnic cleansing , embargoes , and sanctions created not only psychological traumas , but also black markets , smuggling , large-scale corruption , and de facto rule by mafias .
The bombing of Serbia by NATO in 1999 heavily damaged its economy , with serious consequences for neighboring countries .
The definitive end of what remains of Yugoslavia may – at least today – pose no danger of war , but the Muslim Sandjak region will now be divided by state boundaries , and Albanian extremists , with their dreams of a Greater Albania , believe their influence in a separate Montenegro will be reinforced with a yes vote on independence .
Most Serbs and Croats in Bosnia believe that the best solution to the problems of that sad country would be to join the territories that they inhabit with their “ mother ” countries .
Then there is the unresolved status of Kosovo , where the Albanian majority demands independence , and extremists threaten to fight for it .
As one Kosovo Liberation Army commander warned , “ If we kill one KFOR soldier a day , these cowards will leave . ” With independence , the extremists would gain a territorial base from which to undermine Macedonia , southern Montenegro , and southern Serbia , jeopardizing stability in the entire region .
Serbia is offering Kosovo the formula “ less than independence , more than autonomy . ” It demands security guarantees for the Serbian minority and cultural monuments , as well as control of the borders with Albania and Macedonia to stop traffic in arms , drugs , and women , and to prevent the use of Kosovo by Albanian extremists .
Any resolution of Kosovo ’ s status is problematic , but the international community should not repeat old mistakes .
In 1991 , the principle that only a politically negotiated division of Yugoslavia would be recognized was abandoned .
Now , as then , a change of boundaries without the consent of all concerned parties would not only violate international law , but could also lead to violence .
The international community must not be gulled into thinking that war-crimes trials marginalize , rather than mobilize , extremists and nationalists .
Pressure on Croatia and Serbia to arrest and hand over suspects – a condition of EU accession negotiations – has yielded several extraditions and may result in more .
But further trials alone are unlikely to bring about the long-term settlements that the region ’ s fragile states need in order to ensure stability and democratic development .
The people of the Balkans should feel that the EU offers them political and economic support .
They deserve it .
