The Islamic Case for Religious Liberty
ANKARA – Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew of the Orthodox Church recently said on American TV that he feels “ crucified ” in Turkey , upsetting many Turks . Sadly , his Holiness is right . Yet his complaint is not with Islam but with the secular Turkish Republic .
The Turkish state has kept the Halki Seminary , the only institution able to train Orthodox priests , closed since 1971 .
Even the Patriarch ’ s title “ ecumenical ” is lashed out at by some Turkish authorities and their nationalist supporters .
Every year , international reports on religious freedom point to such pressures on the Patriarchate with concern , and they are right to do so . But why does Turkey do all this ?
What is the source of the problem ?
Things were better long ago .
The first Turkish ruler to reign over the Ecumenical Patriarchate was Mehmed II , the Ottoman Sultan who conquered Constantinople in 1453 .
In line with the Islamic tradition of accepting the “ People of the Book , ” the young sultan granted amnesty to the patriarchate .
He also gave the institution many privileges and authorities , no less than that which existed under the Byzantine emperors .
Armenians and Jews later enjoyed the same autonomies .
In the 19th century , the non-Muslim peoples of the empire also achieved the rights of equal citizenship with Muslims .
That ’ s why the late Ottoman bureaucracy and the Ottoman Parliament included a great number of Greeks , Armenians and Jews — something you never see in republican Turkey .
The Halki Seminary , opened in 1844 , is a relic from that bygone age of pluralism .
Nationalism is what destroyed this Pax Ottomana .
It affected the peoples of the empire one by one , including , towards the end , the Turks .
Many conflicts took place between the latter and the rest , and the great empire ’ s colossal collapse left a bitter taste in the mouths of all .
The Armenians , who suffered the worst tragedy in 1915 , never forgot nor forgave .
What the Turks remember , however , was the perceived “ treason ” of the other components of the empire , especially that of the Ecumenical Patriarchate .
The latter had cheered the Greek armies when they invaded western Anatolia in 1919 .
From that point on , the Patriarchate , in the eyes of many Turks , became a “ fifth column . ”
When Mustafa Kemal Atatürk founded the Republic in 1923 , he defined the Patriarchate as “ a center of perfidy . ”
As an alternative , he promoted a rival “ Turkish Orthodox Patriarchate , ” which became a bastion of ultra-nationalist ideology .
( Some members of this artificial & quot ; Patriarchate & quot ; are currently on trial in the so-called Ergenekon case , a covert network of officers and civilians accused at conspiring to stage a military coup against the current Turkish government . )
Over the years , Atatürk ’ s ideas evolved into an official ideology called “ Kemalism , ” which had two main pillars : A self-styled secularism that bans anything but “ the secular way of life , ” and a fierce nationalism that defies anything it deems “ non-Turkish . ”
The Ecumenical Patriarchate , as both a religious and “ non-Turkish ” institution , fits in neither category .
Hence , throughout the Republican regime , and especially at times of military dominance , it faced official pressure and confiscation of property , as did all other non-Muslim and Muslim religious institutions .
So part of the problem is the curse of history .
But you can either trap yourself inside history or take lessons from it and move on .
To date , unfortunately , Turkey ’ s nationalists , within both state and society , have opted for the former option .
If one cause of the repression of the Ecumenical Patriarchate is nationalism , though , the other one is the other pillar of the Kemalist ideology : secularism .
Turkey ’ draconian laws on “ national education ” ban any sort of religious education unless it is strictly controlled by the state .
The real motive behind this is the regime ’ s distaste for Islam .
The Ecumenical Patriarchate , as a foreign observer observes , only receives “ collateral damage . ”
A telling manifestation of this was seen recently in a live discussion on CNNTurk , the Turkish counterpart of the international news channel .
A deputy from the CHP , the staunchly Kemalist People ’ s Republican Party , Muharrem İnce , who opposed the reopening of the Halki Seminary became angry . “ Do you know who most wants to open the seminary in this country , ” he loudly asked .
“ The Islamists ! They want this , because they want to open Islamic schools as well . ”
Yes , this is indeed the position increasingly adopted by Turkey ’ s Islamic opinion leaders — who are striving not for jihad or an “ Islamic state , ” but just a modest preservation of tradition .
They realize that religious freedom must be championed for all .
And they have a good frame of reference in the pluralism of the Ottomans .
This more liberal approach to non-Muslims can be observed in today ’ s AKP ( Justice and Development Party ) government , in power since 2002 .
Although labeled as “ Islamist ” by its opponents , the AKP has been much more willing to liberalize Turkey than its secular counterparts , most of which are zealously nationalist . The Annual Report of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom makes this point nicely :
“ In November 2006 , the [ AKP dominated ] Turkish parliament , as part of the reforms related to possible EU accession , passed a new law governing Lausanne religious minority foundations , easing procedures to establish foundations and allowing non-Turkish citizens in Turkey to open them … Then President Ahmet Necdet Sezer [ a staunch Kemalist ] , however , vetoed the legislation .
In February 2008 , the parliament passed a similar law on the return of property confiscated from non-Muslim minorities ...
President Gül signed the legislation , which was also supported by Prime Minister Erdogan , but was vehemently opposed by Turkish nationalists on the grounds that the law granted too many rights to minority communities . ”
The Ecumenical Patriarch himself acknowledged in a recent interview that the AKP has shown goodwill on this issue .
His All Holiness also said that the real obstacle is probably “ the deep state ” — a reference to Turkey ’ s Kemalist state establishment that considers itself above any elected government and democratic law .
