The American World Turned Upside Down
PARIS – From Washington , the enthusiasm of the French for intervention in Libya is seen with a mixture of relief and puzzlement .
The Americans do not want the job and are happy that someone else does .
Indeed , President Nicolas Sarkozy ’ s willingness to intervene ( alongside British Prime Minister David Cameron ) helped close a dangerous gap between the world of “ values , ” which would call for direct American intervention against Muammar el-Qaddafi , and the world of “ interest , ” which impelled President Barack Obama to restraint .
America ’ s strategy seems to be to squeeze Qaddafi ’ s regime out of power through a combination of financial , economic , and even “ psychological ” pressure aimed at isolating the Colonel from his sources of support within his own inner circle .
That is a wise approach , one that may ultimately work .
But it will likely take a lot of time to produce results .
While Americans are relieved by France ’ s display of determination , they cannot refrain from expressing a sense of bemusement : Do the French really know what they are up against ?
What has happened to them ?
We know what war means , but they seem to have forgotten !
Indeed , France and the United States seem to have switched roles from just a few years ago .
Listening to Obama ’ s reflexive and distant speeches on Libya , one can nearly hear French Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin ’ s flamboyant intervention at the United Nations on the eve of the invasion of Iraq in 2003 .
And , though the circumstances and the “ legal ” environment are very different – there is a UN resolution for the Libya intervention , and a vague declaration of support by the Arab League – Sarkozy ’ s stance reminds some of George W. Bush ’ s enthusiasm for war .
The British , too , seem to be regarding the French with some perplexity .
Even though they are fighting side-by-side in Libya , with their armies expressing a deep confidence in each other , there are distinct nuances in each country ’ s position on military intervention .
The view from London contains the same element of “ distance ” – if not slight apprehension – found in the view from Washington .
To explain this difference in perspective , perhaps one should venture further into the past than the Iraq War and consider the divergence that already existed traditionally between the United Kingdom ’ s pragmatic approach to its imperial role and the French Empire ’ s missionary zeal .
A duty to accumulate wealth catalyzed the former ; a duty to civilize inspired the latter .
The spectacular inversion of the French and US roles on the issue of intervention has different causes .
Some are linked to the personalities of Obama and Sarkozy ; others reflect the nature of their political imperatives .
Obama ’ s priority is not to be dragged into another conflict .
Afghanistan is already such a costly quagmire .
Sarkozy ’ s goal is to “ exist ” as much as possible on the global stage .
But , beyond personalities and political calculus , what we are witnessing is a fundamental shift in the international system .
It is a shift that raises a major question : if those who are willing to act prove incapable of doing so “ successfully , ” what happens to global stability unless those who are capable are also willing to step in ?
At the crossroads of this question stands NATO , an organization perceived as American by Europeans and international ( i.e. , not American ) by the average US citizen .
But if NATO is – for better or worse – in command on the ground in Libya , it is the UN that has given the necessary green light to French action there .
It is this specific “ marriage of reason ” between France and the UN that is essential to understanding the French position on Libya .
Indeed , the same relationship between France and the UN that led to the country ’ s resistance to intervention in Iraq in 2003 has now pushed France to intervene in Libya in 2011 .
Yet it is dangerous to believe that the world has found in this new-model Coalition of the Willing the solution that it was seeking in today ’ s increasingly chaotic post-American order .
Neither France nor Britain – not to mention the European Union , which is more divided than ever when it comes to military interventions – can be seen as substitutes for the US .
Despite Sarkozy ’ s exceptional activism , they have neither the means nor , in reality , the will .
Confronted with the world ’ s increasing complexity and America ’ s decreasing appetite for international responsibilities , the need for adequate rules – and for a referee to enforce them – is greater than ever .
In the face of growing risks of global anarchy , the courageous but risky activism of France and Britain should not be seen as a substitute for an engaged US .
But does such an engaged America still exist ?
The answer is probably no .
