Northeast Asia ’ s Home Fires Burning
TOKYO – Successful diplomatic summits are almost always pre-cooked affairs , with every aspect of the meeting , from the initial handshakes to the final communiqué , minutely choreographed .
But next month ’ s Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation ( APEC ) summit in Beijing looks like a high-risk enterprise .
It is not even clear whether Chinese President Xi Jinping will agree to meet with one of his most important guests , Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe .
It is also unclear whether Abe will be able to meet with South Korean President Park Geun-hye .
And yet there is considerable reason to hope not only for formal handshakes and bilateral meetings among Northeast Asia ’ s “ Big Three ” leaders , but also for substantive discussions aimed at lowering tensions in the region .
That hope is built on all three leaders ’ need for a period of diplomatic quiet , owing to the difficult domestic challenges that each now faces .
Xi may be confronting the most difficult domestic agenda : an effort to engineer a relatively smooth transition from an economic structure based on manufacturing and exports to one in which domestic consumption and services fuel growth .
Not only has structural transformation caused the economy to slow ; it has also exposed deep flaws in China ’ s financial system .
The shift in the country ’ s economic model would be difficult in the best of circumstances .
But it is being undertaken simultaneously with the deepest political purge China has experienced since the days of Mao Zedong , with Xi targeting corrupt officials high and low .
At the moment , the focus seems to be on People ’ s Liberation Army officers and those tied to now-imprisoned former Chongqing Communist Party boss Bo Xilai and the former Politburo security chief Zhou Yongkang , who is awaiting sentencing .
Indeed , the most perilous phase of Xi ’ s purge may now be underway , given the recent arrest of the deputy commander of the Sichuan Military District – a key post , given the district ’ s large and restive Tibetan population .
Abe ’ s domestic troubles , stemming from two decades of economic stagnation , are well known .
Although his economic strategy , known as “ Abenomics , ” appears to have ended deflation , vibrant growth is nowhere in sight .
Moreover , after a series of scandals cost Abe some newly appointed ministers , some fear that he may no longer be willing to follow through on the liberalizing structural reforms – the so-called “ third arrow ” of Abenomics – that sustained economic recovery requires .
Park may appear to face the least vexing domestic conditions , with South Korea ’ s economy growing at a 3.2 % annual pace in the second quarter of 2014 , only marginally lower than market forecasts .
But Park undoubtedly views her domestic circumstances as anything but rosy ; in many ways , this has been an annus horribilis for her and her country .
Indeed , disaster has stalked South Korea this year , beginning in April with the sinking of the ferry Sewol , which claimed some 300 lives , most of them high school students .
The trial of the Sewol ’ s captain , the apparent suicide of its owner , and a series of scandals involving beatings and bullying leading to death and suicide among army conscripts have cost Park key ministerial resignations , and have created a pervasive sense of unease about how the country is governed .
Complicating matters further is the need for Park to devise a viable response to a new diplomatic charm offensive by North Korea ’ s usually charmless leader , Kim Jong-un .
Park remains , rightly , a skeptic concerning Kim ’ s motives ; but the spectacle of the North ’ s second-highest-ranking official appearing suddenly at the Asian Games earlier this month created a frisson of excitement that perhaps Kim the Younger may actually want to improve relations .
Faced with these domestic concerns , all three leaders need a respite from the tensions that have bedeviled relations among their countries over the past three years .
But , because each has played on these tensions , particularly with Japan , in order to control their domestic opponents , achieving this necessary respite may prove difficult .
And yet there are signs that the three leaders understand that the APEC summit may be a make-or-break moment for their countries ’ relations .
Much of the worst anti-Japanese bombast has disappeared from Chinese television in recent weeks , and former Japanese Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda is due to meet with Xi in Beijing this week .
This does not yet add up to a thaw in the bilateral relationship , but it does suggest that Xi may be seeking a respite , at least until China ’ s economy is on a more stable footing and his anti-corruption campaign begins to wind down .
Park , too , has sent signals that she may want to ease tensions .
She recently met with former Japanese finance minister Fukushiro Nukaga , and Kim Kwan-jin , the chief of South Korea ’ s National Security Office , recently met with Abe ’ s national security adviser , Shotaro Yachi .
With Abe , Park , and Xi each facing daunting domestic challenges , a rare convergence in each country of self-interest and national interest may be creating a chance for improved relations .
The question now is whether Northeast Asia ’ s Big Three leaders can overcome old positions , shake hands , and get serious about regional diplomacy .
