The Fed vs. the Financiers
In his August 31 address to the world ’ s most influential annual monetary policy conference in Jackson Hole , Wyoming , United States Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke coolly explained why the Fed is determined to resist pressure to stabilize swooning equity and housing prices .
Bernanke ’ s principled position – echoed by European Central Bank head Jean Claude Trichet and Bank of England head Mervyn King – has set off a storm in markets , accustomed to the attentive pampering lavished on them by Bernanke ’ s predecessor , Alan Greenspan .
This is certainly high-stakes poker , with huge sums hanging in the balance in the $ 170 trillion global financial market .
Investors , who viewed Greenspan as a warm security blanket , now lavish him with fat six-figure speaking fees .
But who is right , Bernanke or Greenspan ?
Central bankers or markets ?
A bit of intellectual history is helpful in putting today ’ s debate in context .
Bernanke , who took over at the Fed in 2006 , launched his policy career in 1999 with a brilliant paper presented to the same Jackson Hole conference .
As an academic , Bernanke argued that central banks should be wary of second-guessing massive global securities markets .
They should ignore fluctuations in equity and housing prices , unless there is clear and compelling evidence of dangerous feedback into output and inflation .
Greenspan listened patiently and quietly to Bernanke ’ s logic .
But Greenspan ’ s memoirs , to be published later this month , will no doubt strongly defend his famous decisions to bail out financial markets with sharp interest rate cuts in 1987 , 1998 , and 2001 , arguing that the world might have fallen apart otherwise .
On the surface , Bernanke ’ s view seems intellectually unassailable .
Central bankers cannot explain equity or housing prices and their movements any better than investors can .
And Bernanke knows as well as anyone that none of the vast academic literature suggests a large role for asset prices in setting monetary policy , except in the face of extraordinary shocks that influence output and inflation , such as the Great Depression of the 1930 ’ s .
In short , no central banker can be the Oracle of Delphi .
Indeed , many academic economists believe that central bankers could perfectly well be replaced with a computer programmed to implement a simple rule that adjusts interest rates mechanically in response to output and inflation .
But , while Bernanke ’ s view is theoretically rigorous , reality is not .
One problem is that academic models assume that central banks actually know what output and inflation are in real time .
In fact , central banks typically only have very fuzzy measures .
Just a month ago , for example , the US statistical authorities significantly downgraded their estimate of national output for 2004 !
The problem is worse in most other countries .
Brazil , for example , uses visits to doctors to measure health-sector output , regardless of what happens to the patient .
China ’ s statistical agency is still mired in communist input-output accounting .
Even inflation can be very hard to measure precisely .
What can price stability possibly mean in an era when new goods and services are constantly being introduced , and at a faster rate than ever before ?
US statisticians have tried to “ fix ” the consumer price index to account for new products , but many experts believe that measured US inflation is still at least one percentage point too high , and the margin of error can be more volatile than conventional CPI inflation itself .
So , while monetary policy can in theory be automated , as computer programmers say , “ garbage in , garbage out . ” Stock and housing prices may be volatile , but the data are much cleaner and timelier than anything available for output and inflation .
This is why central bankers must think about the information embedded in asset prices .
In fact , this summer ’ s asset price correction reinforced a view many of us already had that the US economy was slowing , led by sagging productivity and a deteriorating housing market .
I foresee a series of interest rate cuts by the Fed , which should not be viewed as a concession to asset markets , but rather as recognition that the real economy needs help .
In a sense , a central bank ’ s relationship with asset markets is like that of a man who claims he is going to the ballet to make himself happy , not to make his wife happy .
But then he sheepishly adds that if his wife is not happy , he cannot be happy .
Perhaps Bernanke will soon come to feel the same way , now that his honeymoon as Fed chairman is over .
