The Gospel According to Gates
Bill Gates and Warren Buffett , the richest and second richest person in America , and perhaps the world , are often described as admirers of Andrew Carnegie ’ s famous 1889 essay “ The Gospel of Wealth . ”
Carnegie ’ s treatise , an American classic , provides a moral justification for the concentration of wealth that capitalism tends to create by arguing that immense wealth leads to well-spent charitable contributions and support of the arts and sciences .
In short , Carnegie thought that great personal wealth leads to great civilizations .
” The Gospel of Wealth ” is based on the premise that business competition results in “ survival of the fittest ” – the fittest being those endowed with the most “ talent for organization . ”
Carnegie argued that those who thrive in business and acquire huge personal fortunes are better at judging how the world really works , and thus are better qualified to judge where resources should be directed .
Successful people , according to Carnegie , should retire from business while they still retain those talents and devote their remaining years to spending their fortunes on philanthropy .
Carnegie also advocated an inheritance tax as an incentive , arguing that it would “ induce the rich man to attend to the administration of wealth during his life . ” Encouraging the rich to spend their fortunes on good causes while still alive , Carnegie maintained , is far better than leaving the disposition of their wealth to the care of their ( probably untalented ) children .
Last month , Bill Gates announced that he will do what Carnegie recommended : in two years , he will change his priorities so that he can work full time for the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation , which he and his wife founded .
Even earlier than Carnegie , who quit at 65 , Gates will devote his life to spending his huge fortune on philanthropy .
Warren Buffett , by contrast , is 76 , so he has missed his chance to apply his talents to running a charitable foundation .
But , by leaving the bulk of his fortune , approximately $ 31 billion , to the Gates Foundation , he will have done the next best thing .
Bill Gates is a controversial figure , but few doubt that he is smart .
Even so , whereas Carnegie ’ s theory makes some sense ( which is why his essay is remembered so well more than a century later ) , it isn ’ t obvious that he was right to believe that successful business people are the best administrators of charitable foundations .
Useful traits in business , like aggressiveness or political savvy , might be poorly suited to philanthropy .
Likewise , running a foundation may well require studying social problems or the arts and sciences – activities that may not accord with former capitalists ’ inclinations and talents .
The deeper flaw in Carnegie ’ s theory may be that it is just too difficult psychologically for business people to make the mid-life career transition to philanthropy .
Having accumulated great wealth as “ survivors ” of the business world , will they really turn their talents to the task of giving it away ?
Regardless of whether Gates lives up to his promise , are people like him the exception that proves the rule ?
It is easy to be skeptical that his example will spur a new wave of early retirements to run philanthropies .
The public-spirited justification of the concentration of wealth offered in “ The Gospel of Wealth ” has more support in the United States than elsewhere , which reflects Americans ’ relatively greater admiration of business people .
But Carnegie ’ s argument never became received doctrine even in America , because most people reject the view that rich business people are smarter and morally superior .
Certainly , Gates and Buffett claim nothing of the sort .
Similarly , even in America , movies and TV shows do not dramatize the lives of great tycoon philanthropists .
Americans , like everyone else , prefer portrayals of business people who are truly evil and in the end receive their just deserts .
And yet there is more charitable giving in the US than in other countries , reflecting a greater sense in America that private benevolence is an obligation .
According to the Johns Hopkins University Comparative Nonprofit Sector Project , headed by Lester Salamon , the US leads major countries in private contributions to nonprofits .
Excluding donations to churches , such contributions amount to 1 % of GDP in the U.S. , which is six times higher than in Germany or Japan , and 30 times higher than in Mexico .
However , 1 % of GDP is still not a very big number , and the Gates Foundation , with about $ 60 billion after Buffett ’ s bequest , now accounts for a substantial share of the total .
Of course , Gates and Buffett deserve praise , and we should certainly wish them well .
But we should not yet consider their example a vindication of “ The Gospel of Wealth . ”
