The Market Confidence Bugaboo
CAMBRIDGE – A specter is haunting Europe – the specter of “ market confidence . ”
It may have been fear of communism that agitated governments when Karl Marx penned the opening line of his famous manifesto in 1848 , but today it is the dread that market sentiment will turn against them and drive up the spreads on their bonds .
Governments all over are being forced into premature fiscal retrenchment , even though unemployment remains very high and private demand shows few signs of life .
Many are driven to undertake structural reforms that they don ’ t really believe in – just because it would look bad to markets to do otherwise .
The terror spawned by market sentiment was once the bane of poor nations alone .
During the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980 ’ s or the Asian financial crisis of 1997 , for example , heavily indebted developing countries believed they had few options but to swallow bitter medicine ­ – or face a stampede of capital outflows .
Apparently , now it ’ s the turn of Spain , France , Britain , Germany , and , many analysts argue , even the United States .
If you want to keep borrowing money , you need to convince your lender that you can repay .
That much is clear .
But in times of crisis , market confidence takes on a life of its own .
It becomes an ethereal concept devoid of much real economic content .
It turns into what philosophers call a “ social construction ” – something that is real only because we believe it to be .
For , if economic logic were clear-cut , governments wouldn ’ t have to justify what they do on the basis of market confidence .
It would be evident which policies work and which do not , and pursuing the “ right ” policies would be the surest way to restore confidence .
The pursuit of market confidence would be superfluous .
So , if market confidence has a meaning , it must be something that is not pinned down simply by economic fundamentals .
But what is it ?
In his Communist Manifesto , Marx went on to say that it is “ high time that Communists should openly , in the face of the whole world , publish their views , their aims , their tendencies , and meet this nursery tale of the specter of Communism with a Manifesto of the party itself . ” Similarly , it would be nice if markets would clarify what they mean by “ confidence ” so that we would all know what we are really dealing with .
Of course , “ markets ” are unlikely to do any such thing .
This is not just because markets comprise a multitude of investors and speculators who are unlikely ever to get together to publish a “ party program , ” but more fundamentally because markets have little clue themselves .
A government ’ s capacity and willingness to service its debt depend on an almost infinite number of present and future contingencies .
They depend not just on its tax and spending plans but also on the state of the economy , the external conjuncture , and the political context .
All of these are highly uncertain , and require many assumptions to reach some form of judgment about creditworthiness .
Today , markets seem to think that large fiscal deficits are the greatest threat to government solvency .
Tomorrow they may think the real problem is low growth , and rue the tight fiscal policies that helped produce it .
Today , they worry about spineless governments unable to take the tough actions needed to deal with the crisis .
Perhaps tomorrow they will lose sleep over the mass demonstrations and social conflicts that tough economic policies have spawned .
Few can predict which way market sentiment will move , least of all market participants themselves .
Even with hindsight , it is sometimes not clear why markets go one way and not the other .
Similar policies will produce different market reactions depending on the prevailing story , or fad of the moment .
That is why steering the economy by the dictates of market confidence is a fool ’ s errand .
The silver lining in all this is that , unlike economists and politicians , markets have no ideology .
As long as they make money they do not care if they have to eat their words . They simply want whatever “ works ” — whatever will produce a stable , healthy economic environment conducive to debt repayment .
When circumstances become dire enough , they will even condone debt restructuring — if the alternative is chaos and the prospect of a greater loss .
This opens up some room for governments to maneuver .
It permits self-confident political leaders to take charge of their own future . It allows them to shape the narrative that underpins market confidence , rather than play catch-up .
But to make good use of this maneuvering room , policymakers need to articulate a coherent , consistent , and credible account of what they are doing , based on both good economics and good politics .
They have to say : “ we are doing this not because the markets demand it , but because it is good for us and here is why . ”
Their storyline needs to convince their electorates as well as the markets .
If they succeed , they can pursue their own priorities and maintain market confidence at the same time .
This is where European governments ( along with their economist advisors ) have kept missing the boat .
Rather than face up to the challenge , leaders first procrastinated and then buckled under pressure .
They ended by fetishizing the pronouncements of market analysts .
In doing so , they have denied themselves economically desirable policies that have greater chance of garnering popular support .
If the present crisis gets worse , it will be political leaders that bear primary responsibility – not because they ignored markets , but because they took them too seriously .
