The Consequences of Korean Extremism
SEOUL – Once again , the Korean peninsula is experiencing one of its periodic bouts of extremism , this time marked by the suicide on May 22 of former president , Roh Moo-hyun , and North Korea ’ s second test of a nuclear device .
Roh ’ s suicide is a disaster for his family and a national shame , while North Korean leader Kim Jong-il ’ s nuclear blast is something of a temper tantrum , but one which may have dire consequences for the two Koreas and the world .
The North Korean bomb , estimated at four kilotons , does not come anywhere near the magnitude of the atomic bombs of 15-21 kilotons that America dropped on Japan 64 years ago .
Indeed , this vainglorious attempt by Kim Jong-il reminds Koreans of the mother bullfrog in Aesop ’ s Fables who puffed herself out to imitate an ox .
Yet North Korea ’ s world-defying belligerency is not utter madness .
Rather , it is a by-product of its own acute fears of regime collapse .
As a Korean , I am always puzzled by Korean extremism .
Where in the world can you find a more isolated , regimented and militarized dynastic mutation of a communist totalitarian system than in North Korea ?
Where on earth can you see a nuclear-armed , missile-shooting panhandler such as Kim Jong-il ?
Is there another country where only a father and his son have ruled like demigods for the last 61 years ?
Likewise , where else but in South Korea can you find a Christian church whose registered membership runs upwards of 800,000 , and where nearly 100,000 adherents attend each of the three Sunday services every week ?
Where else can you witness an ex-president commit suicide by jumping off a cliff near his residence ?
And this in a country that had an estimated per capita income of $ 40 in the 1940 ’ s but has now become the world ’ s 12th or 13th largest economy .
Cornelius Osgood , an American anthropologist , attributed Korean extremism to the peninsula ’ s weather .
He observed that the Korean temperament is a product of long , harsh Siberian winters and hot , humid summers , with only short springs and autumns .
I believe , however , that Korean extremism stems from the country ’ s geography and history .
Surrounded by hostile neighbors , such as Chinese , Mongols , and Manchus in the north and Japanese across the sea , Koreans have struggle tooth and nail for thousands of years to retain their ethnic , linguistic , cultural , and political identity .
Setting the blame game aside , what can be done with North Korea ?
Unfortunately , putting the nuclear genie back in the bottle is next to impossible .
The effectiveness of available options is limited , and all of them are pregnant with unpredictable political and military consequences .
“ Economic strangulation ” of North Korea appears to be the fallback option .
Strengthening and tightening United Nations Security Council Resolution 1718 , crafted in the wake of North Korea ’ s first nuclear test in October 2006 , should be the immediate task .
The Security Council is already at work drafting a new resolution .
But , to make the new resolution effective , China ’ s full and unwavering participation – which has not yet been the case – is critical .
Any unilateral measures against North Korea by individual countries must be executed within the broader framework of the new resolution .
And , even if new sanctions are imposed , the door to the Six-Party Talks must be left open for Kim Jong-il .
In this eyeball-to-eyeball situation , the other five parties in the talks – China , Japan , Russia , the United States , and South Korea – must not give in first to North Korea .
At present , public opinion worldwide , particularly in South Korea and Japan , is highly volatile .
A cooling-off period is necessary .
Seeking dialogue with North Korea immediately after its missile tantrum and nuclear brinkmanship is unwise and impractical .
After tough and effective UN-led sanctions are imposed , the concerned parties must wait until North Korea feels the pain of the economic squeeze .
But , as North Korea is one of the world ’ s poorest and least globalized states , the effectiveness of sanctions will be limited .
At the same time , the nuclear threat is not the most immediate danger .
The bigger threat today is actual combat , for , the day after North Korea ’ s nuclear test , South Korea announced its full participation in the US-led Proliferation Strategic Initiative , which seeks to intercept ships that may be involved in illegally transporting nuclear technology .
North Korea blasted this South Korean decision as a “ declaration of war . ”
So great care and cool heads will be needed in the seas around Korea in the days and weeks to come .
Rising tension on the Korean Peninsula is shattering fast the glimmers of hope for re-unity that followed ten years of progress under the Kim Dae-Jung and Roh Moo-hyun governments .
South Korean President Lee Myung-bak , through his flip-flops , and Kim Jong Il , with his renewed nuclear blackmail , both seem determined to see relations deteriorate .
The two current leaders in Korea must not repeat the mistake of their predecessors in the latter part of the nineteenth century .
Blinded by internecine domestic power struggles , they failed to see the great powers ’ strategic gambits in the region . That failure led directly to the colonization of Korea by Japan .
Worsening inter-Korean relations will certainly make both sides less secure and stable politically , economically , and militarily .
Caught in this vicious spiral , North and South Korea will become far more vulnerable to neighboring powers ’ strategic maneuvers .
As a result , growing inter-Korean hostility may ultimately prove far more lethal to the well-being of all Koreans than Roh Moo-hyun ’ s tragic suicide and Kim Jong-il ’ s futile fireworks .
