The Kremlin Temptation
PARIS – What is the significance of France ’ s recent sale of four powerful Mistral-class warships to Russia ?
Was it business as usual or an irresponsible move contributing to a dangerous shift in the balance of power in the Baltic and Black Seas ?
It is sometimes said that Germany has become a “ second France ” in its “ selfish ” approach to the European Union .
But is France really on its way to becoming a “ second Germany ” ?
If Germany is Russia ’ s main economic partner , why should not France be its principal strategic partner ?
France does not share Germany ’ s natural closeness to Russia – a relationship based on both geography and history .
But France does have a long tradition of a “ special ” bilateral relationship with Russia – marked by a deep cultural dimension – that somehow transcended the Cold War .
General Charles de Gaulle once described himself as a “ bad weather friend ” of the United States , which implied that in “ better weather ” he could go his own way , leave NATO ’ s integrated military command , and behave as some kind of bridge between East and West .
De Gaulle ’ s policy of detente towards the Soviet Union , coming years before Nixon and Kissinger tried it , personified France ’ s desire to “ exist ” diplomatically on its own and to maximize its room for maneuver with the US .
Times have changed .
The Cold War is over .
Nicolas Sarkozy is not de Gaulle , and Russia is not the Soviet Union .
Yet there is an undeniable whiff of nostalgia in the current rapprochement between two powers that are both conscious of their relative decline in the world .
Both intend to reinforce their respective status – diplomatic in the case of France , strategic in the case of Russia .
Yet the reality is more prosaic for both .
The high point of Russian President Dmitri Medvedev ’ s recent visit to Paris , where the arms deal was concluded , was the two countries ’ agreement not so much on long-term strategic visions , but on pragmatic considerations .
For France , above all , “ it ’ s the economy , stupid . ”
France is keen to maintain its independent arms industry , and to keep open its naval arsenal , based in Saint-Nazaire on the West coast .
This legitimate “ mercantile ” concern has supposedly been reciprocated by “ small steps ” by Russia in the direction of a policy of sanctions against Iran .
It will be interesting to see in a few weeks or a few months whether the Kremlin will really deliver .
In reality , as was the case in August 2008 , when Sarkozy successfully negotiated a cease-fire and then a peace deal between Georgia and Russia ( largely on Russian terms ) , the French president ’ s actions are music to Russian ears .
And “ Sarkozy the American ” ( as he was once known in France ) no longer thinks he has to prove anything to America nowadays .
France symbolically returned to NATO ’ s military command in April 2009 .
Even if some American officials are irritated by French sales of sophisticated military equipment to Russia , no one has dared to complain openly .
After all , isn ’ t the US in the process of pushing the “ reset button ” with Russia ?
With China looming on the horizon as a much more confident and defiant force than Russia , including as a key player in the G20 , Russia is being courted by all the world ’ s powers .
And everybody seems to be making the same calculus , hoping to alter the balance of power within Russia to reinforce Medvedev ’ s position vis-à-vis Prime Minister Vladimir Putin .
But does such a calculus make sense , or is it simply wishful thinking , a reassuring and comfortable illusion designed to make French leaders feel good , when in fact they are dealing with Russia on purely commercial grounds ?
As a Russian friend of mine told me recently , “ Putin wants to live like Roman Abramovich and to rule like Stalin . ”
He is the man in charge . The idea that you can play a Medvedev card to balance Putin is a dangerous illusion .
There is no division of power between the two men .
The first one is paving the way for the second to return to the Kremlin in 2012 .
In Russia , power is money and money is power .
The stakes are simply too high .
France should not delude itself .
There is nothing inherently wrong in selling weapons to Russia , but by so doing one merely plays into the hands of Putin ’ s effort to reinforce his policy of domination over Russia ’ s “ near abroad . ”
The sale of such warship will not positively affect the balance of power within Russia , but it will affect the regional balance of power – in favor of Russia .
What is clear is that any ambition to define a common European energy and security policy toward Russia is slowly disappearing .
From Berlin to Paris , and from Paris to Rome , European leaders may ultimately be doing the same thing , but they are all doing it separately , as competitors vying for Russian favor rather than as partners within a supposedly tight-knit Union .
