The Eternal Putin
NEW YORK – The only vote that matters in Russia ’ s 2012 presidential election is now in , and Vladimir Putin has cast it for himself .
He will be returning as Russia ’ s president next year .
When the news broke – together with the lesser news that the incumbent , Dmitri Medvedev , will step down to become Putin ’ s prime minister – I wanted to scream , I told you so.I have always been puzzled by the naïveté of analysts , in Russia and abroad , who believed that Putin would never be so bold as to make a mockery of Russia ’ s electoral system by reclaiming the presidency .
But contempt for democracy has been Putin ’ s stock-in-trade ever since he arrived in the Kremlin from Saint Petersburg two decades ago .
Anyone who thought that things would be different was either delusional or ignorant of Russia .
Putin can ’ t help himself , just as he couldn ’ t help himself in 2004 .
Then a very popular leader – he restored to Russia its self-regard as a global power through deft use of the country ’ s control of a large share of the world ’ s supply of oil and gas at a time of limited availability – he would have won hands down .
Yet he rigged those elections nonetheless : in the KGB tradition , people are simply too unpredictable to be left uncontrolled .
If many analysts were blithely unaware of the certainty of Putin ’ s 2012 return , the Russian public certainly wasn ’ t . Culture never lies about politics .
When Putin installed his protégé , Medvedev , as president in 2008 , a joke made the rounds : It is 2025 , and Putin and Medvedev , now elderly , are sitting in a restaurant .
“ Mine , ” replies Medvedev . “ Remember , I just replaced you as president again . ”
Mikhail Kasyanov , a prime minister under Putin and now a leader of the opposition People ’ s Freedom Party , insisted that “ nobody knew ” about the swap .
If he believes that , he is fooling only himself .
The sad truth is that , in Russia , history does indeed repeat itself , but , in a twist on Karl Marx ’ s dictum , as tragedy and farce at once .
Power in Russia is a product of inertia and personal willfulness , and a generally apathetic public has traditionally surrendered to the country ’ s paradox of tyranny : a weak state believes that it can function as a strong state by depriving citizens of basic liberties and the ability to make their own decisions .
In such a state , initiative , especially political initiative , is worse than futile ; it is a crime , as the case of Mikhail Khodorkovsky , the imprisoned former oil tycoon , has demonstrated .
The only freedom Russians have left is to devise bitter jokes that tap the country ’ s rich historical stores of political pathology .
If they could export them , they would be as rich as Germans .
In the absence of the rule of law and functioning state services , we Russians generally perceive ourselves as subordinate to the state rather than as citizens acting out our lives in a functioning , vibrant , and independent civil society .
This de facto surrender creates a fertile environment for despotism .
For many Russians , if not most , the authority figure embodies the powers that control everything that matters in life ; they support him , regardless of the policies that he implements , because there is no possibility of doing otherwise .
This partly explains enduring popular devotion to rulers like Joseph Stalin .
The question today is not about the outcome of next year ’ s presidential election ; that has already been determined .
With the presidential term now extended to six years , we can expect an encore lasting up to 12 years – longer than Putin ’ s original performance .
But now the delusional and ignorant want to believe that Putin will become a reformer this time around .
I remember a similar analysis in 2000 , when experts tried to equate Putin ’ s KGB background with US President George H.W. Bush ’ s years as Director of the CIA .
Putin , they argued , is not your typical security tough guy ; he is an enlightened technocrat .
But the only technique that Putin appeared to have absorbed from his earlier career as a spy in East Germany was that of social control .
That remains true today .
Still , looking beyond the 2012 elections might be worthwhile , because the economic , political , and social contexts have changed since 2004 , when Putin re-elected himself , and since 2008 , when he pretended to be a democrat by promoting Medvedev .
Today , Russia ’ s rulers have never looked more arbitrary and illegitimate .
After 12 years in power , and grasping for 12 more , Putin can no longer sustain the pretense of adhering to democracy and promoting modernization .
During the last few years , popular support for Putin has weakened considerably , largely due to a stagnating , commodities-based economy .
So manipulation of presidential powers might not prove as simple as before .
Indeed , Russia ’ s elites know that things are going wrong , and are voting the only way they can – with their feet and by bank transfer , moving their families and their wealth out of the country .
History also teaches us that , despite their inertia , Russians are capable of turning on their government , as they did in 1917 and 1991 .
So when resettling comfortably in the Kremlin in 2012 , Putin should take a moment to re-read Alexander Pushkin ’ s The Captain ’ s Daughter , a novella about the bloody Cossack-led rebellion against Catherine the Great : “ God save us from a Russian revolt , senseless and merciless . ”
