The Anatomy of Global Economic Uncertainty
NEWPORT BEACH – The sense of uncertainty prevailing in the West is palpable , and rightly so .
People are worried about their futures , with a record number now fearing that their children may end up worse off than them .
Unfortunately , things will become even more unsettling in the months ahead .
The United States is having difficulties returning its economy to the path of high growth and vigorous job creation .
Thousands of people have taken to the streets of US cities , and thousands of others in Europe , to demand a fairer system .
In the eurozone , financial crises have forced out two governments , replacing elected representative with appointed technocrats charged with restoring order .
Concern about the institutional integrity of the eurozone – key to the architecture of modern Europe – continues to mount .
This uncertainty extends beyond countries and regions .
Those looking around the next corner also worry about the stability of an international economic order in which the difficulties faced by the system ’ s Western core are gradually eroding global public goods .
It is no coincidence that all of this is happening simultaneously .
Each development , and certainly their occurrence in tandem , points to the historic paradigm changes shaping today ’ s global economy – and to the anxiety that comes with the loss of once-dependable anchors , be they economic and financial or social and political .
Restoring these anchors will take time .
There is no game plan as of now , and historic precedents are only partly illuminating .
Yet two things seem clear : different countries are opting , either by choice or necessity , for different outcomes ; and the global system as a whole faces challenges in reconciling them .
Some changes will be evolutionary , taking many years to manifest themselves ; others will be sudden and more disruptive .
Yet , as complex as all of this sounds – and , by definition , paradigm changes are complicated affairs that , fortunately , seldom occur – a simple analytical framework may help shed light on what to look for , what to expect and where , and how best to adapt .
The framework relies on an often-used analytical shortcut : identifying a limited set of explanatory variables in what statisticians call “ a reduced-form equation . ”
The objective is not to account for everything , but rather to pinpoint a small number of variables than can explain key factors , albeit neither perfectly nor fully .
Using this approach , it is possible to argue that the future of many Western economies , and that of the global economy , will be shaped by their ability to navigate four inter-related financial , economic , social , and political dynamics .
The first relates to balance sheets .
Many Western economies must deal with the nasty legacy of years of excessive borrowing and leveraging ; those , like Germany , that do not have this problem are linked to neighbors that do .
Faced with this reality , different countries will opt for different de-leveraging options .
Indeed , differentiation is already evident .
Some , like Greece , face such a parlous situation that it is difficult to imagine any outcome other than a traumatic default and further economic turmoil ; and Greece is unlikely to be the only Western economy forced to restructure its debt .
Others , like the United Kingdom , have moved quickly to take firmer control of their destiny , though their austerity drives will inevitably involve considerable sacrifices .
A third group , led by the US , has not yet made an explicit de-leveraging choice .
Having more time , they are using the less visible , and much more gradual , path of “ financial repression , ” under which interest rates are forced down so that creditors , including those on modest fixed incomes , subsidize debtors .
De-leveraging is closely linked to the second variable – namely , economic growth .
Simply put , the stronger a country ’ s ability to generate additional national income , the greater its ability to meet debt obligations while maintaining and enhancing citizens ’ standards of living .
Many countries , including Italy and Spain , must overcome structural barriers to competitiveness , growth , and job creation through multi-year reforms of labor markets , pensions , housing , and economic governance .
Some , like the US , can combine structural reforms with short-term demand stimulus .
A few , led by Germany , are reaping the benefits of years of steadfast ( and underappreciated ) reforms .
But growth , while necessary , is insufficient by itself , given today ’ s high unemployment and the extent to which income and wealth inequalities have increased .
Hence the third dynamic : the West is being challenged to deliver not just growth , but “ inclusive growth , ” which , most critically , involves greater “ social justice . ”
Indeed , there is a deep sense that capitalism in the West has become unfair .
Certain players , led by big banks , extracted huge profits during the boom , and avoided the deep losses that they deserved during the bust .
Citizens no longer accept the argument that this unfortunate outcome reflects the banks ’ special economic role .
And why should they , given that record bailouts have not revived growth and employment ?
Calls for a fairer system will not go away .
If anything , they will spread and grow louder .
The West has no choice but to strike a better balance – between capital and labor , between current and future generations , and between the financial sector and the real economy .
This leads to the final variable , the role of politicians and policymakers .
It has become fashionable in both America and Europe to point to a debilitating “ lack of leadership , ” which underscores the extent to which an inherently complex paradigm change is straining traditional mindsets , processes , and governance systems .
Unlike emerging economies , Western countries are not well equipped to deal with structural and secular changes – and understandably so .
After all , their histories – and certainly during what was mislabeled as the “ Great Moderation ” between 1980 and 2008 – have been predominantly cyclical .
The longer they fail to adjust , the greater the risks .
Those on the receiving end of these four dynamics – the vast majority of us – need not be paralyzed by uncertainty and anxiety .
Instead , we can use this simple framework to monitor developments , learn from them , and adapt .
Yes , there will still be volatility , unusual strains , and historically odd outcomes .
But , remember , a global paradigm shift implies a significant change in opportunities , and not just risks .
