The Peace Process and the Arab Spring
DENVER – President Barack Obama ’ s speech on the ongoing popular uprisings in the Middle East , followed by Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu ’ s recent visit to Washington , was intended to kick off a renewed effort to revive the Israeli-Palestinian peace process .
Things are not turning out as planned .
Instead , Netanyahu took the opportunity of Obama ’ s address to emphasize his own well-documented opposition to a two-state solution based on a return to the pre-1967 borders .
He chose not to address either the issue of using those borders as a starting point for negotiations , or Obama ’ s idea of land swaps ( a very common element of international peace negotiations ) as the means to get from that starting point to the end game .
Netanyahu ’ s response to Obama ’ s initiative signaled what has been apparent for some time : the complex regional process known as the Arab Spring , and the eve of a US presidential election year , are difficult circumstances in which to try to re-start the peace process .
As Netanyahu ’ s statements suggested , the Israelis have some serious concerns : if the basic equation remains after all “ land for peace , ” just who will their interlocutors be after the dust has settled in the Arab world ?
This troubled moment is an appropriate occasion to ask some fundamental questions about the peace effort itself , a process whose length in years is beginning to span the lifetimes of some of the people engaged in it .
The elements of an eventual settlement have been known for years : the creation of a viable Palestinian state – a goal endorsed by the last two US presidents – together with secure borders for Israel , some arrangement on Jerusalem , and an economic package .
If these components were boxed and sold as a parlor game , those playing it would not find creating Middle East peace especially challenging .
Yet , for decades , neither the parties nor any of the many peace mediators have been able to claim the prize .
Now that a raucous regional situation is being joined to a raucous American election season ( where no issue is excluded from the political arena ) , the task of assembling these components will be even more difficult .
It is too early to assess the historical effect of the Arab Spring , but if there is one conclusion that can be drawn today , it is that Israel and its Palestinian neighbors had little to do with it .
For Americans ( and others ) who believe that the Arab world thinks about nothing but the Palestinian cause , events this spring in North Africa , the Arabian Peninsula , and even the Levant should have convinced them otherwise .
In the months ahead , we can expect the region ’ s countries to remain focused on issues of governance and capacity building , human rights , and how to create economies that respond to their restive citizens ’ demands for a better life . New Arab leaders will struggle mightily with the public ’ s rising expectations , and their willingness to get behind a peace process will take a backseat to that struggle .
Thus , an argument could be made that during this delicate time of transition , and in the complete absence of any indication of progress , the peace process might well benefit – at least for the time being – from stalemate , if not benign neglect .
When nothing is moving in the right direction , the most appropriate step might be to press the pause button .
Here , everyone needs to tread with care .
There has been considerable discussion about how regional developments could eventually affect the peace process .
For example , any leadership in Egypt must deal with more democratic internal structures ( such as parliamentary committees ) in the future .
But the absence of a peace process could also eventually influence internal developments in Middle East countries undergoing reform .
We should not ignore how the absence of a peace process could ultimately erode the fragile ( and by no means universal ) gains in the rest of the Arab world .
If the peace process does not exist , the resulting vacuum might tempt some in the Arab world to deal with the problem of rising economic expectations – and , alas , dashed political expectations – through old-fashioned anti-Israel demagoguery .
One of the most hopeful and refreshing aspects of the Arab Spring has been the retreat of Arab radicalism in the face of real people anxious to address real problems .
But the absence of a peace process could encourage its return .
So policymakers are facing difficult challenges .
It is critical to respond to the Arab Spring with assistance that is commensurate to the movement ’ s historical possibilities .
The Obama administration ’ s efforts in Egypt , as well as the G-8 ’ s proposals for what needs to be done for the region as a whole , signals that international leaders understand that this is a defining moment .
But this recognition won ’ t be enough .
World leaders must help the battered peace process pick itself up from the canvas , clear its head , and fight on .
