The End of Fiscal Sovereignty in Europe
MILAN – The late Milton Friedman said that a common currency – that is , a monetary union – cannot be sustained without a deep form of economic and political union .
By this , he meant an open economy that ensures the free flow of goods , labor , and capital , together with a disciplined central fiscal authority and a strong central bank .
The latter two are pillars of a strong currency . They work in tandem .
But the other pieces are no less important .
The eurozone , currently wrestling with fiscal imbalance and sovereign debt risk , has a strong and autonomous central bank , but is fiscally fragmented and only partly unified politically .
Enter the Maastricht Treaty , which in theory imposes fiscal discipline by placing limits on government deficits and debt levels – clearly a structure designed to prevent free riding on the fiscal discipline of others .
Maastricht was thus intended to prevent a situation like the current one in Greece .
It didn ’ t work .
Eurozone sovereign debt turned out not to be homogenous with respect to risk .
In a stable world , Maastricht Treaty ’ s rules-based framework , if enforced , might do the job .
But in a shock-prone world , it is a fragile system , because it precludes anything but modest countercyclical policy .
No wonder , then , that the treaty ’ s strict limits were breached early in the euro ’ s first decade bycore countries as well as peripheral ones .
Indeed , with a large shock , much of the breach happens automatically , as tax revenues shrink and social-insurance payments expand .
Recent analysis by the International Monetary Fund suggests that as much as 80 % of the fiscal stimulus in advanced countries during the current crisis is non-discretionary .
That kind of built-in counter-cyclicality is not a bad thing .
But if it produces the threat of fiscal instability and excessive sovereign-debt risk after a large shock , then the starting point was not sufficiently conservative – in other words , deficits or debt levels ( or both ) were too high .
Counter-cyclicality does not mean running modest deficits in the good times and huge deficits in major downturns .
If the current EU budget rules are too rigid and are ignored in the face of a shock , then the door is open for imprudent fiscal behavior .
In theory , strict in-depth monitoring could distinguish genuinely prudent countercyclical responses from profligacy .
But in practice it is hard to enforce .
The eurozone ’ s immediate challenge is declining fiscal stability in a subset of countries whose credit ratings are falling and debt-service costs rising .
Absent external assistance and a credible plan for restoring fiscal order , Greek sovereign debt could not be rolled over , forcing a default , probably in the form of a restructuring of Greek debt .
Even with external assistance , many view default as a near certainty , because the arithmetic of restoring fiscal balance is so daunting .
Eurozone membership precludes inflation and devaluation as adjustment mechanisms .
An alternative is domestic deflation combined with extreme fiscal tightening – that is , a period of slow or negative growth in wages , incomes , and some prices of non-traded goods .
But deflation is painful and cannot realistically be pursued for political reasons .
The constraints for eurozone countries are similar to those of a state in America that gets into fiscal trouble .
Devaluation is not an option because of the common currency . The Federal Reserve will not willingly resort to inflation .
Moreover , in the United States , there are rules and conventions ( similar to Maastricht ) that disallow or discourage states from running long-term deficits .
This means that state fiscal behavior tends to be pro-cyclical in the face of large shocks like the recent one .
So why isn ’ t a federal system equally fragile ?
There are two key safety valves .
One is the central government ’ s ability to run deficits and to act decisively .
The other is labor mobility .
The EU does not have a robust centralized fiscal structure with a counter-cyclical mandate .
And labor mobility , a long-run goal in the EU , is constrained by language , laws , and diverse regulatory regimes .
In addition , state bonds are not treated as equals , and the markets penalize profligate states .
If the EU wants a monetary union in which sovereign debt is relatively homogenous with respect to risk , fiscal discipline must be similarly homogenous .
But that also means that it will need a more robust mechanism for countercyclical responses to shocks .
The EU ’ s leaders recently stated their intention to revisit the Maastricht structure , which in principle is a good idea .
They might take the route of adapting the Maastricht rules to allow for more inter-temporal flexibility at the national level .
But that approach would be complicated . One would need a sophisticated capability for monitoring and enforcing fiscal policy and sovereign debt – or else end up with a repeat of the current situation .
A better long-term solution is a central EU fiscal capacity that accumulates the resources to respond to shocks during periods of growth .
One could think of it as a stabilization tax that becomes negative in downturns .
But a move in this direction does involve some degree of fiscal centralization .
And it probably would require that the EU be able to issue sovereign debt .
It is unclear whether there is the political will to do all that .
But a step in the right direction could be taken by partial fiscal centralization with a limited countercyclical mandate .
That would enable effective enforcement of fiscal discipline at the national level and provide the euro with the fiscal discipline it needs to survive .
When the eurozone was created , it was widely understood that fiscal discipline was a crucial underpinning .
The current crisis vividly underscores the point .
The challenge now is to achieve a combination of discipline and flexibility that protects the collective interest .
That will involve a loss of full fiscal sovereignty , but facing up to that reality is required to sustain the monetary union .
