Hybrid Humans
SINGAPORE – The election of a new pope always sparks debate about the tension between tradition and modernity in the Catholic Church .
Perhaps more interesting is the ongoing modernization of the language in which those debates are conducted : Latin .
While Catholic doctrines have evolved slowly , the Latin vocabulary has been expanding steadily in recent years , reflecting the surge of neologisms ( new words , usages , and expressions ) that has accompanied technology ’ s increasingly prominent role in people ’ s daily lives .
The addition of terms like telephonium albo televisifico coniunctum ( video telepresence ) and usus agonisticus medicamenti stupecfactivi ( performance-enhancing drugs ) has helped to spark a revival of Latin education in the West , despite growing competition from Mandarin .
Likewise , the English language ’ s ability to produce and absorb neologisms is an important reason why it will endure as the world ’ s lingua franca .
The Oxford English Dictionary , now updated quarterly , revised more than 1,900 entries in its March 2011 edition , and added new terms , such as “ subdomain , ” “ dataveillance , ” and “ geotagging . ”
Humans use language to make sense not only of specific concepts , but also of larger scientific , social , and historical movements .
With technology changing the face – and pace – of such movements , devising terms that capture its far-reaching impact on human life is becoming increasingly important .
For example , according to Nobel laureate Robert Fogel , medical and nutritional advances since the Industrial Revolution have accelerated and directed the evolutionary process , making modern humans a fundamentally different species from Homo sapiens .
In 2011 , bio-technology investor Juan Enriquez coined the term Homo evolutis to denote this shift .
But do widely accepted labels like “ Information Age ” and “ knowledge-based society ” adequately describe the global movement that is underway ?
Technology-fueled development is causing historical eras to become cumulative , rather than linear .
As the world enters the Information Age , most countries are still experiencing the Agricultural and Industrial Ages .
In order to describe emerging socio-technological patterns – including the merging of scientific disciplines and the fusion of human life with progress in these fields – the current era should be called the “ Hybrid Age . ”
It is an age , most tellingly , of proliferating new terminology .
For example , we now have “ synthetic biology ” to describe a hybrid of biology and chemical engineering in which scientists create biological systems that are not found in nature .
Man-made cells can now be inserted into humans .
In 2010 , the biologist Craig Venter created the first fully synthetic and self-replicating cell .
In another hybrid discipline , “ molecular computing , ” organic or artificial enzymes are programmed to conduct complex calculations faster than silicon chips .
The field could provide an avenue , alongside 3D silicon chips , for maintaining – or even accelerating – the pace of Moore ’ s Law , which states that the number of transistors on the integrated circuits used by computers doubles every two years .
Humans ’ biological hybridization with technology also requires new vocabulary .
At the MIT Media Lab , double-amputee Hugh Herr has pioneered “ biomechatronics , ” which combines biology , mechanical engineering , and electronics to invent efficient , lifelike prosthetics .
Some believe that Herr ’ s work heralds an age of bionic superhumans .
Moving from muscles to the mind , brain-computer interface technologies have advanced significantly in recent years , giving rise to “ neuro-prosthetics , ” which has already enabled paraplegics to navigate a computer mouse with their thoughts and monkeys to operate a giant robotic arm .
Scientists are now working to pinpoint the neuro-chemistry of thought and emotions so accurately that new technologies could be developed to allow humans to communicate them silently .
With scientists working tirelessly to refine such technologies , the public must become more knowledgeable about their socioeconomic implications .
Neither of the existing paradigms for assessing individual potential – intelligence quotient and emotional quotient – can assess a person ’ s ability to compete against the growing “ robo-collar ” workforce .
Industrial robots are now displacing Foxconn workers making iPhones in China ; Intuitive Surgical ’ s da Vinci robot reduces the need for surgical assistants in operating rooms ; and the Engkey robot teaching English in South Korea may gradually fill the 30,000 teaching positions that Westerners there currently occupy .
Increasingly sophisticated algorithms are replacing currency traders , paralegals , and even news reporters .
Competing with the increasingly competent robotic labor force will require people to enhance their “ technology quotient . ”
Societies and governments must drive this shift by boosting technology ’ s role in both the form and content of educational curricula .
Improved technological capacity would not only help citizens to compete for jobs ; it would help countries thrive in the new global environment of increasing hybridization .
The rise and fall of empires has long been considered a geopolitical matter , based on factors such as military assets , resource endowments , and population size .
Likewise , geo-economic calculations of relative GDP , terms of trade , and foreign-exchange reserves carry significant weight in determining the balance of power .
But all of these metrics fail to account for factors like research and development , technological innovation , and commercialization , which are now more indicative of future success than nuclear arsenals or economic size .
Indeed , the Hybrid Age is shaping up to be an era of “ geo-technology . ”
The stakes of geo-technological competition are higher than ever .
Cyberwarfare is proving to be as threatening to political and economic stability as conventional military conflict .
At the same time , technologies like water filtration systems , drought-resistant seeds , renewable energy , and the Internet have the potential to fulfill the basic needs of a crowded planet better than any empire could .
Many historical periods have been named after imperial hegemons : Pax Romana , Pax Britannica , Pax Americana .
Some believe that , with the rise of China , Pax Sinica is next .
But these eras have been characterized by conquest and exploitation , not peace .
Perhaps what comes next will be a fundamental break from the past , a truly modern era of Pax Technologica .
