The Eurozone ’ s Autumn Hangover
NEW YORK – After a summer of Europeans forgetting their woes and tanning themselves at the beach , the time for a reality check has come .
For the fundamental problems of the eurozone remain unresolved .
First , a trillion-dollar bailout package in May prevented an immediate default by Greece and a break-up of the eurozone .
But now sovereign spreads in the peripheral eurozone countries have returned to the levels seen at the peak of the crisis in May .
Second , a fudged set of financial “ stress tests ” sought to persuade markets that European banks ’ needed only € 3.5 billion in fresh capital .
But now Anglo-Irish alone may have a capital hole as high as € 70 billion , raising serious concerns about the true health of other Irish , Spanish , Greek , and German banks .
Finally , a temporary acceleration of growth in the eurozone in the second quarter boosted financial markets and the euro , but it is now clear that the improvement was transitory .
All of the eurozone ’ s peripheral countries ’ GDP is still either contracting ( Spain , Ireland , and Greece ) or barely growing ( Italy and Portugal ) .
Even Germany ’ s temporary success is riddled with caveats .
During the 2008-2009 financial crisis , GDP fell much more in Germany – because of its dependence on collapsing global trade – than in the United States .
A transitory rebound from such a hard fall is not surprising , and German output remains below pre-crisis levels .
Moreover , all the factors that will lead to a slowdown of growth in most advanced economies in the second half of 2010 and 2011 are at work in Germany and the rest of the eurozone .
Fiscal stimulus is turning into fiscal austerity and a drag on growth .
The inventory adjustment that drove most of the GDP growth for a few quarters is complete , and tax policies that stole demand from the future ( “ cash for clunkers ” all over Europe , etc . ) have expired .
The slowdown of global growth – and actual double-dip recession risks in the US and Japan – will invariably impede export growth , even in Germany .
Indeed , the latest data from Germany – declining exports , falling factory orders , anemic industrial-production growth , and a slide in investors ’ confidence – suggest that the slowdown has started .
In the periphery , the trillion-dollar bailout package and the non-stressful “ stress tests ” kicked the can down the road , but the fundamental problems remain : large budget deficits and stocks of public debt that will be hard to reduce sufficiently , given weak governments and public backlash against fiscal austerity and structural reforms ; large current-account deficits and private-sector foreign liabilities that will be hard to rollover and service ; loss of competitiveness ( driven by a decade-long loss of market share in labor-intensive exports to emerging markets , rising unit labor costs , and the strength of the euro until 2008 ) ; low potential and actual growth ; and massive risks to banks and financial institutions ( with the exception of Italy ) .
This is why Greece is insolvent and a coercive restructuring of its public debt is inevitable .
It is why Spain and Ireland are in serious trouble , and why even Italy – which is on relatively sounder fiscal footing , but has had flat per capita income for a decade and little structural reform – cannot be complacent .
As fiscal austerity means more recessionary and deflationary pressures in the short run , one would need more monetary stimulus to compensate and more domestic demand growth – via delayed fiscal austerity – in Germany .
But the two biggest policy players in the eurozone – the European Central Bank and the German government – want no part of that agenda , hoping that a quarter of good GDP data makes a trend .
The rest of the eurozone is in barely better shape than the periphery : the bond vigilantes may not have woken up in France , but economic performance there has been anemic at best – driven mostly by a mini housing boom .
Unemployment is above 9 % , the budget deficit is 8 % of GDP ( larger than Italy ) , and public debt is rising sharply .
Nicolas Sarkozy came to power with lots of talk of structural reforms ; he is now weakened even within his own party and lost regional elections to the left ( the only case in Europe of a shift to the left in recent elections ) .
Given that he will face a serious challenge from the Socialist Party candidate – most likely the formidable Dominique Strauss-Kahn – in the 2012 presidential election , Sarkozy is likely to postpone serious fiscal austerity and launch only cosmetic structural reforms .
Belgian Prime Minister Yves Leterme , as current holder of the rotating EU presidency , now speaks of greater European policy unity and coordination .
But Leterme seems unable to keep his own country together , let alone unite Europe .
Even Angela Merkel – in growing Germany – has been weakened within her own coalition .
Other eurozone leaders face stiff political opposition : Silvio Berlusconi in Italy , whom one hopes may soon be booted out of power ;
And politics is becoming nationalistic and nativist in many parts of Europe , reflected in an anti-immigrant backlash ; raids against the Roma ; Islamophobia ; and the rise of extreme right-wing parties .
So a eurozone that needs fiscal austerity , structural reforms , and appropriate macroeconomic and financial policies is weakened politically at both the EU and national levels .
That is why my best-case scenario is that the eurozone somehow muddles through in the next few years ; at worst ( and with a probability of more than one-third ) , the eurozone will break up , owing to a combination of sovereign debt restructurings and exits by some weaker economies .
