The Libertarian and the Lobbyists
WASHINGTON , DC – In the three years since the global financial crisis erupted , two dominant views of what went wrong have emerged .
It is crucial that we understand each , because their implications for policymakers – and thus for the future health and stability of the global economy – could not be greater .
The first view is that governments simply lost control of the situation , either through incompetence or because politicians were pursuing their own agendas .
This is the view heard most frequently from the political right – for example , from people who think that the main problem in the run-up to the financial meltdown of 2008 was government housing policies .
In the United States , among the candidates still competing for the Republican Party ’ s nomination to challenge Barack Obama in November ’ s presidential election , Ron Paul stands out for arguing consistently that government is the problem , not the answer , with regard to banking .
If the government were removed more fully from the financial sector ( including abolishing the Federal Reserve ) , he argues , the economy would function better .
The second view is that the financial sector lobbied long and hard for deregulation in recent decades , and spent a great deal of time and money persuading politicians that it constituted the safe and modern approach to banking .
According to this view , government policies did not fail ; on the contrary , they operated exactly as intended – and as bought and paid for .
If this view is correct , the kind of policy prescription recommended by Ron Paul is less appealing .
Unless you think that a modern financial sector really can operate with absolutely no regulation of any kind ( including , presumably , the rules for banks that come with deposit insurance ) , the real problem is not government officials ’ policy preferences , but what financial-sector lobbyists are able to persuade officials to do .
Fresh evidence supporting the second view is now available in the form of a recent study by Deniz Igan and Prachi Mishra of the International Monetary Fund .
In “ Three ’ s Company : Wall Street , Capitol Hill , and K Street , ” the authors look at the data – lots of it – on lobbying by financial-sector companies in the US .
Legislators , of course , have different preferences about what kinds of laws to support , which can make it hard to study mechanisms of political influence precisely .
But Igan and Mishra approach the problem in a clever way – they look for instances when elected officials switched their position on legislative proposals that surfaced more than once .
And they devote a lot of effort to figuring out what caused this switch .
In addition to analyzing information about lobbying expenditures , the authors map out the network connections of lobbyists ( known collectively as “ K Street , ” because so many have their Washington offices there ) and legislators .
For example , lobbyists were often previously employed by legislators on their staffs .
The results are simply staggering – although surely not a surprise to professional lobbyists .
A big increase in lobbying expenditures helps to persuade legislators to switch their votes .
And “ whether any of the lobbyists working on a bill also worked for a legislator in the past sways the stance on that bill in favor of deregulation . ”
It is deregulation , of course , that financial firms want – fewer rules and less oversight of any kind .
And it really is all about whom you know , and how you know them .
In particular , your value as a lobbyist seems to depend very highly on whom you worked with in the past .
Igan and Mishra find “ spending an extra dollar is almost twice as effective in switching a legislator ’ s position if the lobbyist is connected to the legislator compared to the case where the lobbyist is unconnected . ”
The revolving door between Congress and lobbying firms appears to have been central to how the financial sector became deregulated , which effectively allowed excessive risk-taking in the run-up to the crisis .
In another paper , Igan and Mishra , working with Thierry Tressel , found that firms taking more risks before 2008 were also engaged in more lobbying .
Essentially , financial firms have been buying the right to take on more risk .
When things go well , executives in these firms get the upside – mostly in terms of immediate compensation , because few executives are compensated on the basis of risk-adjusted returns .
That means that when the risks materialize and the firms suffer losses , the costs fall on taxpayers .
Ron Paul is right to point to imbalances of power and massive distortions within the financial sector .
He is also correct that many government policies favor relatively few big firms – and favor them in a way that encourages excessive and dangerous risk-taking .
But Paul and others are wrong to argue that the government is the ultimate cause of all financial evil .
Executives in financial firms want to take big risks .
They like arrangements under which they win even when they lose .
Big financial firms can more readily buy the necessary political protection ( in the form of deregulation ) , enabling them to become even bigger and more dangerous .
This incentive structure has only become more extreme since the financial crisis of 2008 .
