The Eurozone ’ s Strength in Disunity
FLORENCE – For months , an increasingly frenetic , even apocalyptic , debate about the fate of the euro has been the major driver of global instability .
Can Europe ’ s common currency survive ? No less a figure than former United States Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan has now declared that it cannot .
But the euro also seems surprisingly resilient in the face of this woe .
Unlike in the early summer of 2010 , it has been largely stable relative to the dollar on foreign-exchange markets .
That stability is puzzling .
Skeptics have plenty of ammunition for their critique of the euro .
European governments ’ high-level crisis diplomacy and new and ever more complex mechanisms sometimes briefly calm the markets , but the tide of doubt quickly sweeps back in .
For a day , or sometimes only for a few hours , traders succumb to the illusion of stability , fueling a euphoric but ephemeral financial-market rally .
Then they awaken to the reality that not much has really changed , and that in a few weeks or months the problems will reappear in a seemingly even more intractable form .
All manner of new legal and constitutional difficulties constantly arise .
Is an amendment to the EU treaty required ?
Isn ’ t that politically unthinkable ?
One is ineluctably led to the conclusion that governance of the eurozone is irredeemably flawed .
But the persistence of these difficulties sheds light on why the eurozone was established in the first place .
Market turbulence demonstrates a need for some institutional mechanism that can ensure greater currency stability .
An international currency is the most obvious solution .
The euro originated from the harmful effects of international currency instability in the wake of the collapse of fixed-exchange-rate regimes in the early 1970 ’ s .
Whenever the dollar was weak , capital surged into alternative currencies , notably the Japanese yen and the German Mark .
But exchange-rate appreciation put great strain on the export industries that were central to these countries ’ economic performance ; and both countries tried desperately to avoid becoming reserve currencies .
Today , the major “ beneficiaries ” – in fact , victims – of dollar doubts are economies that are much smaller than Japan or Germany .
Nowadays , capital flows are driving up the Swiss franc , the Swedish and Norwegian krone , and the Canadian and Australian dollars , causing profound dislocations in these small economies as their products and services become uncompetitive .
The managers of these new safe-haven currencies are now desperately seeking at least a temporary peg or some system of bands relative to the exchange rates of their big neighbors .
Such a policy is fraught with danger ; indeed , it is inherently self-defeating , as the establishment of a peg or a band provides an obvious target against which speculators can take huge positions .
The current turmoil eventually will lead smaller European countries to look for ways to tie themselves much more closely to the euro .
That is what happened in the 1970 ’ s , during the original wave of currency turmoil : the Scandinavians and the Swiss negotiated to associate themselves with a European currency regime .
Today , the logic of that strategy has become even more compelling .
The benefits of euro membership are also clear to many other small economies .
Slovenia , which entered the eurozone in 2007 , and Slovakia , which joined at the beginning of 2009 – just as the cresting financial crisis slammed shut the door to further euro enlargement – have enjoyed much greater financial stability than their untied neighbors .
Part of those neighbors ’ problem was that domestic borrowing costs looked so high that many small borrowers , including many house buyers , turned to low-interest Swiss-franc loans and were then hit by the franc ’ s massive appreciation .
The turbulence reinforces the lesson – fundamental to the rationale of establishing the euro – that ordinary people and businesses should not be exposed to exchange-rate risk .
Even in larger countries , the costs and benefits of membership in a currency union are under renewed consideration .
In the initial aftermath of the financial crisis , it was widely assumed that currency flexibility gave the United Kingdom an advantage over eurozone members like Spain .
But Spanish exports recovered more quickly than British exports , and inflationary pressure via the exchange rate is now a major constraint on future British monetary policy .
Of course , there are obvious governance problems with the eurozone .
Most glaringly , the question of how to allocate the costs of some member countries ’ unsustainable debt overhang has not been adequately addressed .
It is easy to conclude that no one is in charge : not the national governments , and certainly not the ineffective European Commission in Brussels , with which the large member countries seem to be practically at war .
And yet , paradoxically , the absence of control is what makes the euro attractive .
Unlike the US dollar , there is no obvious way to put pressure on the European Central Bank to depreciate the currency in order to obtain a competitive advantage over other economies .
European governments are not in a position to instruct the ECB to purchase government bonds .
The more the eurozone ’ s ineffective governance is criticized , the greater becomes the euro ’ s importance as a non-political currency that represents a secure store of value .
In a stable world of confident markets , small countries can rest easy with their own monetary regimes .
In a turbulent world of market volatility , however , they risk being overwhelmed .
There is thus a surprising resilience in the European project .
A bundle of logs lashed together in a raft – even if it lacks a rudder – has a clear advantage over a single storm-tossed trunk .
The higher the waves of doubt and uncertainty become , the more the common approach is needed .
