The Khmer Rouge in the Dock
These days suspected war criminals - from Rwanda to Serbia to Sierra Leone - are in the dock .
Dozens are still on the run , but hope remains that they , too , will face justice .
This is not true of the perpetrators of the Cambodian genocide of the 1970 's .
They remain free , and nobody is looking for them .
A quarter of Cambodia 's population of eight million was executed , starved to death , or succumbed to disease during the Khmer Rouge 's rule from 1975-79 .
There has been no real trial , no truth commission , and no official acknowledgement of one of the most heinous crimes in human history .
As a result , many Cambodians born since 1979 do not understand the scope and gravity of the atrocities .
Meanwhile , the anguish and sorrow of survivors - almost all of whom lost loved ones - have not found redress .
This may be about to change .
A year ago , the United Nations and the Royal Government of Cambodia agreed in principle to establish an " Extraordinary Chambers " composed of Cambodian and international prosecutors and judges to investigate and try the " senior leaders of Democratic Kampuchea and those who were most responsible for crimes " under Khmer Rouge rule .
Ratification of the agreement has been delayed by the stalemate among Cambodia 's bickering political parties following last year 's elections .
But a breakthrough appears close .
The formal decision to create a tribunal for the Khmer Rouge represents a major achievement after a decade of diplomatic effort .
To implement it , however , a number of hurdles remain to be overcome .
The first obstacle is cost .
Cambodian authorities can help build their credibility by curbing the temptation to pad bills and inflate salaries .
But outsiders will inevitably bear the lion 's share of the budget for the tribunal .
The current estimate - $ 50 million over three years - has shocked donor governments .
But this compares favorably with the Special Court in Sierra Leone ( more than $ 70 million over three years ) , and the $ 100 million spent annually on the international courts for Rwanda and Yugoslavia .
The price is appropriate .
The United States and other western governments fueled Cambodia 's civil war in the 1970 's , then lent the Khmer Rouge legitimacy in the 1980 's by insisting that they continue to occupy Cambodia 's seat at the UN .
If the Khmer Rouge trials are to proceed , donor countries must see the Extraordinary Chambers as a prudent investment toward a stable and productive Cambodia .
Given how long it has taken to get this far , donors must act quickly to come up with the necessary funds .
The second hurdle stems from the fact that Cambodia 's tribunal will be the first internationalized court in which domestic judges form a majority .
This poses a particular challenge in a country where lawyers were among the targets of genocidal violence , where few sitting judges possess formal legal training , and which has little tradition of judicial independence .
There is thus concern that some in Cambodia 's government - which includes officials who once served under the Khmer Rouge - will seek to hijack the trials for political ends .
In order to ensure a credible process , Cambodia and the UN must select judges of the highest caliber , not those that toe a party line .
Prosecutors must follow the evidence wherever it leads .
The trials should be conducted transparently and with broad public involvement .
Non-governmental monitors need to scrutinize the proceedings to ensure that errors are identified early enough to be corrected .
The UN must make clear that it will halt the tribunal if it falls short of international standards .
The third hurdle is the danger that the Extraordinary Chambers will be regarded as the end rather than the beginning of a long-term search for accountability and legal reform .
Given time and resource constraints , it is unlikely that more than a dozen defendants will be tried .
But thousands of others took part in the violence .
Their many victims will rightly seek some form of accounting - at a minimum , an official record of the crimes they suffered .
Before long , an effort to document and publish the truth will be necessary .
Done properly , the proceedings of the Extraordinary Chambers could have further positive ramifications by contributing to lasting changes in Cambodia 's ordinary courts .
By highlighting positive models of judging and legal advocacy , the trials may stimulate public demand for domestic tribunals that dispense justice fairly and effectively .
Cambodia 's government and international donors should respond to this demand by launching reform programs that extend beyond the life of the Extraordinary Chambers .
The Khmer Rouge prosecutions will not be perfect .
But they are necessary .
Pol Pot died in 1998 , but aging senior associates like " Brother Number Two " Nuon Chea and ex-Khmer Rouge president Khieu Samphan live freely in Cambodia .
With sufficient resources , and a determination not to compromise on quality , the Extraordinary Chambers can provide a measure of justice for the victims and an example of law 's power to serve the public good .
