The Poetry of the Euro
PRINCETON – The purpose of creating a common currency has been largely and surprisingly forgotten in crisis-torn Europe .
Instead , there seem to be more pressing concerns : gloomy speculation about the eurozone ’ s impending collapse and desperate attempts to find institutional fixes to its extensive governance problems .
But the euro was not just the outcome of an idiosyncratic quest to reduce the wear on pockets stuffed with odd national coins , or to facilitate intra-European trade .
The bold European experiment reflected a new attitude about what money should do , as well as how it should be managed .
In opting for a “ pure ” form of money , created by a central bank independent of national authority , Europeans self-consciously flew in the face of what had become the dominant monetary tradition . & # 160 ;
In the twentieth century , the creation of money – paper money – was usually thought to be the domain of the state .
Money could be issued because governments had the power to define the unit of account in which taxes should be paid .
This tradition went back well before paper , or fiat , currencies .
For many centuries , even while metallic money circulated , the task of defining units of account – livres tournois , marks , gulden , florins , or dollars – remained a task of the state ( or of those with political power ) .
Abuse of this role , with governments addressing excessive debt by inflating it away , was deeply destructive of political order in the first half of the twentieth century .
After World War II , the liberal politicians most committed to European federalism saw this point clearly .
The economist , central-bank governor , finance minister , and president of the Italian Republic , Luigi Einaudi , pleaded the case in the immediate aftermath of the war : “ If the European federation takes away from the individual states the power of running public works through the printing press , and limits them to expenses that are financed solely by taxes and voluntary loans , it will by that act alone have accomplished a great work . ”
But monetary abuse is no less dangerous in political systems with multi-layered authority , and in the past often led to the breakup of federal states .
That is because inflation is not a benign cure for economic ills , in which beneficent and stimulatory effects are spread equally over the entire region under the inflationary monetary authority .
Making inflation depends on the central bank ’ s decision to monetize specific debt instruments .
After all , the monetary authority never decides simply to convert every obligation into money .
Instead , it decides that some industries , banks , or political authorities need to be sustained for the general good .
Those industries , banks , and political authorities that are not so privileged are inevitably resentful , and view the central bank ’ s actions as an abuse of power .
In federal systems , in particular , those businesses and political authorities far removed from the center are most likely to be excluded from the monetary stimulus and hence are inclined to be resentful .
Hyperinflation in Germany in the 1920 ’ s fanned separatism in Bavaria , the Rhineland , and Saxony , because these remote areas thought that Germany ’ s central bank and central government in Berlin were discriminating against them .
The separatists were politically radical – on the left in Saxony , and on the far right in Bavaria and the Rhineland .
There are also more recent cases of the same effect . In late-1980 ’ s Yugoslavia , as the socialist regime disintegrated , the monetary authorities in Belgrade were inevitably closest to Serbian politicians such as Slobodan Milošević and to Serbian business interests .
As a result , the Croats and Slovenes wanted out of the federation .
In the Soviet Union , inflation appeared as an instrument of Moscow bureaucrats , and there , too , more remote areas sought to break away .
The makers of modern Europe saw that unstable and politically abused money would be a European nightmare , and lead to destructive national animosities and antagonisms .
They were supported by the twentieth century ’ s two most influential economists , Friedrich von Hayek and John Maynard Keynes .
Hayek was the most consistent critic of state-produced money .
His proposal , competitive currencies produced by “ free banking ” in which numerous private authorities would issue their own money , was more radical than the solution adopted by Europeans in the 1990 ’ s .
But the Hayekian element of a money-issuing authority that was extensively protected against political pressures , and consequently against political opprobrium , was a key part of the European Union ’ s Maastricht Treaty .
Keynes , too , in planning for the postwar order , proposed a synthetic global currency that would guarantee stability and prevent deflation .
The vision of central-bank independence as a necessary part of the constitution of a sound and stable political order was not simply a European construct in the 1990 ’ s .
It was also reflected in legislative changes affecting other central banks , and in central bankers ’ growing prestige .
That view is now seriously challenged .
In the aftermath of the worst financial crisis since WWII , central banks are once again being called on to monetize securities issued by some debtors , but not others .
That task of selecting between debtors is highly political , and poisons the idea of monetary stability .
Jean-Claude Trichet , until recently the president of the European Central Bank , liked to claim that money was like poetry , before adding that both give a sense of stability .
That unusual but accurate formulation is reminiscent of General August Neidhardt von Gneisenau ’ s famous reply to the Prussian King , who dismissed as “ nothing more than poetry ” von Gneisenau ’ s patriotic concerns in the early nineteenth century .
“ Religion , prayer , love of one ’ s ruler , love of the fatherland , what are these but poetry ? ” von Gneisenau asked .
“ Upon poetry is founded the security of the throne . ”
Stable money , too , is the foundation of political order .
We should not allow ourselves to be so overwhelmed by today ’ s crisis that we forget that .
