The Other Palestinian Revolution
The euphoria that has , for over a week , greeted Mahmoud Abbas 's election as President of the Palestinian Authority was perhaps justified .
But now it is time for a clear-eyed assessment of what lies before Palestinians , Israelis , and , perhaps more importantly , for the wider Arab world .
Such an assessment requires acknowledging that the election was far from flawless : Hamas and Islamic Jihad boycotted the poll , and Marwan Barghouti , a fellow Fatah member with Abbas and the one candidate who could seriously have challenged him , was ungently persuaded by the movement 's leadership to withdraw his candidacy in order to present a unified front .
Moreover , Abbas ( also known as Abu Mazen ) succeeded in getting the dozen or so Palestinian security services and militias under his control .
This guaranteed his victory , though the parades of armed men brandishing guns at his rallies were not exactly what democratic norms call for .
Yet the fact remains that after decades of Yasir Arafat 's autocratic rule , and despite the obvious constraints of continued Israeli occupation , the Palestinians did elect a leader in a relatively free and competitive election .
For years , Arafat avoided holding elections , as required by the laws of the Palestinian Authority , under the pretense that they cannot be held under occupation : but , lo and behold , two months after his demise , an election was held - and with resounding success .
The presidential election will obviously serve as a catalyst for renewed , and possibly more successful , negotiations with Israel .
But the impact of the Palestinian vote will also be watched closely in the Arab world , because what happened in the West Bank and Gaza is unparalleled in the annals of Arab politics .
Abbas will now bask in the glow of having been elected .
Nothing like this has happened in any Arab country .
Indeed , Abbas is now the only Arab leader who came to power in a more or less free election .
Is Palestinian society so different from other Arab societies ?
Not really .
But there were several unique factors in the Palestinian context .
First , there was strong external pressure : confronted and exasperated by Arafat 's deviousness and autocratic style , the United States and the European Union clearly told the Palestinians that any future support for their quest for independence would depend on their going through a reasonably acceptable democratic process .
Second , most Palestinians perceived that their ability to go through such a democratic process was itself a significant step in their struggle against Israel .
Finally , Palestinians have been exposed not only to the obvious hardships of occupation while living under Israeli rule for the better part of four decades ; they were also able to experience , at close range , a liberal democracy at work - a free press , an independent judiciary , and political pluralism .
The dialectic of occupation plays strange games , both with occupier and occupied .
The Palestinian elections were seen all over the Arab world on Al-Jazeera and other Arab TV channels .
They must have focused people 's minds on their own stunted political conditions .
If the Palestinians , under Israeli occupation , can choose their own leaders , why can 't the same happen in Cairo or Damascus , in Ryadh or Algiers ?
When the jubilation and the justly earned compliments for the Palestinians subside , both Arab rulers and Arab masses ( the much hyped " Arab street " ) may start asking some hard questions .
The Palestinians have shown that it is not true that an Arab society cannot progress towards representative institutions .
So why can 't this progress be emulated in other Arab societies ?
Perhaps a time bomb has been planted under the thrones of Arab potentates - kings , emirs and presidents .
While Iraq - an attempt to import democracy by force - is failing , the paradoxical conditions of an Arab democracy under Israeli occupation may be a threat that Arab rulers have not yet comprehended .
