The ECB \ u0026 Europe \ u0027s Upswing
CAMBRIDGE : Europe is on an upswing in growth and euphoria .
But how long can this last ?
Showing the nervousness to be expected of a new recruit , the European Central Bank ( ECB ) has already fired a premature shot at the still hidden figure of inflation .
Will it wait for inflation to really show before firing another volley ?
Or will the ECB empty its guns at the first rumblings of a stronger business cycle , fearful of accusations of running from battle or of being caught of guard .
The ECB might surprise everyone by a successful policy of pragmatism , in the manner of the Alan Greenspan led US Federal Reserve Board .
The ECB , however , should not expect to be popular in the way Mr Greenspan is .
It should simply try to be successful .
At this stage , success for the ECB means one thing only : inflation below 2 % .
Everything else , including lack of a persistent economic upswing can and should be blamed on Europe 's supply side .
Within a year of its establishment the ECB found its way to safe ground : it accepted the advice of Hans Tietmeyer , former head of the Bundesbank , concerning the proper " cruising speed " for Europe 's economy .
To keep inflation below 2 % , cruising speed cannot exceed 1.5 % .
That leaves just enough room for accidents that add to inflation to happen and yet stay below 2 % .
Today 's upswing is the test .
Coming from a point where inflation is barely over 1 % , Europe 's upturn will inevitably add to inflation .
The risk of passing to 1.7 % in the year ahead motivated the ECB 's recent 50 basis point hike .
In capital markets , the commitment to fight inflation , to not be even remotely experimental , was welcomed with a lower long-term rate .
Over the next 6 months we will see how wage rounds are conducted in the new Europe .
To paint the extremes , there are two possibilities .
First , and most optimistically , wage earners throughout the new EMU zone understand the force of permanently fixed exchange rates .
With trade open and unrestricted , with exchange rates gone , labor in each country has lost much , if not all , of its pricing power .
No union can still pretend that it has captive employers who can and will pass wage increases on into prices without reckoning the consequences for profitability and employment .
In this vision of a New European Economy , wage discipline will be stunning .
So , the ECB will encounter no problem of inflation being driven ahead by wages .
Growth can go forward at a significant speed , for wage inflation is no longer an issue .
The pessimistic argument is this : nothing has changed ;
Germany and France had fixed rates for years ; so too Austria , the Netherlands , and Spain .
The only that has changed is that governments are now leftwingish almost everywhere , most dramatically in Germany .
In this view , labor views business as mostly captive , markets as segmented , and the unemployed as generously supported by the State .
So , no more wage moderation ; with profits back it is time to get higher wages for workers back , too .
We won 't know for a few months which alternative will prevail .
But it helps to look ahead and appreciate the narrow room for maneuver facing the ECB .
With inflation near Tietmeyer 's cruising speed , there are only a few tenths of a percent of extra inflation that can be accepted , maybe 1.7 rather than only 1.5 % .
Indeed , we can already hear the ECB 's refrain : Assuredly , nobody will argue that a an extra one-tenth percent of inflation helps growth ; surely everyone must agree that an unambiguous success on keeping inflation below 2 % does help growth .
Thus , no experiments .
The ECB will then raise interest rates to slow European growth .
If the EU or the ECB forecast near 3 % growth for two consecutive years , watch for interest rates to jump .
The ECB has arrived at where the Bundesbank was for over a decade .
The central bank cannot create growth in an economy that has a bad supply side ; in the US , with highly competitive markets , the central bank can afford to stand by .
In Europe , where competition and flexibility are in short supply , indeed are disdained by political leaders , the central bank must be preemptive .
When in doubt , fire .
The ECB is right to establish its inflation-fighting credentials ; it is right to be unambiguous in educating labor markets to its total unwillingness to accommodate the old ways .
Only when that point is established , if necessary at the cost of a growth slowdown , can we expect to start seeing improvements in labor market behavior .
Even a slowdown will not be enough so long as governments accommodate unwarranted real wage gains ( and the resulting unemployment ) with generous income support .
The payoff for Europe cannot come from the central bank , it must come from governments recognizing that the ECB cannot create growth .
Only they can create the conditions for growth by allowing for a far more competitive supply side .
But it is hard to see even the smallest indication of a more competitive supply side .
Governments , most strikingly in Germany , seek to escape from their political dilemmas by talking about the transition to a learning society and other dreams .
At the same time , however , they go out of their way to stop radical cures through aggressive mergers or tough corporate workouts .
None of this will change without a crisis .
But Europe is rich and for that reason won 't have a crisis any time soon .
In essence , Europe is satisfied with low growth and borrowing from its grandchildren just because that keeps the peace and it keeps confused and undecided governments in power just a bit longer .
In fact , not just a bit , they can surely play the same game for another decade .
If Europe 's economy performs poorly , blame Schroeder , don 't blame the ECB .
A new central bank and an old economy mean one thing : low inflation and low growth .
