More Leadership for More Europe
MILAN – The debate about improving economic governance within the eurozone is shedding new light on the system ’ s weaknesses .
It was already evident when the Maastricht
Treaty was signed in 1992 that a monetary union without something similar in the fiscal domain would be unsustainable in the long run .
Then , for the common currency ’ s first decade , that fundamental flaw was papered over .
Now the eurozone – with a centralized monetary policy , run by the European Central Bank , alongside 27 national fiscal policies – has come to look like a mockery of economic common sense .
Early on , important states like France and Germany stopped taking seriously the European Union ’ s Stability and Growth Pact ( SGP ) , which was supposed to guarantee fiscal discipline and coordination among the member states .
With the euro ’ s introduction boosting intra-European trade and lowering inflation in many member states , fiscal obligations were simply ignored .
The euro quickly became the world ’ s second most important currency , and it proved to be a shield against external financial turbulence .
Optimism soared and prudence fled – reflected in premature eurozone membership for countries like Greece , as well as in the gap between the pace of EU enlargement and that of institutional integration .
In other words , Europe ’ s decision-makers ultimately overlooked the basic requirements of a monetary union in a heterogeneous economic area :
• & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; A sizeable common budget for the provision of public goods .
• & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; Fiscal transfers from more prosperous areas to lagging or distressed regions .
• & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; Some form of mutualization of public debt , carried out under stringent rules .
• & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; Above all , a central bank with all of the prerogatives and instruments needed to serve as lender of last resort .
Satisfying these conditions would , of course , lead to fully-fledged political union , but the process could be gradual , starting with a banking union , a fiscal union , or a central bank with lender-of-last-resort status – a functionalist approach that might be more politically viable .
Some will oppose greater solidarity nonetheless , disregarding the elementary fact that enhanced interdependence in a monetary union requires it , and ignoring the Lisbon Treaty ’ s affirmation of Europe ’ s “ social market ” model .
A monetary union that does not benefit all of its participants will not survive for long .
After the eurozone ’ s sovereign-debt crisis erupted , defaults were avoided by establishing the European Financial Stabilization Mechanism ( since replaced by the European Stability Mechanism ) , and by crafting a more pragmatic and reinforced role for the ECB ( acting with the European Commission and the International Monetary Fund ) .
And a new “ fiscal compact ” foresees enshrining member states ’ commitment to budget balance – and to reducing public debt to within 60 % of GDP in 20 years – in their constitutions .
But any assessment of European economic governance must acknowledge the slow , contradictory nature of intergovernmental decision-making , in which a misconceived notion of national interest , together with upsurges in popular anti-EU sentiment and electoral pressure , has led to a stop-and-go process , punctuated by financial-market swoons .
Viewed in these terms , the European political class has clearly failed to exercise leadership .
The challenge now is twofold : how to cope with the financial crisis while creating a safer economic future through better governance .
Excessive emphasis on fiscal rigor , unaccompanied by measures to stimulate growth , has reinforced recessionary trends , placing additional strain on national budgets and debt / GDP ratios .
That drives up affected governments ’ borrowing costs further , fueling a downward spiral .
Any lasting solution requires Europeans to acknowledge that they now face a common problem that can be resolved only by greater cohesion and financial solidarity .
The ECB must become a genuine central bank for Europe .
The European banking system must be turned into a banking union with the ECB responsible for prudential supervision .
The fiscal compact must be implemented quickly , and progress on harmonizing fiscal policies should continue .
But fiscal discipline must be accompanied by policies that promote growth , without which balanced budgets and debt reduction cannot be achieved .
The Europe 2020 strategy , approved two years ago in part to improve economic governance , is a good starting point , offering the basis for the “ growth compact ” that some EU governments have sought .
The path to improved European economic governance leads through the EU ’ s political institutions , with “ more Europe ” presupposing further strengthening of the European Parliament and the European Commission , and the abolition of veto powers in the European Council .
The argument that strengthening Europe ’ s common institutions would reduce national sovereignty appears very weak , for the simple reason that in today ’ s globalized economy sovereignty is more apparent than real .
Parallel with these changes , European leaders must publicly acknowledge that if the euro collapses , Europe will quickly revert to competitive devaluations , intra-EU protection , and “ beggar-thy-neighbor ” policies , all of which were evident in the 1970 ’ s and 1980 ’ s .
European public opinion must be made aware that increasing interdependence means that the exchange-rate stability and gradual completion of the single market implied by the euro really do benefit all participants .
Europe ’ s political class needs to find the courage to take the next steps toward a closer union .
The small price that nation-states will have to pay is negligible compared to the likely consequences of inaction .
