The Public and Its Problems
CHICAGO – On a recent visit to Europe , I found economists , journalists , and business people thoroughly frustrated with their politicians .
Why , they ask , can ’ t politicians see the abyss that yawns before them , and come together to resolve the euro crisis once and for all ?
Even if there is no consensus on what a solution might be , can ’ t they meet and thrash out a plan that goes beyond their repeated half-measures ?
It is only because of the European Central Bank ’ s bold decision to lend long term to banks that we have seen some respite recently , or so their argument goes .
Politicians , in contrast , are failing Europe by being forever behind the curve .
Why do they find it so hard to lead ?
One answer that can be easily dismissed is that politicians simply don ’ t understand the gravity of the situation .
Political leaders need not be economic geniuses to understand the advice that they hear , and many are both intelligent and well-read .
A second answer – that politicians have short time horizons , owing to electoral cycles – may contain a kernel of truth , but it is inadequate , because the adverse consequences of timid action often become apparent well before they are up for re-election .
The best answer that I have heard comes from Axel Weber , the former president of Germany ’ s Bundesbank and an astute political observer .
In Weber ’ s view , policymakers simply do not have the public mandate to get ahead of problems , especially novel ones that seem small initially , but , if unresolved , imply potentially large costs .
If the problem has not been experienced before , the public is not convinced of the potential costs of inaction .
And , if action prevents the problem , the public never experiences the averted calamity , and voters therefore penalize political leaders for the immediate costs that the action entails .
Even if politicians have perfect foresight of the disaster that awaits if nothing is done , they may have little ability to persuade voters , or less insightful party members , that the short-term costs must be paid .
Talk is cheap , and , in the absence of evidence to the contrary , the status quo usually appears comfortable enough .
So leaders ’ ability to take corrective action increases only with time , as some of the costs of inaction are experienced .
Calamity can still be averted if the costs of inaction escalate steadily .
The worst problems , however , are those with “ inaction costs ” that remain invisible for a long time , but increase suddenly and explosively .
By the time the leader has the mandate to act , it may be too late .
A classic example was Winston Churchill ’ s warnings against Adolf Hitler ’ s ambitions .
Hitler ’ s plans were outlined in Mein Kampf for all to read – and he did not disguise them in his speeches .
Yet few in Britain wanted to give them credence , and many thought that communism was the greater threat , especially in the bleak years of the Great Depression .
The Nazis ’ dismembering of Czechoslovakia in 1938 made the sincerity of Hitler ’ s ambitions all too clear .
But it was only after the invasion of Poland the following year that Churchill was appointed First Lord of the Admiralty , and he became Prime Minister only after the invasion of France in 1940 , when Britain stood alone .
Britain might well have been better off had Churchill held power earlier , but that would have meant costly rearmament , which was unacceptable so long as there was a chance that Hitler proved to be a paper tiger .
And , of course , it would also have meant entrusting Britain ’ s fate to a politician who , though now regarded as an indomitable leader , was widely distrusted at the time .
Non-linear costs of inaction are most obvious in the financial sector .
At the same time , financial-sector problems may be particularly difficult to address : if politicians emphasize the need for action too strongly in order to get a mandate , they might precipitate the very turmoil that they seek to contain .
Between the Bear Stearns crisis and the failure of Lehman Brothers , the United States government could do little to get ahead of the growing problem ( though , of course , the government-backed mortgage underwriters Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were placed under conservatorship in the interim ) .
It took the post-Lehman panic for Congress to authorize the Troubled Asset Relief Program , which threw a financial lifeline to banks and the auto industry , among others .
And only frenetic action by the Federal Reserve and Treasury ( with authorities around the world joining ) prevented a systemic meltdown .
A subprime-mortgage problem that was initially estimated to imply losses of a few hundred billion dollars imposed far higher costs on the entire world .
Similarly , eurozone politicians have obtained a mandate to take bolder action only as the markets have made the costs of inaction more salient .
Even setting aside Germany ’ s understandable attempt to limit how much it would have to pay , it is difficult to see how politicians could have gotten ahead of the problem .
While the ECB has bought the eurozone some time , the calming effect on markets may be a mixed blessing .
Have Europeans seen enough of the abyss to tolerate stronger action by their leaders ?
If not , markets might have to deteriorate further to make possible a comprehensive resolution to the eurozone crisis .
Similarly , with government bond yields as low as they are in the US , the public has little sense of urgency about its fiscal problems , though some doomsayers , like Peter Peterson of the Blackstone Group , have been trying their best to awaken it .
One hopes that the coming US presidential election will lead to a more enlightened public debate about tax and entitlement reform .
Otherwise , a rapid escalation of yields in the bond market might be necessary for the public to accept that there is a problem , and for politicians to have the room to resolve it .
Don ’ t blame the leaders for appearing short-sighted and indecisive ; the fault may lie with us , the public , for not listening to the worrywarts .
