The Everlasting Schism
Christianity 's holiest days always seem to incite fresh disputes between Roman Catholicism and Russian Orthodoxy , between the first Rome and the third Rome .
This Easter is no different .
What 's new this time is that the current storm came out of the blue .
Last year , Russia 's Patriarch Aleksei gave his blessing to a visit to Moscow by the Catholic girls ' choir of the Saint Danilov monastery .
Soon after , and more importantly , the Patriarch raised the level of Orthodoxy 's representation at an ecumenical prayer called by Pope John Paul II in Assisi on January 24 th .
This was to be followed by a visit to Moscow by a senior Vatican cleric , Cardinal Walter Kasper , President of the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity and the man who helped organize last year 's papal visits to Ukraine , Kazakhstan and Armenia .
An invitation for the Pope to visit Moscow ( a cherished dream of John Paul II ) seemed near at last .
This budding goodwill ended when the Vatican announced plans to reorganize Catholic structures overseas , including within Russia .
A Roman Catholic arch-diocese ( headed by either a Cardinal or Archbishop ) was to be created for Moscow .
Four other apostolic districts in Russia were to be turned into dioceses .
These changes were intended to " grant greater opportunities for Catholic believers , " according to Dr. Joaquin Navarro-Valls , the Vatican press officer .
The pope 's press secretary called this a matter of mere " technical change " with nothing to do with " proselytism . "
Similar measures , indeed , had recently been undertaken by the Moscow Patriach in relation to Orthodox parishes in Berlin , Vienna and Brussels .
Moscow 's reaction was quick and withering .
Archbishop Clement of Kaluga and Borovsk , the vice-chairman of Department for External Church Relations , declared that " the actions outlined by the Vatican are in contravention of the canonical principles and norms of interchurch relations and stand as a serious obstacle to the development of dialogue between the two churches . "
Soon after , Cardinal Kasper 's visit was canceled .
Not to be outdone , Russia 's foreign ministry joined the fray .
Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov expressed " regret " at the Vatican 's actions and , for the first time in many years , failed to make the obligatory call on the Holy See on his trip to Rome this March .
A resolution to " save Orthodoxy " was rushed through the Duma and street protests aimed at the papal nuncio took place .
All of this was taking place around the time that Pope John Paul II was making a " virtual " pilgrimage to Moscow via the internet .
This was accomplished through a televised transmission which connected the Apostolic Palace of the Vatican with the Church of the Immaculate Conception in Moscow .
Speaking on gigantic television screens , Karol Wojtyla blessed Catholic believers in Russian .
But this rather innocuous meeting did not go off without problems as , until the very last moment , the customs office at Moscow 's international airport refused to approve the import of electronic equipment for the televised transmission .
Why is it that , at a time when America and Russia can begin to work together , Catholicism and Orthodoxy prefer to keep going after each other 's throats ?
The current crisis has actually been burning underground for some time , and has broken to the surface now because the Moscow Patriarchate fears that there is a real possibility that John Paul II will be invited by President Putin to visit Russia on governmental matters .
The Pope will be invited as a head of state ( the Vatican ) not in his spiritual capacity .
A stick with which to beat back any instinct in the Kremlin to issue such an invitation was needed by the Patriarch , and so the Vatican 's decision to reorganize its dioceses in Russia must have seemed a godsend .
The leadership of the Orthodox Church does not want to see the current Roman pontiff ever invited to Russia , and appear to be awaiting his replacement as the head of the Holy See .
Why is this ?
First , because the next pope will almost certainly not be Polish - indeed , is unlikely to be any sort of Slav .
Second , the next Pope will not be endowed initially with such enormous moral authority as John Paul II has acquired across the world , and so the Patriarch will be able to speak publicly with him , and be measured against him , on something more like equal terms .
The sharp reactions of the Orthodox Patriarchate to the actions of the Holy See reflect an ongoing crisis of leadership and legitimacy within the Russian Orthodox church , where a battle is clearly underway for the succession of Aleksey II .
After almost a century of oppression , the Orthodox Church is still struggling to define its role in Russia 's postcommunist society , and finds it difficult to compete with more nimble ( and self-assured ) churches .
Moreover , although younger than John Paul II , Patriarch Aleksey II has entered his own " autumn of the patriarch . "
Sad to say , reconciliation between the two churches is thus unlikely to gain momentum until two new leaders begin to command their believers .
