The End of South Africa ’ s Honeymoon
The honeymoon is over for South Africa and the international community .
Domestic problems and regional instability mean foreign policy is becoming an increasingly rocky road for the ruling African National Congress ( ANC ) government of President Thabo Mbeki .
South Africa ’ s internal problems , most notably the upsurge in the AIDS epidemic , have been well documented since the ANC came to power more than ten years ago , but the country ’ s stance as a player within the international community has been less obvious .
There were high expectations , both at home and abroad , that South Africa could and would punch above its weight in international affairs , capitalizing on the extraordinary and unexpected constitutional settlement achieved by Nelson Mandela and F. W. de Klerk in 1994 .
Initially , a foreign policy based on Nelson Mandela ’ s shining global reputation enabled the country to project itself as an exemplary international citizen .
The government aspired to play a constructive role across Africa , act as a spokesman for Third-World interests at the UN and elsewhere , and promote an end to the plethora of conflicts bedeviling the continent .
In time , however , as the impact of Mandela ’ s reputation faded , South Africa became just another country desperately trying to cope with immense social and economic deprivation and anxious for the foreign investment crucial to economic growth .
There was also recognition of limits to what the government could achieve on the international stage , despite some important accomplishments such as its helpful role in the renegotiation of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1995 .
The activist trend in South Africa ’ s foreign policy was initially accelerated under the presidency of Thabo Mbeki after he was first elected in 1999 .
He extolled the notion of an “ African renaissance ” in which Africans are committed to find African solutions for African problems .
NEPAD , the New Partnership for Africa ’ s Development , an organization designed to promote decent and appropriate standards of economic and political development throughout the continent , has been at the core of this policy .
Despite its domestic problems and the loss of global visibility that accompanied Mandela ’ s retirement , South Africa is still perceived as an emerging power comparable in status and aspiration to , say , Brazil , India , and Nigeria .
Such powers seek an effective and constructive regional role , and possibly , in some instances , a global one .
They tend to have proactive and assertive foreign policies and aspire to more than the middle-power status and limited niche-style influence enjoyed by Canada , Sweden , or Saudi Arabia .
South Africa seeks a wider and more influential role reinforced by its obvious standing as a regional hegemon .
But South Africa ’ s aspiration to play a dynamic role beyond its borders is proving increasingly difficult , primarily because the regional environment – indeed , the continental environment – is not hospitable , defying the best efforts of Mbeki ’ s government to produce meaningful and sustained political and economic change .
The persistence of civil wars , periodic failure of ceasefires and mediation efforts , and protagonists that are sometimes warlords and rapacious militias – rather than states capable of making rational decisions – all add to the difficulty of conflict resolution by diplomatic means and traditional peacekeeping .
Zimbabwe is perhaps the key example of South Africa ’ s foreign policy problems .
Mbeki ’ s “ quiet diplomacy ” has not succeeded .
More importantly , South Africa ’ s ruling elite clearly believes that black liberation solidarity of the kind that links Mbeki with Mugabe inevitably trumps human rights .
The persistence of the Zimbabwean crisis profoundly damages South Africa ’ s claim to leadership of efforts at African transformation via organizations such as NEPAD , which is largely dependent on Western aid .
But any agreement at , say , the G-8 Summit in July to disperse such aid in the massive proportions advocated by the recent Report by the Blair Commission on Africa may be difficult to achieve .
In the face of Western and , in particular , American skepticism about South Africa ’ s failure , and that of the Africa Union , to engineer an acceptable outcome to the Zimbabwean crisis , money may not be forthcoming .
The long-term future of South Africa ’ s foreign policy is uncertain : its emergence as a power of substance with a claim to a seat in a reformed UN Security Council will ultimately depend on the government ’ s capacity to attract foreign investment sufficient to help deliver economic and social goods to the country ’ s black majority .
For , as with everywhere else , a successful foreign policy inevitably begins at home .
