The Other Switzerland
BRUSSELS – As policymakers scratch their heads and wonder how best to absorb different cultures and religions into Europe ’ s very distinct national societies , they could do worse than consider some new ideas being developed in Switzerland .
Switzerland , the country that recently voted to ban the construction of minarets on mosques ?
Absolutely .
It is time for Europe to adjust the way that it thinks about nationality , cultural roots , and how it deals with immigrants .
In a world of increasing mobility , an aging Europe will badly need the immigrants of whom it is so frightened – and it should give them a voice in local politics soon ( say , one year ) after they arrive .
After all , it is more important for taxpayers to participate in local politics than to sit on the sidelines waiting to be given the rights of native citizens .
Democratic participation is the best way to integrate people into society and make them feel that their opinions count , regardless of whether they have formal citizenship and thus the right to vote .
I should declare a personal interest here : I was stateless for a time after my birth in Geneva .
My father was American , but naturalized too recently to hand his US citizenship on to me .
I was born on Swiss soil , but that did not give me the right to a Swiss passport .
In the end , the Irish accepted me because that was my mother ’ s nationality .
I have a framed copy of the Act of Parliament by Dail Eireann that was needed .
I have lived in Europe all my life , mostly in Belgium , but never in Ireland , and I have never voted , despite the fact that the Maastricht treaty entitles me to vote both in European elections and in Belgium ’ s local elections .
I suppose that I belong to an expat generation that has not been educated to consider voting an essential right , if not a duty , and I regret that .
But voting in Belgium is compulsory , so once you have started there is no jumping ship without a fine or a good excuse .
Foreign voter participation is clearly bound to work best at a local level , where the issues are more concrete .
That is where Switzerland demonstrates that giving foreigners a voice is good policy , one that also means teaching citizens to understand the benefits of open democracy .
The canton of Neuchatel ( one of the 26 mini-states that comprise the Swiss confederation ) lies alongside the French border .
Its official language is French , it has its own constitution , and it has created a highly efficient Multicultural Cohesion Service .
The Council of Europe , which for 60 years has promoted European integration through human rights and culture , includes Neuchatel among 10 “ intercultural ” cities that it is studying for “ best practice ” policies and governance in multicultural societies .
In the case of Neuchatel , this includes the canton as well as the picturesque lakeside city .
Unemployment is relatively low , despite hard times for its major industry – watch-making – and foreigners represent one-quarter of its 170,000 residents .
Much of Neuchatel ’ s progressive attitude toward foreign residents is attributable to one man , Thomas Facchinetti , who started a multicultural cohesion service 20 years ago and has steadily built it up .
Among his achievements is a Citizens ’ Charter that is handed to every new resident to explain Swiss participatory democracy and lay out its rules .
His offices also have an anti-racism service , offer well publicized access to inexpensive French classes , and distribute booklets on topics like forced marriages and headscarves .
The fact that Facchinetti himself is the lynchpin of the canton ’ s open-minded views may be seen as a weakness , but it is also its strength .
Tolerance has a face – the neat smiling figure of this son of Italian immigrants , who is easily accessible to the canton ’ s citizens .
Partly as a result of his efforts , Neuchatel was one of the four cantons in Switzerland to vote against the ban on new minarets .
If people are to feel committed to the place where they live , they must be allowed to influence decision-making , and that influence should not depend on nationality .
In Neuchatel , many naturalized citizens , including elected local councilors , retain their foreign passports for several reasons : among European Union passport-holders , doing so allows their children to study in the EU or to work there themselves .
Among non-EU citizens , it allows them to re-settle in their parents ’ or grandparents ’ country if they so desire .
No two countries , regions , or cities are the same .
Geography , budgets , political systems , and the number and nature of its immigrants differ .
But where Neuchatel could serve as a model is in its hands-on attitude to helping foreigners fit in by making it easy for people to learn the local language , opening the voting booths to all , and encouraging foreigners to represent their country ’ s communities .
