The Brain-Drain Panic Returns
NEW YORK – While developed countries are angst-ridden over mostly illegal immigration by unskilled workers from developing countries , a different set of concerns has surfaced in Africa , in particular , over the legal outflow of skilled , and even more importantly , highly skilled , people to developed countries .
This outflow is supposedly a new and damaging “ brain drain , ” with rich countries actively luring away needed skills from poor countries .
This fear is misplaced .
At the outset , we have to distinguish between “ need ” and “ demand . ”
Yes , many African countries need skills .
But they are unable to absorb them , owing to several factors associated with economic backwardness .
In India in the 1950 ’ s and 1960 ’ s – & nbsp ; a time when many professionals were emigrating – working conditions were deplorable .
Bureaucrats decided whether we could go abroad for conferences .
Heads of departments carried inordinate power .
So , no surprise , many of us left .
We Hindus may believe in an infinity of lifetimes , but we maximize our welfare in this one , just like everyone else .
Besides , simply holding people back , even if feasible , would do little for their countries . The “ brain ” is not a static concept .
Trapped in Kinshasa , under appalling conditions , the brain will drain away in less time than it takes to get to New York .
Moreover , keeping people at home is easier said than done .
In many poor countries , except those like India and South Korea , which have now developed superb educational institutions , the brightest citizens receive their education abroad .
The challenge , then , is to prevent them from staying there and settling down .
But , in any event , emigration restrictions today would violate a human right enshrined in current international treaties .
But would immigration restrictions work instead , as proposed by some developed-country organizations , which worry about the “ brain drain ” ?
Here , human-rights concerns pose serious difficulties .
Could we really say to a Ghanaian doctor that she must return to her country while an immigrant Russian doctor is allowed to settle down and start a new life ? This is likely to run afoul of anti-discrimination principles and constitutional provisions in countries like the United States .
The proper response to the outflow of skilled manpower from poor countries , especially those in Africa , is to be found in a different direction .
Given that outflows of skilled workers cannot be restricted – and , indeed , should not be – we must devise institutional mechanisms to work with it .
This means adopting a “ diaspora ” model , which implies four policy proposals .
First , stop crying over the fact that the diaspora is not returning home .
Instead , nurture the loyalty of professionals settling abroad , so that they assist their home countries in a variety of ways .
Thus , they may be offered voting rights .
Restrictions on investment and land purchases can be dropped .
And immigration experts like me have proposed since the 1970 ’ s that schemes be developed to enable the academic diaspora to run workshops aimed at bringing teachers up to the best international standards .
Second , while the diaspora should be integrated through more rights , its members also ought to accept obligations that put them on an equal footing with those who remain behind .
I suggested in the 1970 ’ s that a tax be levied on citizens abroad . Known as the “ Bhagwati Tax , ” it is of course “ the American way ” : US citizens and permanent residents abroad , like those at home , must pay federal taxes .
Third , because skills are necessary for nearly all activities in most of Africa , here and now , we need to organize ways to supply such skills to these countries .
I have long argued that , because many in rich countries are retiring while still in sound health , and because altruism increases with age , we could organize a Grey Peace Corps of senior citizens to share their skills in countries whose own trained professionals prefer to settle abroad .
Finally , foreign aid should be used to expand training massively for Africans in all the essential fields in rich countries like the US , the United Kingdom , France , and the Netherlands .
They would add to the diaspora , while the Grey Peace Corps would help to fill current needs .
When development has taken off , and conditions have improved sufficiently to attract people back to their homelands , the hugely increased diaspora would indeed return , as they have done in India , South Korea , and China .
Together , these policies would benefit Africa both immediately and in the long run .
Sentimental handwringing over the “ brain drain , ” and foolish attempts at restricting people ’ s mobility , will not .
