The Only Game in Town
TOKYO – What should central banks do when politicians seem incapable of acting ?
Thus far , they have been willing to step into the breach , finding new and increasingly unconventional ways to try to influence the direction of troubled economies .
But how can we determine when central banks overstep their limits ?
When does boldness turn to foolhardiness ?
Central banks can play an important role in a cyclical downturn .
Interest-rate cuts can boost borrowing – and thus spending on investment and consumption .
Central banks can also play a role when financial markets freeze up .
By offering to lend freely against collateral , they “ liquify ” assets and prevent banks from being forced to unload loans or securities at fire-sale prices .
Anticipating such liquidity insurance , banks can make illiquid long-term loans or hold other illiquid financial assets .
To the extent that unconventional monetary policy – including various forms of quantitative easing , as well as pronouncements about prolonging low interest rates – serves these roles , it might be justified .
For example , the US Federal Reserve ’ s first round of so-called quantitative easing ( QE1 ) , implemented in the midst of the crisis , was doubly effective : By purchasing mortgage-backed securities , the Fed brought down interest rates in that important market ( in part , probably , by signaling its confidence in those securities ) , and restored it to vitality .
Similarly , with its outright monetary transaction ( OMT ) program , the European Central Bank has offered to buy peripheral eurozone countries ’ sovereign bonds in the secondary market – provided that they sign up to agreed reforms .
The logic is that conditionality will ensure that countries are solvent , while OMTs will restore trust to a market that has broken down because investors fear that the countries concerned will exit the eurozone .
Again , its effect , thus far , has been significant .
Other unconventional policies , however , have been undertaken to stimulate the economy , rather than to deal with broken markets .
The benefits have been commensurately smaller .
QE2 , in which the Fed bought long-term government bonds , did not have a discernible effect on long-term government interest rates .
Indeed , with its recent decision to pursue QE3 , the Fed is focusing once again on the mortgage-backed securities market ; but , given that the market is much healthier now , it is unclear how much good this will do .
Recently , the Fed expressed its intent to keep policy rates low for a long time – until employment picks up strongly .
The hope is that if investors consider this announcement credible , long-term interest rates will come down further , encouraging spending .
But the immediate effect on long-term bond rates has not been encouraging .
As central banks venture farther into uncharted territory , advocates argue that at worst they will do no harm .
In fact , no one really knows .
For example , sustained low interest rates hurt savers who traditionally prefer safe short-term investments .
Pensioners and those near retirement , facing low income from interest , may cut back further on consumption , weakening the economy .
Bolder pensioners , desperate to generate higher returns , may take undue risks – for example , investing in junk bonds – that could jeopardize their nest eggs .
And , unfortunately , such financial risk-taking may have little impact in terms of spurring corporations to assume more risk by investing .
Similarly , a potential downside to quantitative easing is that low interest rates send capital to higher-growth , high-interest-rate countries .
In theory , as capital floods in , these countries ’ exchange rates will appreciate rapidly , making them look unattractive and automatically stemming the flow .
In practice though , as investors make money on their trades , they bring in yet more money , forcing further currency appreciation .
All too often , the process does not end smoothly but in a crash .
No wonder recipient countries resist inflows of hot capital .
We also know little about how smooth the exit from quantitative easing will be .
In theory , as the economy picks up and interest rates begin to climb , central banks will simply pay higher interest rates on their reserves , so that they can finance their holdings of long-term securities and shrink them slowly .
But higher interest rates also imply large capital losses for central banks ’ asset holdings .
Even if some of these losses are offset for the government as a whole ( as the central bank loses on its holdings of government debt , the treasury gains in equal measure , because the debt it owes is worth less ) , the losses on long-term private debt holdings are real .
Moreover , the argument that losses are offset is not easy to explain to the public .
Will opinion be sympathetic to the Fed when politicians like Ron Paul excoriate it for losing tens of billions of dollars monthly on its asset holdings ?
Will bond markets fall sharply ( and interest rates rise ) as markets fear that the Fed will be pushed to sell its enormous holdings in short order ?
A last defense offered by advocates of continuing on the path of adventurous monetary policy , even when the perceived benefits are small , is that , because politicians refuse to settle their differences and act , monetary policy is “ the only game in town . ”
In democracies , when there are no other alternatives , politicians often eventually do the right thing .
By creating the impression that something beneficial is being done , unconventional monetary policy relieves pressure on politicians .
So , when central bankers argue that they are the only game in town , they are ensuring that outcome .
Central bankers nowadays enjoy the popularity of rock stars , and deservedly so : their response to the difficult and uncertain environment during and after the financial crisis has been largely impeccable .
But they must be able to admit when they are out of bullets .
