The Hollow Heart of the West
BERLIN – It is tempting to compare NATO and the European Union to the French and Italian football teams in this year ’ s Euro 2008 competition .
What unites them , above all , is a process of “ competitive decadence . ”
The EU and NATO may see themselves as potential rivals or complementary partners in the field of defense . But what their leaders say in private reveals a sense of common frustration .
“ We fail to translate military presence into political influence , ” says the NATO person , who sounds very much like EU representatives commenting on the Union ’ s role in the Middle East . “ We have failed to transform economic aid into political influence , ” they lament .
The crises that the two institutions now face in the wake of Ireland ’ s vote against the Lisbon Treaty and the deterioration of security in Afghanistan are of course very different .
Yet both are ultimately identity crises .
Both NATO and the EU have been forced to redefine how they function and rethink their purposes after a dual process of enlargement .
From that standpoint , the challenge confronting NATO may be even more difficult , for enlarging the security organization not only means taking on new members , but also exercising new “ out of area ” responsibilities .
Moving from the North Atlantic to Afghanistan , and from deterrence to combat , has proved to be a major challenge for NATO – a test that may prove harder than the disappearance of the Soviet Union nearly 20 years ago .
Can NATO survive defeat in Afghanistan ?
The question is far from abstract .
The challenge posed by Afghanistan was underestimated from the start , and the Alliance has under-resourced it .
The lack of a clear plan – is the goal to defeat Al Qaeda or to create democracy ? – remains problematic , but less so in the short term than the lack of adequate resources .
Indeed , while Afghanistan is the size of France , NATO has sent the same number of troops as it has in tiny Bosnia .
The war in Iraq has not only caused NATO to lose focus in Afghanistan ; it has also undermined solidarity of purpose among allies .
And , without confronting much more seriously the “ sanctuary ” role unwillingly played by Pakistan , there is no solution ahead for NATO in Afghanistan .
The other major problem facing NATO is linked to the United States ’ loss of the moral high ground .
In the artistic imagination of Europeans , America has become associated more with servitude than with freedom .
In the Berlin Opera ’ s latest version of Beethoven ’ s Fidelio , the prisoners seemed to be coming out of Guantánamo .
The Afghan quagmire and America ’ s image are not the only problems facing NATO .
The organization has to redefine its purpose , particularly its relationship with a resurgent Russia .
NATO ’ s aim cannot simply be , to use Lord Ismay ’ s famous formula , “ to keep America in , Russia out and Germany down . ”
By losing its geographic focus , NATO is now confronted with a major identity challenge .
Is it to become a “ league of democracy ” ?
If so , it must consider having a special relationship with countries like India and Japan , to name a few .
If it is to remain a “ Western Alliance ” in a “ globalized ” world , must it define a much clearer relationship with Russia without giving the Kremlin a veto in the Alliance ?
Or will NATO eventually become an “ alliance for stability ” that includes all the new powers – China , India , and Brazil , not to mention Russia – of the emerging “ multi-polar world ” ?
One thing is certain ; a “ shrinking West , ” as long as it retains some influence , must create the best institutions it can during the time it still has .
In essence , the EU ’ s fundamental dilemma is not that different from NATO ’ s .
It has succeeded so well that it has taken on new members and new responsibilities , but has lost focus and clarity of purpose .
What is Europe ’ s project today ?
Where does the EU end ?
It no longer dreams of becoming the “ United States of Europe , ” and Jacques Delors ’ suggestion of “ the United Nations of Europe ” has remained too ambivalent , if not deliberately ambiguous , to be effective .
After the Irish “ No , ” can the Union find salvation in NATO ’ s idea of a “ coalition of the willing ” ?
Can the most determined pro-integration Europeans leave the pack without being paralyzed by the coalition of the unwilling ?
Of course , the Irish “ No ” is not the equivalent for the EU of what the Afghan quagmire represents for NATO .
Yet it also constitutes a major setback and challenge of an institutional , political , and even psychological nature .
How do you recreate a European “ narrative ” that reconciles the Union with its citizens ?
The EU has lately failed – far more than NATO has – not only to win hearts , but also to convince Europeans that in a global world , it is part of the solution , not part of the problem .
