Asia ’ s New Tripartite Entente
NEW DELHI – The launch of trilateral strategic consultations among the United States , India , and Japan , and their decision to hold joint naval exercises this year , signals efforts to form an entente among the Asia-Pacific region ’ s three leading democracies .
These efforts – in the world ’ s most economically dynamic region , where the specter of a power imbalance looms large – also have been underscored by the Obama administration ’ s new strategic guidance for the Pentagon .
The new strategy calls for “ rebalancing toward the Asia-Pacific ” and support of India as a “ regional economic anchor and provider of security in the broader Indian Ocean region . ”
At a time when Asia is in transition and troubled by growing security challenges , the US , India , and Japan are seeking to build a broader strategic understanding to advance their shared interests .
Their effort calls to mind the pre-World War I Franco-British-Russian “ Triple Entente ” to meet the threat posed by the rapid rise of an increasingly assertive Germany .
This time , the impetus has been provided by China ’ s increasingly muscular foreign policy .
But unlike the anti-German entente a century ago , the aim is not to contain China .
Rather , US policy is to use economic interdependence and China ’ s full integration into international institutions to dissuade its leaders from aggressively seeking Asian hegemony .
Indeed , the intention of the three democratic powers is to create an entente cordiale without transforming it into a formal military alliance , which they recognize would be counterproductive .
Yet this entente could serve as an important strategic instrument to deter China ’ s rising power from sliding into arrogance .
The three partners also seek to contribute to the construction of a stable , liberal , rules-based regional order .
After their recent first round of strategic dialogue in Washington , the US , Japan , and India will hold more structured discussions in Tokyo , aimed at strengthening trilateral coordination .
Over time , the trilateral initiative could become quadrilateral with Australia ’ s inclusion .
A parallel Australia-India-US axis , however , is likely to precede the formation of any quadrilateral partnership , especially in view of the earlier failure to launch such a four-party coalition .
Important shifts in American , Japanese , and Indian strategic preferences and policies , however , are needed to build meaningful trilateral collaboration .
Japan , America ’ s treaty ally , has established military interoperability only with US forces .
Following its 2008 security-cooperation declaration with India , Japan must also build interoperability with Indian naval forces , so that , as former Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has said , “ Japan ’ s navy and the Indian navy are seamlessly interconnected . ”
American and Indian forces have conducted dozens of joint exercises in recent years , but some US analysts complain that India still hews to “ nonalignment ” in power politics by guarding its strategic autonomy .
In reality , India is just being more cautious , because it is more vulnerable to direct Chinese pressure from across a long , disputed Himalayan border .
Whereas Japan is separated from China by an ocean and the US is geographically distant , China has sharply escalated border violations and other incidents in recent years to increase pressure on India , even as the US has maintained tacit neutrality on Sino-Indian disputes .
But , in view of America ’ s dire fiscal challenges , the Obama administration has just announced plans for a leaner military and greater reliance on regional allies and partners .
This demands that the US transcend its Cold War-era hub-and-spoke system , whose patron-client framework is hardly conducive to building new alliances ( or “ spokes ” ) .
India for example , cannot be a Japan to the US .
Indeed , the US has worked to co-opt India in a “ soft alliance ” devoid of treaty obligations .
The hub-and-spoke system , in fact , is more suited to maintain Japan as an American protectorate than to allow Japan to contribute effectively to achieving the central US policy objective in Asia : a stable balance of power .
A subtle US policy shift that encourages Tokyo to cut its overdependence on America and do more for its own defense can more effectively contribute to that equilibrium .
Such a shift is likely to be dictated by the US imperative to cut defense expenditure further , in order to focus on the comprehensive domestic renewal needed to arrest the erosion in its relative power .
If the US is to rely less on prepositioned forward deployments and more on acting as an offshore balancer , it will need to make fundamental changes in its post-1945 security system .
The three entente parties must also understand the limits of their partnership .
The broad convergence of their strategic objectives in the Asia-Pacific region does not mean that they will see eye-to-eye on all issues .
Consider , for example , their earlier contrasting approaches toward Burma , or their current differences over the new US energy sanctions against Iran .
Building true military interoperability within the entente will not be easy , owing to the absence of a treaty relationship between the US and India , and to their forces ’ different weapon systems and training .
But , given that no formal tripartite alliance is sought , limited interoperability may mesh well with this entente cordiale ’ s political objectives .
Indeed , the entente ’ s political utility is likely to surpass its military value .
Even so , the deepening cooperation between the US , India , and Japan can help to strengthen maritime security in the Indo-Pacific region – the world ’ s leading trade and energy seaway – and shape a healthy and stable Asian power equilibrium .
