The Globalization of Ethics
Many Europeans doubt that Asia can catch up with Europe in terms of regional integration .
But Asia not only has the type of stable common ethical foundations that were so important to European integration ; it also has a well developed set of moral principles , some of which were an established part of Asian culture long before similar principles were adopted in Europe .
Indeed , these Asian principles can serve as a part of an emerging common global ethic .
Of course , Asia does not yet have a cohesive core culture comparable to that of Europe , which is founded on the Judeo-Christian tradition and the Enlightenment .
But Europeans ought not to be too arrogant , because , in recent years , that common European culture has itself proven to be fragile , particularly in light of the Bush administration ’ s divide-and-rule strategy pitting “ Old Europe ” against “ New Europe . ”
And , just as the inhuman terror attacks of September 11 , 2001 severely damaged Islam ’ s credibility in many people ’ s eyes , the invasion of Iraq , which was based on lies , has damaged both Christianity and the Western community of values .
Although Asia seems to lack Europe ’ s cultural core , there are core ethical constants that have long governed Asian societies and indicate common ethical foundations .
Indeed , in some respect , Asia has more experience with intercultural relations than Europe .
As early as the third century B.C. , Buddhism spread peacefully from India to Sri Lanka and to large parts of Southeast Asia .
In the first century C.E. , it continued its advance , spreading along the Silk Road to Central Asia and China , and finally made its way to Korea and Japan centuries later .
Ethnically homogeneous Japan is an example of how three different religions – Shinto , Confucianism , and Buddhism – can coexist peacefully and , in many cases , intermingle .
Even Islam – which mostly spread in the wake of military conquests in the Middle East , India , and North Africa – expanded rather peacefully into Southeast Asia in the footsteps of merchants , scholars and mystics .
Moreover , there was a historically important and ethically oriented humanism in China as early as the fifth century B.C. The concept of “ ren , ” which corresponds to our “ humanum ” is a central term in the Chinese tradition .
Likewise , Confucius was the first to formulate the Golden Rule of Reciprocity : “ Never impose on others what you would not choose for yourself . ”
This Golden Rule , however , also appears in the Indian tradition . In Jainism , it is stated as : “ A man should wander about treating all creatures as he himself would be treated . ”
In Buddhism : “ A state that is not pleasant or delightful to me must also be so to him ; and a state that is not pleasing or delightful to me , how could I inflict that upon another ? ”
This is the essence of morality . ”
This “ Golden Rule ” can also , of course , be found in the Abrahamic religions . Rabbi Hillel ( 60 B.C. ) said : “ What is hurtful to yourself do not do to your fellow man . ”
Jesus worded it positively : “ So in everything , do to others what you would have them do to you . ”
Moreover , such commonalities go beyond the principle of humanity and the Golden Rule of Reciprocity .
Four concrete ethical rules were laid down in the Buddhist canon by Patanjali , the founder of Yoga , in the Chinese tradition and , of course , in the three prophetic religions : “ Do not kill , ” “ do not steal , ” “ do not bear false witness , ” and “ do not abuse sexuality . ”
These trans-cultural ethical rules form structural elements of a common human ethic , whatever we call it , and make almost irrelevant the idea of a deep antagonism between “ Asian ” and “ Western ” values .
If Asia focuses on its trans-cultural ethical core , an entirely new spirit of unity can be developed that uses soft power instead of military force and does not know enemies , but only partners and competitors .
In this way , Asia could catch up with the West in terms of its cultural integration while contributing to the establishment of a genuinely peaceful new world order .
This project differs from the West ’ s human rights movement , which is based on natural law thinking .
The point is rather to integrate values , standards , and attitudes of ethical-religious traditions that , while appearing in each culture in a specific form , are common to all , and that can be supported by non-religious people as well .
