A Standby Program for the Eurozone
CHICAGO – How will the eurozone crisis play out in the next few weeks ?
With luck , Italy may soon get a credible government of national unity , Spain will obtain a new government in November with a mandate for change , and Greece will do enough to avoid roiling the markets .
But none of this can be relied upon .
So , what needs to be done ?
First , eurozone banks have to be recapitalized .
Second , enough funding must be available to meet Italy ’ s and Spain ’ s needs over the next year or so if their market access dries up .
And , third , Greece , now the sickest man of Europe , must be treated in a way that does not spread the infection to the other countries on the eurozone ’ s periphery .
All of this requires financing – bank recapitalization alone could require hundreds of billions of euros ( though these needs would be mitigated somewhat if the sovereign debt of large eurozone countries looked healthier ) .
In the short run , it is unlikely that Germany ( and Northern Europe more generally ) will put up more money for the others .
Germans are upset at being asked to support countries that do not seem to want to adjust – unlike Germany , which is competitive because it endured years of pain : low wage increases to absorb the former East Germany ’ s workers and deep labor-market and pension reforms .
The unwillingness of the Greek rich to pay taxes , or of Italian parliamentarians to cut their own perks , confirms Germans ’ fears .
At the same time , German politicians have done a poor job explaining to their people how much they have gained from the euro .
But we are where we are .
A glimmer of hope is Europe ’ s willingness to use the European Financial Stability Facility ( EFSF ) imaginatively – as equity or first-loss cover .
Clearly , some of the EFSF funds will have to go to recapitalize banks that cannot raise money from the markets .
As for the rest , the amounts that are not already committed to the peripheral countries could be used to support borrowing that can be lent onward to Italy and Spain .
There is , however , no consensus about how to do this .
Some propose bringing in the European Central Bank to leverage the EFSF ’ s funds .
This is a recipe for trouble .
Giving the ECB a quasi-fiscal role , even if it is somewhat insulated from losses , risks undermining its credibility .
And if Italy were helped , the incoming ECB President , Mario Draghi , an Italian , would be criticized , no matter how dire Italy ’ s need .
Moreover , financing would have to be accompanied by conditionality , and these institutions have neither the requisite expertise nor the necessary distance from the countries at risk to apply and enforce appropriate conditions .
Finally , both the EFSF and the ECB ultimately rely on the same eurozone resources for their financial strength .
If markets start panicking about large eurozone defaults , they could question whether even a willing Germany has the necessary capacity to support the EFSF-ECB combine .
Put differently , these institutions do not offer a credible , non-inflationary , external source of strength .
Indeed , the eurozone ’ s problems might soon become too big for its members to address .
The world has a stake in their resolution .
And it has an institution that can channel help : the International Monetary Fund .
The IMF could set up a special vehicle along the lines of its New Arrangements to Borrow ( NAB ) , which would be capitalized by a first-loss layer from the EFSF with the IMF ’ s own capital comprising a second layer .
This NAB-like vehicle could borrow as needed from countries , including the United States and China , as well as tap financial markets .
It would offer large lines of credit to illiquid countries like Italy , with conditionality intended to help such countries resume borrowing from markets at reasonable cost .
A special vehicle is required because the amounts that must be made available far exceed what IMF members can usually access , and it is only right that if the eurozone seeks such amounts for its members , it should bear a significant portion of any potential losses .
At the same time , the Fund ’ s capital resources would back the vehicle if the first-loss buffer provided by the eurozone were eroded ; that way , the market would understand that strength from outside the eurozone can be brought to bear .
The IMF is not an institution that inspires warm and cuddly feelings .
But it is also not the mindless preacher of fiscal austerity that it is accused of being – and it should start taking the lead in managing the crisis , rather than holding up the rear .
The eurozone needs an independent outside assessment of what needs to be done , and rapid implementation , before it is too late and the incipient bank runs become uncontrollable .
Of course , the IMF cannot act without the permission of its masters , the large countries .
The eurozone should suppress any wounded pride , acknowledge that it needs help , and provide quickly what it has already promised .
The US should continue pushing hard for a solution .
And the emerging-market countries should pitch in too , once some safeguards for their money are in place .
Unresolved , the crisis will spare no one .
As for the birthplace of the euro crisis , Greece ’ s debt will almost surely have to be restructured .
But adequate funding structures for Italy and Spain must be in place before any resolution .
So , while others have to step forward to do their part , it is best if Greece steps back from the brink .
