The Putin Parody
Such regimes rarely perish from external shocks or оррosition pressure . As a rule , they die unexpectedly from some internal disease – from irresistible existential disgust at themselves , from their own exhaustion .
Czarist rule withstood many harsh tests during its long history : peasant revolts , conspiracies , and the alienation of the educated class .
General Secretary Yuri Andropov died in 1984 , leaving behind a country cleansed of dissidents . But when in several years one of his former regional First Secretaries , Boris Yeltsin that is , signed a decree banning the Communist Party none of 18 million party members went to the streets to protest .
Today , before our very eyes , Vladimir Putin ’ s once seemingly impregnable regime may be fading in the same way as its predecessors . In just ten years , Putinism , which was consciously designed by its image-makers as a simulacrum of a great ideological style has run through all the classical stages of Soviet history .
First comes the creation of a formative myth for the new system , one that generates a demiurge-hero , the nation ’ s father . Where the Bolsheviks had the October Revolution and the subsequent civil war to deify Lenin , Putinists used the second Chechen war , triggered by blowing up of Moscow apartments , to raise up Vladimir Putin as national saviour .
The second stage is the time of the tempest – the period when the country is stoically remade through the leaders ’ s iron will . Where Stalin had his barbarous yet monumental drive to industrial modernization , Putin boasted of making Russia a great energy power .
The Soviets had the great victory over Hitler ’ s Germany in World War II , which left Russia one of the world ’ s two superpowers . Putin ’ s supposedly heroic victory came in the war with Georgia of 2008 , followed by the subsequent virtual annexation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
Under the Soviets , this stage lasted about 40 years . But Putin ’ s simulacrum of Sovietism began to collapse much faster , partly by virtue of the fact that his regime ’ s ideology never had much substance to begin with , and so couldn ’ t begin to be used as a prop .
Indeed , at the onset of the financial crisis , Putin tried to bestride the world , portraying Russia as an island of stability and demanding the creation of a new global financial order , with the rouble to become one of the world ’ s reserve currencies . But that megalomaniac position was quickly reversed .
At such moments of decline in Russia , the clans always come to the fore in a mad scramble of self-preservation and self-enrichment . Even Putin ’ s truest followers are now beginning to speak of their leader and the results of his governance in impertinent and disrespectful ways .
Of course , no one should think that Putinism will disappear tomorrow , even though its jackals are already circling . Let us remember that Soviet communism took four decades to rot away – decades during which the inner circle knew that the regime was disintegrating from within but lacked any real idea of how to save it .
So now we hear pathetic echoes of all the reform communist efforts of the long years of Soviet decline : Putinism without Putin , Putinism with a human face , etc .
Our “ father ” did not turn out to be a father at all . Even among Putin ’ s kleptocracy of ex-KGB men , as among the communist apparatchiks in the dying days of Gorbachev ’ s rule , there is a growing realization that the jig is nearly up , and that it is time to look after oneself .
So , as Putinism atrophies , the great hope among his immediate circle is that they will be able to do what the communist elite did in the early 1990 ’ s – hijack whatever new system emerges and put it to work in the service of their own interests .
