The EU ’ s Rules to Default By
BRUSSELS – Greece ’ s ballooning public debt is again throwing Europe ’ s financial markets into turmoil .
But why should a debt default by the government of a small , peripheral economy – one which accounts for less than 3 % of eurozone GDP – be so significant ?
The answer is simple : the financial system ’ s entire regulatory framework was built on the assumption that government debt is risk-free .
Any sovereign default in Europe would shatter this cornerstone of financial regulation , and thus would have profound consequences .
This is particularly visible in the banking sector .
Internationally agreed rules stipulate that banks must create capital reserves commensurate to the risks that they take when they invest depositors ’ savings .
But when banks lend to their own government , or hold its bonds , they are not required to create any additional reserves , because it is assumed that government debt is risk-free .
After all , a government can always pay in its own currency .
This assumption makes sense , however , only when a government issues debt in its own currency ; only then can it order its central bank to print enough money to pay its creditors .
Before the introduction of the euro , this was the case in all advanced countries .
But the countries that adopted the euro can no longer rely on the printing press .
They are , instead , effectively borrowing in a “ foreign ” currency ( or , rather , a currency that they cannot individually control ) .
It should thus have been clear that with the start of European Monetary Union ( EMU ) , participating countries ’ public debt should no longer have been considered risk-free .
But it was .
Indeed , eurozone regulators not only maintained the assumption that the public debt of a bank ’ s own country was risk-free , but chose to extend it to all eurozone countries , implying that banks did not have to provide additional capital against their holdings of any eurozone public debt .
This is the key reason why one-third of all public debt in the European Union is held by banks .
And this concentration of public debt on banks ’ balance sheets is what makes the entire European banking system so vulnerable to a sovereign default .
Moreover , given the prevailing assumption that public debt was risk-free , banks were not bound by the usual rules against “ large exposures ” : they could accumulate as much exposure to any one government as they wanted .
That is why Greek banks could end up holding more government debt than they have capital .
A government default would thus wipe out the entire Greek banking system .
It is now too late to turn back the clock and suddenly force banks to get rid of their excessive holdings of public debt .
Unfortunately , regulators do not even appear to be learning from the current crisis in order to prevent the next one .
The EU ’ s rules on how much capital banks must hold are about to be revised .
The rules , which are detailed in a 500-page legal proposal , called “ CRDIV ” and published recently by the European Commission , will increase the amount of capital banks must hold , but only for lending to the private sector .
Lending to eurozone governments continues to have a zero risk weight .
This will only increase the bias in bank lending towards government debt and against lending to enterprises , especially small and medium-size businesses .
This is a mistake .
The European Commission should have introduced capital requirements on banks ’ holdings of public debt .
The justification would be simple : no one can seriously claim that the bonds of all eurozone governments are without risk .
It should thus be obvious that banks should hold some capital against the risks they assume when lending to governments with particularly high debts or large budget deficits .
Moreover , the new rules will require banks to hold more liquid assets .
It is easy to guess which assets the authorities consider liquid : public debt .
In this way , too , banks will be induced to hold public debt rather than to finance private investment , despite the obvious fact that government bonds can become very illiquid ( for example , those issued by Greece , Ireland , and Portugal ) .
The definition of what banks should hold for liquidity purposes should have been broadened beyond public debt to include a wide range of private-sector assets based on market size .
Both key elements of the new banking rules thus go in the same direction : they increase the bias in bank financing against lending to the private sector .
It is easy to understand why the authorities persist in favoring public debt : the rules are set by finance ministers , who are naturally inclined to give themselves a good deal .
Moreover , it is difficult for politicians to see that their budgets compete for a limited pool of savings .
Lower financing costs for public debt appear to be a net gain to society , because the government then saves on debt service and can keep taxes lower .
But any gains from lower taxes are more than offset by the losses to the private sector , which , facing higher financing costs , will invest less , in turn lowering economic growth – and thus reducing government revenues .
Many steps have been taken in recent years to reinforce regulation of the banking system .
But what is proposed now will make lending for investment even less attractive and increase the incentive to concentrate sovereign risk in the banking sector .
This can only worsen Europe ’ s sovereign-debt problem and weaken its already meager growth prospects .
