The Language of Global Protest
PRINCETON – The protest movements that have flared up across the West , from Chile to Germany , have remained curiously undefined and under-analyzed .
Some speak of them as the greatest global mobilization since 1968 – when enragés in very different countries coalesced around similar concerns .
But others insist that there is nothing new here .
The Bulgarian political scientist Ivan Krastev , for example , has claimed that what we are actually experiencing is 1968 “ in reverse . ”
“ Then students on the streets of Europe , ” he says , “ declared their desire to live in a world different from the world of their parents .
Now students are on the streets to declare their desire to live in the world of their parents . ”
No name and no clear interpretation have yet attached itself to the movements .
But how they describe themselves – and how analysts describe them – will make an important difference in the direction they might take .
Such self-understandings should also influence how citizens generally should respond to these movements .
Nineteen sixty-eight was famously over-theorized .
Student leaders , or so most people remember , were constantly producing convoluted manifestos that combined Marxism , psychoanalysis , and theories about Third World liberation struggles .
What is easily forgotten is that even the most theory-eager leaders of the time understood that ultimately , the protest movements that helped to define 1968 didn ’ t come out of seminar-room discussions .
The German leader Rudi Dutschke , for example , insisted that the movement was driven by “ existential disgust ” – and anger , provoked by the Vietnam War in particular .
Many putative “ theorists ” themselves declared that the enragés should let go of revolutionary textbooks and , instead , “ practically problematize ” inherited radical strategies .
Put more simply : they were supposed to make it up as they went along .
In that sense , 1968 and today ’ s protests are not as different as some observers claim .
There is no political playbook , but there are events and also books that inspired outrage : Frantz Fanon ’ s Wretched of the Earth in the 1960 ’ s and , nowadays , the unlikely bestseller Indignez-Vous ! , by the 93-year old former French Resistance fighter Stéphane Hessel .
As critics have mockingly pointed out , Hessel ’ s booklet at times reads more like a call for a free-floating , almost arbitrary desire to be agitated by something – almost anything , really , as long as it can somehow be justified by one ’ s own subjective sense of justice .
It did not help that Hessel nostalgically invoked Jean-Paul Sartre and existentialism , and the “ great stream of history ” – longings reflected on a hand-painted sign at Occupy Wall Street : “ Get excited and do something . ”
Tellingly , that sign was flanked by posters for the left-wing anarchist philosopher Noam Chomsky and the right-wing libertarian politician Ron Paul .
Still , for all the theoretical weaknesses of Hessel ’ s treatise , “ indignation ” has become a watchword for movements in France , Spain , and elsewhere .
And language matters here : indignation suggests that some social actors – a government or elites in general – have violated shared norms or moral understandings .
This is the literally “ reactionary ” interpretation of these movements : they are animated by a sense that the social contract has been broken , and that elites ought to return to the status quo that preceded the policies which ultimately led to the financial crisis .
If so , the people on the squares of Madrid , Athens , and New York are not so much demonstrating against those in power – give or take a few anarchists – as demonstrating to those in power that they should feel ashamed for having reneged on supposedly shared commitments .
Indignation is different from outrage – a sentiment that is ultimately blind and not necessarily connected to any presumption that one shares commitments with the people against whom it is directed .
This is to some degree also the story of 1968 : righteous disgust led to outrage , but , when channeled through completely unrealistic revolutionary theorizing , also to self-righteousness and , ultimately , to elaborate justifications for physical violence on the part of radical factions .
In such a scenario , self-empowered minorities come to speak in the name of imaginary majorities – a populism of sorts , and , like all populism , driven by emotions more than by norms , let alone reasons .
Or it simply all ends in riots .
The distinction between indignation and outrage might seem like nitpicking .
But the lessons that elites learn – and they clearly will want to turn the protests to their electoral advantage – will partly depend on how these movements are described , and how they conceive of themselves .
On that point , the demonstrators have so far remained curiously mute : they have yet to articulate any wider demands or a sense of what a different society , or “ real democracy ” – a stock phrase of the Spanish movement – should be all about .
If today ’ s protest movements are based on righteous indignation , the lack of concrete demands should not be a problem : shared norms ( and the policies that would follow from them ) can still broadly be assumed .
But if they are being driven by rage , then a lack of clear goals might merely produce more anger and frustration , which in turn could eventually lead to physical violence and some kind of political nihilism .
This also means that political elites should try to understand and work with the message of indignation – and not cynically play up anger for electoral advantage .
It is not just ridiculous , but downright irresponsible , for example , that the British Labour Party intellectual Maurice Glasman now feels compelled to reveal the so-far hidden “ angry insurgent side ” of party leader Ed Miliband .
Elites – and protesters ’ fellow citizens – should respond conscientiously and creatively to moral indignation , comprehending that it is ultimately about an affirmation of liberal democracy , and not about all-out revolution , let alone nihilism .
And they should seek to calm anger and defuse outrage , which can be a serious threat to liberal democracy .
