The Battle for Churchill ’ s Bust
NEW YORK – The election of the United States ’ next president is surely the most important contest in the democratic world .
Yet the issues being contested can seem awfully trivial .
Consider , for instance , the question of Winston Churchill ’ s bust .
A bronze sculpture of the British prime minister had been in the Oval Office of the White House since the 1960 ’ s .
On becoming President , Barack Obama replaced it with a bust of Abraham Lincoln .
Mitt Romney , his Republican opponent in November ’ s election , has vowed to restore it if he wins .
Then a White House spokesman said that the bust was still on the premises , just in a different room , whereupon the story changed once more : there were apparently two busts of Churchill ; one still in the White House , and one that Obama returned to the British embassy .
Why would anyone care about this ?
One answer was provided by two of Mitt Romney ’ s advisers , who stated that their candidate particularly valued the “ special relationship ” with Britain because of the shared “ Anglo-Saxon heritage . ”
This heritage , they claimed , was not sufficiently “ appreciated ” by the current president .
When this bizarre statement , with its racist undertones , threatened to become a scandal , Romney quickly distanced himself from it .
He did not want to be seen as a racist .
But how else is his peculiar nostalgia for Churchill ’ s bust to be understood ?
In fact , the phrase “ Anglo-Saxon ” is not often heard any more in the US , where the majority of the population has not been of Anglo-Saxon origin for a long time ( which is also true of Britain ’ s largest cities ) .
When Americans use the term , it is usually to differentiate white Americans from the rest , which is not something that most Americans , least of all presidential candidates , would now choose to do in public .
“ Anglo-Saxon ” is more often used in a negative sense by the French , as in “ Anglo-Saxon bankers ” or “ Anglo-Saxon conspiracies ” ( to keep the French down ) .
Just recently Le Monde had the wonderful headline : “ [ President ] Hollande Defends French Foie Gras against Anglo-Saxon lobbies ” ( the reference was to California ’ s ban on foie gras under its animal-cruelty laws ) .
Even Churchill himself did not speak of Anglo-Saxons much .
He talked about “ the British race ” or the “ English-speaking peoples . ”
The so-called “ special relationship ” between Britain and the US , certainly prized by Churchill , was not so much racial as it was a product of World War II – and a rather complicated one at that .
During the war , Churchill and Roosevelt shared the idea that once Germany and Japan were defeated , British and US military forces should act as global policemen .
They believed that the world would be safe from future Hitlers if it were , at least for some time , under the enlightened leadership of the democratic English-speaking peoples .
By the end of the war , however , Britain was too exhausted to police the world .
The country was bankrupt and His Majesty ’ s colonial subjects were growing restive .
The future belonged to the US and the Soviet Union , neither of which had sentimental feelings about the British Empire , let alone the “ Anglo-Saxons . ”
But the British elite , fully aware of their country ’ s decline , took the “ special relationship ” with the US very seriously , for it was the only way for Britain to feel like it was still a major power , unlike , say , France .
They still do .
Churchill certainly saw it that way , but so did Tony Blair , who presented President George W. Bush with the second Churchill bust .
Americans , on the whole , have far less interest than the British in the “ special relationship . ”
But they are often sentimental about Churchill .
He is the man whom many American presidents would like to emulate , not because of any racial affinities , but because of his allure as a wartime leader .
The US is the strongest military power in the world , just as Britain was in Churchill ’ s youth .
And , like British empire-builders in the past , US elites often claim a moral mission to remake the world in America ’ s image .
Churchill , in other words , became a symbol of presidential hubris in the US , even as the “ special relationship ” can be viewed as a symbol of British decline .
People tend to forget that Rudyard Kipling ’ s famous poem about “ the white man ’ s burden ” was not an ode to the British Empire , but to the US colonial enterprise in the Philippines .
Too much power corrupts , as we all know .
Hubristic presidents contemplating Churchill ’ s bust in their office are prone to believe that they have been called upon to be “ war presidents ” – that they , like Churchill in 1940 , must oppose the next Hitler .
This siren song drew the US into Vietnam , Afghanistan , and Iraq .
So , when Obama decided to remove Churchill ’ s bust from his office in 2008 , this struck me as a very sensible gesture .
A little less hubris would do the US , as well as the world , some good .
But now Romney wants him back .
Whatever else he might be , Romney does not come across as a convincing war leader .
Businessmen rarely are .
Yet he likes to portray himself as a tough patriot , and Obama as an un-American wimp .
Perhaps Romney wants another war , in which he can play Churchill .
Or perhaps his two advisers were speaking the truth .
Maybe Romney really is feeling sentimental about the “ Anglo-Saxon heritage , ” even as Asian power grows .
If so , nostalgia for Churchill is hardly a sign of American vitality , but more like a romantic rearguard battle , typical of a country in decline .
