The Geopolitical Consequences of the Financial Crisis
PRINCETON – Worried investors and policymakers are becoming obsessed with Great Depression analogies .
But the lesson of 1931 is only in part financial or economic . The 1931 crisis was so big and so destructive because it was a financial drama that played out on a geo-political stage .
Two surprising conclusions are emerging in today ’ s discussions , but only one has been fully digested .
First , big public sector action is needed . Second , such action is complicated because in a globalized world the need for assistance spans borders .
First , private sector solutions have been tried but have failed in a breathtakingly short space of time .
The most frequent consolation in this failure is that a really bad crisis is purgative .
Insolvent businesses close , bad loans are written off , and lenders can lend with new confidence again .
Hank Paulson , who came to America ’ s Treasury from the strongest US investment bank , Goldman Sachs , made the purgation gamble in allowing Lehman Brothers to go under . He argued that the US could not tolerate a bailout culture .
A firm denial by the government should be seen as a sign that most of the American economy is fundamentally sound , and that American financial markets are sophisticated enough to be able to identify sound business practices .
America ’ s Treasury Secretary in the Great Depression was also a titan of finance , Andrew Mellon . Mellon ’ s immediate conclusion in the face of the 1929 stock market panic has subsequently become notorious : “ liquidate labor , liquidate stocks , liquidate the farmers , liquidate real estate … purge the rottenness out of the system . ”
It is already clear that the high risk bet of 2008 has not paid off , any more than it did in 1929 . On the contrary , the failure to perform one rescue has made more rescues necessary : of AIG , of HBOS in Britain . That is unlikely to be the end . There are lists circulating of which institution is next on the ladder to fall off – or be picked off . The most appropriate analogy for this kind of mood is Agatha Christie ’ s “ And Then There Were None … ” in which each murder produces more paranoia .
In a financial system that has become so demented , only institutions with more or less infinite resources can stem the tide . Such institutions can conceivably be self-help organizations , such as pools of powerful banks . The US Treasury indeed tried to put together such a pool on Sunday , September 14th .
But in a climate of profound uncertainty , self-help is not enough . Governments or central banks are needed , because only they are both big and quick enough .
Only they could quickly come to the assistance of the giant housing finance institutions US Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , and then deal with AIG .
The second question is what kind of government can do the job ?
Not just any government will do . Mid-sized European governments can possibly rescue mid-sized European institutions , but in the case of really major financial conglomerates at the heart of the world ’ s financial system , there are probably only two governments that have the fire power : the US and China .
In the similar circumstances of a financial meltdown in 1931 , there were also only a limited number of governments that could be effective . The old economic superpower , Britain , was too exhausted and strained to help anyone else . World ’ s reserves were massively accumulated in the US .
Thus the only plausible case for a way out of the worldwide Great Depression in 1931 lay , as the great economic historian Charles Kindleberger emphasized , with some step from the US . At the time , there were all kinds of convincing reasons why Americans should not want to take on the burden of a worldwide rescue : sending more money to Europe might be seen as pouring money down a drain ; had not the Europeans fought a World War that had been the fount and origin of the financial mess ? Economically such action would have made a great deal of sense from a long term perspective ; but politically it was a non-starter with no short term payoff at all .
China is the America of this century . The initial stages of the credit crunch in 2007 were managed so apparently painlessly because sovereign wealth funds from the Middle East , but above all from China , were willing to step in and recapitalize the debt of American and European institutions . The pivotal moment in today ’ s events came when the Chinese SWF China Investment Co. was unwilling to go further in its exploration of buying Lehman Brothers . CIC ’ s turning back will be held up in the future as a moment when history could have turned in a different direction .
Now there will be plenty of reasons why the Chinese pulled back .
The logic sounds like the American case of 1931 . Some of the arguments that are reverberating around Beijing are very reasonable : there is a great deal of uncertainty , and the SWFs might lose a lot of money .
CIC would have initially lost some money with Lehman .
Some lines of thought are more emotional : might not 2008 be a payback for the American bungling of the 1997-1998 East Asia crisis ?
We are about to see what stake China really has in the survival of the globalized world economy . As in 1931 , the political arguments are all against such an operation . Only the far-sighted will see that the economic case for a rescue is compelling .
