The Osama Opening
NEW DELHI – The image , caught on home video , is a defining one : a hunched Osama bin Laden , in pathetic , lonely domesticity , with a grey beard and a blanket covering him like a shawl , surveying the television wasteland for images of himself .
How banal this epitome of evil turned out to be .
That is why Osama ’ s elimination by US commandoes is such a marvelous case study .
Start with this question : Was it poetic or divine justice that Al Qaeda ’ s leader , whose group , born in Peshawar , Pakistan , in 1988 , was fathered by Pakistan ’ s Inter-Services Intelligence agency and midwifed by the CIA , was finally killed by his figurative creators ?
This question leads to two more that are anything but rhetorical : Where , in the end , does the fault for Bid Laden ’ s murderous decades lie ?
And will his death mark the end of global jihadist terrorism ?
To be sure , street protests and a chaotic clamor of recrimination have gripped Pakistan , while dire threats float in the Internet ether and a bizarre indifference pervades the rest of the Muslim world .
But events in the Maghreb and the Middle East seem to demonstrate that the streams of Arab and Muslim political life are flowing away from Osama ’ s murderous messianism .
That is why the crucial test today is what happens tomorrow in Pakistan and Afghanistan .
The future of Pakistan , peace in Afghanistan , normalcy in India-Pakistan relations , and economic progress in South Asia all hinge on whether Bin Laden ’ s death dilutes extremism and dissolves intolerance or re-concentrates both .
The history of the region ’ s discord is a complex mix of ethnic , territorial , and existential fears , imaginary or real .
But now that America ’ s mission in Afghanistan has , at least symbolically , achieved its objectives , a new chapter must open .
To persist with the old “ reordering ” of Afghanistan would be sheer folly , dissipating whatever good might come from the end of Bin Laden ’ s blood-soaked career .
But the United States alone cannot bring peace to the region .
A broader regional condominium , involving Afghanistan , Pakistan , India , China , Russia , and , yes , Iran , must be brought into play .
For this to happen , however , the first step must come from Pakistan .
It must now renounce terrorism as an instrument of state policy ; stop employing groups like Lashkar-e-Taiba as strategic reserves against India ; and abandon aspirations of acquiring overweening influence over the government in Kabul .
Of course , Pakistan ’ s concerns about Afghanistan are fuelled by a near-paranoid anxiety about India .
This fear must be overcome , for the geopolitical challenge in Afghanistan is too great to allow such misbegotten apprehensions to persist .
Here , India bears a grave responsibility : it must assuage Pakistan ’ s valid security concerns convincingly .
After all , there is no solution in retributory , panic-ridden responses by Pakistan , or in chest-thumping schadenfreude elsewhere .
Now is the moment for South Asia to revert to its “ natural balance , ” gain breathing space , and recover its shattered peace .
To this end , and to facilitate a withdrawal of US and NATO troops from Afghanistan , the region ’ s countries must create a credible template for reconciliation .
The design for such a process cannot accommodate malevolently carnivorous forces like jihadist terrorism , which merely sucks credibility out of its principal progenitor , Pakistan .
Is this too idealistic , and thus unattainable ?
Perhaps , but the alternatives to doing nothing are infinitely worse : the continued condemnation of South Asia to the scourge of terrorism ; almost one-third of humanity reduced to self-perpetuating penury ; and a near-permanent US / NATO military presence , which would make Afghanistan ( and Pakistan ? ) tantamount to a Western-controlled protectorate .
Unless we accept our responsibility , more “ Abbottabads ” will surely follow .
Of course , no one questions Pakistan ’ s sovereignty .
But both its identity and faith in its word are now doubted by almost everyone outside the country .
Surely we can caution its people that they are sliding towards Talibanization , and that this threatens to tear their country apart ?
Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari proclaims that the war on terror is Pakistan ’ s war too , and that the country has paid a high price in waging it – not only the thousands of Pakistani soldiers and policemen killed , but also in terms of social progress foregone .
But that is all the more reason why Pakistan must act now – if only to save itself .
A new , complex endgame has already begun , because ideologies are harder to kill than the individuals who espouse them .
So the central challenge is to devise a feasible new regional order .
For the US , whose military drawdown in Afghanistan is set to begin in July , a game-changing moment has been further complicated by Pakistan ’ s self-relegation from strategic ally to untrustworthy obstacle .
But it would be unwise at this critical moment for the US to shortchange Pakistan .
Some of the old relationship must be restored if Pakistan – until lately a pillar of US and NATO policy , but now with diminished relevance – is to have the confidence it needs to save itself .
Equally important is the now discernible fragmentation of Al Qaeda , which is why the respective national aims of Afghanistan , the US , India , Pakistan , China , Russia , Iran , and the region ’ s other important countries must somehow be reconciled .
Only a truly regional initiative can ensure a lasting end to the cruel and senseless Thirty Years War that has ravaged Afghanistan and frustrated South Asia ’ s hopes for peaceful development .
The US has a unique opportunity to assist in finding the correct balance in the region .
As Philip Zelikow , a key adviser to former US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice , put it : “ All the major policies are ripe for re-evaluation .
Leadership is defined by the way people use such moments . ”
