The Rape of Burma
SYDNEY – Burma , once the richest country in Southeast Asia , today is mired in deep poverty .
Its economy ruined by nearly 50 years of economic mismanagement under military rule , the only international rankings that it tops are those for most corrupt nation , world ’ s worst health system , and lowest spending on education – “ accolades ” that are sadly indicative of its people ’ s suffering .
And yet , over the last few years Burma has also emerged as a significant producer of energy in Southeast Asia .
Thanks to large fields of recoverable natural gas located offshore , Burma now earns substantial foreign exchange revenues .
At present , most of these revenues ( $ 1-1.5 billion per year , depending on price fluctuations ) come from Thailand .
Gas from Burma , piped onshore from the Gulf of Martaban , generates around 20 % of Bangkok ’ s electricity supply .
If all goes well , new gas fields recently discovered in the Bay of Bengal will provide even more gas for China ’ s Yunnan Province .
To get the gas into Yunnan , a much longer pipeline – running the length of Burma – must be built .
The project will be as difficult as it will be controversial .
But , with no environmental or labor standards to contend with , few doubt that the pipeline will proceed .
So , given its newfound energy riches , one might expect Burma ’ s public finances to be rather flush , with surpluses aplenty to spend on health , education and much else that the country so desperately needs .
Alas , almost none of Burma ’ s gas revenues actually feed into its budget , owing to a rather ingenious device employed by the Burmese junta .
The device is simple .
Like many countries ruled by authoritarian regimes , Burma has a dual exchange rate system .
The official exchange rate pegs Burma ’ s currency , the kyat , at a rate of six to one against the US dollar .
The informal or black market exchange rate determines the value of the kyat according to supply and demand in the marketplace .
Trading kyat in the black market is formally illegal ( and Burma ’ s regime loves rounding up foreign exchange dealers from time to time ) , but it is the only way that people unconnected to the regime can ever hope to come across foreign currency .
According to the informal exchange rate , the kyat ’ s worth is currently about 1,000 to one against the dollar .
Given this dual exchange rate system , hiding Burma ’ s gas earnings becomes easy .
By recording earnings at the official exchange rate , they are worth nearly 200 times below what they should be .
Thus , Burma ’ s gas earnings of around $ 1.2 billion for 2006-07 are rendered into a mere 7.2 billion kyat in the country ’ s public accounts – less than 1 % of the regime ’ s official public spending .
Recorded at the market exchange rate , however , these earnings translate into 1.2 trillion kyat – an amount large enough to eliminate Burma ’ s budget deficit , as well as the destructively inflationary money printing that is the regime ’ s preferred method of public finance .
So where do Burma ’ s generals hide all the money they keep away from the state ’ s budget ?
No one but the generals knows for sure .
An inspection of the vaults of the country ’ s Foreign Trade Bank might be a good place to start , however , as well as those of some accommodatingly unscrupulous banks offshore .
Whatever the precise location of Burma ’ s riches , these hoards enable the junta to spend at its whim .
A nuclear reactor , a new capital city , military pay increases – all of these and more have been on the menu of late .
The one group that almost certainly will not benefit from any of the largesse are the Burmese people themselves , who are entitled to it and for whom it would mean an end to lives of poverty and want .
