The Dissident and the Mahatma
NEW DELHI – With the Nobel Peace Prize presented this month in the absence of this year ’ s laureate , the imprisoned Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo , it might be wise to think of a man who never won the prize : Mahatma Gandhi .
Despite that omission , there is no doubting Gandhiji ’ s worldwide significance – including for Liu .
The Mahatma ’ s image now features in advertising campaigns for everything from Apple computers to Mont Blanc pens .
When Richard Attenborough 's film Gandhi swept the Oscars in 1983 , posters for the film proclaimed that “ Gandhi ’ s triumph changed the world forever . ” But did it ?
The case for Gandhi-led global change rests principally on the American civil-rights leader Martin Luther King , Jr . , who attended a lecture on Gandhi , bought a half-dozen books about the Mahatma , and adopted satyagraha as both precept and method .
In leading the struggle to break down segregation in the southern United States , King used non-violence more effectively than anyone else outside India . “ Hate begets hate .
Violence begets violence , ” he memorably declared . “ We must meet the forces of hate with soul force . ”
King later avowed that “ the Gandhian method of non-violent resistance ... became the guiding light of our movement .
Christ furnished the spirit and motivation , and Gandhi furnished the method . ” Last month , Barack Obama told India ’ s Parliament that were it not for Gandhi , he would not be standing there as America ’ s president .
So , yes , Gandhism helped to change America forever .
But it is difficult to find many other instances of its success .
India ’ s independence marked the dawn of the era of decolonization , but many nations threw off the yoke of empire only after bloody and violent struggles .
Other peoples have since fallen under the boots of invading armies , been dispossessed of their lands , or terrorized into fleeing their homes .
Non-violence has offered no solutions to them .
Indeed , non-violence could only work against opponents vulnerable to a loss of moral authority – that is , governments responsive to domestic and international public opinion , and thus capable of being shamed into conceding defeat .
In Gandhi ’ s own time , non-violence could have done nothing to prevent the slaughter of Jews in Hitler ’ s path .
The power of Gandhian non-violence rests in being able to say , “ To show you that you are wrong , I punish myself . ” But that has little effect on those who are not interested in whether they are wrong and are already seeking to punish you .
Your willingness to undergo punishment merely expedites their victory .
No wonder Nelson Mandela , who told me that Gandhi had “ always been a great source of inspiration , ” explicitly disavowed non-violence as ineffective in South Africans ’ struggle against apartheid .
Indeed , Gandhi can sound frighteningly unrealistic : “ The willing sacrifice of the innocent is the most powerful answer to insolent tyranny that has yet been conceived by God or man . Disobedience , to be ‘ civil , ’ must be sincere , respectful , restrained , never defiant , and it must have no ill will or hatred behind it .
Neither should there be excitement in civil disobedience , which is a preparation for mute suffering . ”
For many around the world who suffer under oppressive regimes , such a credo would sound like a prescription for sainthood – or for impotence .
Mute suffering is fine as a moral principle , but only Gandhi could use it to bring about meaningful change .
The sad truth is that the staying power of organized violence is almost always greater than that of non-violence .
Gandhi believed in “ weaning an opponent from error by patience , sympathy , and self-suffering . ” But , while such an approach may have won Burma ’ s Aung San Suu Kyi the Nobel that eluded the Mahatma himself , the violence of the Burmese state proved far stronger in preventing change than her suffering has in fomenting it .
And , as the Mumbai terror attacks of November 2008 demonstrated , India today faces the threat of cross-border terrorism to which the Mahatma ’ s only answer – a fast in protest – would have left its perpetrators unmoved .
In his internationalism , the Mahatma expressed ideals that few can reject .
But the decades since his death have confirmed that there is no escaping the conflicting sovereignties of states .
Some 20 million lives have been lost in wars and insurrections since Gandhi died .
In a dismaying number of countries , including his own , India , governments spend more for military purposes than for education and health care combined .
The current stockpile of nuclear weapons represents more than a million times the explosive power of the bomb whose destruction of Hiroshima so grieved him .
Outside India , as within it , Gandhian techniques have been perverted by terrorists and bomb-throwers who declare hunger strikes when punished for their crimes .
Gandhism without moral authority is like Marxism without a proletariat .
Yet too few who have tried his methods worldwide have had his personal integrity or moral stature .
None of these misguided or cynical efforts has diluted Gandhi ’ s greatness , or the extraordinary resonance of his life and his message .
While the world was disintegrating into fascism , violence , and war , the Mahatma taught the virtues of truth , non-violence , and peace .
He destroyed the credibility of colonialism by opposing principle to force .
And he set and attained personal standards of conviction and courage that few will ever match .
He was that rare kind of leader who was not confined by his followers ’ inadequacies .
Yet Gandhi ’ s truth was essentially his own .
He formulated its unique content and determined its application in a specific historical context .
Inevitably , few in today ’ s world can measure up to his greatness or aspire to his credo .
The originality of Gandhi ’ s thought and the example of his life still inspire people around the world today – as Liu Xiaobo would readily admit .
But his triumph did not “ change the world forever . ”
I wonder if the Mahatma , surveying today ’ s world , would feel that he had triumphed at all .
