The Currency Quandary
Two views about today 's prevailing exchange rates exist : the dollar is overvalued dollar and the yen needs a deep depreciation .
The implication of the two is an explosion upward for the Euro .
But can Europe deal with such a shock , and what would happen to the US if that happened ?
Now that America 's recovery is underway - and it arises from a slump not a recession - the current account deficit will widen even further and in no time discussions about the unsustainable high-flying dollar will become fashionable again .
Yet , the very fact of a US upswing that is bigger , comes sooner , and is better than anywhere else - Europe remains plagued by growth cramps and Japan 's economic policy kabuki is going nowhere - will support and even strengthen the dollar .
All those who predicted the collapse of America 's " house of cards " economy ( who thought that Enron 's collapse was finally the sign in the sky that they were right ) must now be exhausted .
No dollar collapse looms .
Financial stability , strong productivity , flexibility and dynamism make the US one of the choice places for capital , and this influx of capital finances America 's large current account deficits .
It will continue doing so until , at the end of the rainbow , Japan or Europe compare favorably with the US investment climate .
Don 't hold your breath for that day ; don 't wait for the $ 1.20 per Euro that is touted as the " equilibrium " rate .
But the dollar is not the only issue atop currency market debates .
There is another strongly held belief : that Japan cannot recover without a steep decline in the yen .
For those who hold this view , the yen would have to decline to 160 or even 200 yen / $ .
Without monetary policy , fiscal policy or supply side reforms , how else can Japan return to growth except by a depreciation-driven export boom ?
Because Japan 's export sector is so small , barely 10 % of GDP , the depreciation would have to be enormous to stoke the entire economy .
Suppose we put the two propositions together : the yen depreciates 30 % against the dollar while the dollar in turn depreciates 30 % against the euro .
These numbers are large but such falls are in everyday discussion .
The implication , of course , is a huge appreciation of the euro against everybody else .
Japan might get some growth , probably not even a full percentage point of GDP .
For the US the story is mostly neutral : a gain in competitiveness toward Europe , a loss relative to Japan , and with no net gain or loss in competitiveness or trade , scant inflationary effects to speak about , no interest rate hikes or stock declines - nothing to get excited about .
But that would not be the story in Europe .
A huge yen depreciation and sizeable decline in the dollar would hit European competitiveness and growth hard .
Empirical models that try to quantify the impact of exchange rate changes suggest that without an aggressive monetary policy response , a 40 % euro appreciation would knock 2.5 % off European growth .
This number is not at all surprising if we remember that growth in the past few years was substantially due to the euro 's weakening ; this time round , the euro strengthening would take it all back .
Even as European growth turns down , sharply lower import prices would also bring down inflation .
That opens the door for a dampening the damage if the European Central Bank vigorously responded by cutting rates . " Vigorous , " however , is not a word one often used to describe the ECB , so there is a serious problem .
The message here is clear : Europe must hope that the dollar stays strong because , without domestic dynamism , the cheap euro is Europe 's only growth ticket .
In countries like Germany , which have been on the ropes since the signing of the Maastricht Treaty , a continuation of stagnation or outright recession would deeply strain budgets and credibility .
But all this should not happen .
A big appreciation in the euro is not on the cards .
Europe 's leading economies , like Germany , are a fiscal embarrassment .
Their tardiness in reforming and hostility to capital creates an impression of eurosclerosis that won 't attract capital .
The euro was a great idea , but the economy that backs it is distinctly dull .
So there is no way Europe will become a magnet for world capital flows anytime soon .
The euro will stay at around 90 % of the dollar and may not even pay a weekend visit at parity .
There won 't much European growth , but nor will there be an outright growth crisis either .
Europe will keep talking about the American house of cards , but with a sense of yearning that its dynamism is a trick an ageing Europe can 't master .
Suppose all this is wrong , suppose suddenly the US cannot attract enough capital .
No one shows up at Treasury auctions to buy US bonds , and fewer foreigners buy US stocks or companies and real estate .
What would happen ?
Of course the dollar would fall in no time , and substantially so - enough to shrink the deficits or bring in capital to take advantage of a now undervalued dollar .
But there is very little pain in that - inflation won 't rise , stocks won 't fall , manufacturers would cheer .
Because America has low inflation and is financially stable , the exchange rate is not the risk factor it was in the 1970s .
That situation was well characterized by a line from John Connolly , the then Treasury Secretary for President Nixon : " the dollar is our money and their problem ! "
The more things change , the more they remain the same .
