Arrogance and Authority
WASHINGTON , DC – It is increasingly common to hear prominent American and European central bankers proclaim , with respect to the crisis of 2008-2010 , the following verdict : “ We did well . ”
Their view is that the various government actions to support the financial system helped to stabilize the situation .
Indeed , what could be wrong when the United States Federal Reserve ’ s asset purchases may have actually made money ( which is then turned over to the US Treasury ) ?
But to frame the issue in this way is , at best , to engage in delusion .
At worst , however , it creates an image of arrogance that can only undermine the credibility on which central banks ’ authority rests .
The real cost of the crisis is not measured by the profit and loss statement of any central bank – or by whether or not the Troubled Asset Relief Program ( TARP ) , run by the Treasury Department , made or lost money on its various activities .
The cost is eight million jobs in the US alone , with employment falling 6 % from its peak and – in a major departure from other post-1945 recessions – remaining 5 % below that peak today , 31 months after the crisis broke in earnest .
The cost is also the increase in net federal government debt held by the private sector – the most accurate measure of true government indebtedness .
Comparing the US Congressional Budget Office ’ s medium-term forecasts before ( in January 2008 ) and after the crisis , this debt increase is a staggering 40 % of GDP .
Indeed , the reason there is a perceived fiscal crisis in the US today – along with spending cuts that will further hurt many people – is simple : the banks blew themselves up at great cost to the American people , with major negative global implications .
Most of the public-debt increase in the US and elsewhere is not due to any kind of discretionary fiscal stimulus ; it ’ s all about the loss of tax revenue that comes with a deep recession .
( And the Bush administration ’ s tax cuts for the wealthiest , unfunded Medicare prescription benefit , and debt-financed wars in Afghanistan and Iraq have severely weakened the long-term fiscal outlook . )
Finally , the cost of the crisis is millions of homes lost and lives damaged , some permanently .
The issue is not whether the Fed , or any central bank , should seek to prevent the collapse of its country ’ s banking system .
To see the severe effects of a banking crisis , look no further than the 1930 ’ s , a period that Ben Bernanke studied in detail before he became Fed chair .
If the choice at any particular moment is to provide support or let the system collapse , you should choose support .
But , more broadly , as Dennis Lockhart , President of the Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank , said last week at a public conference organized by his institution , we should not seek to operate a system based on the principle of “ private gains and public losses . ”
And these losses are massively skewed in ways that are grossly inefficient , in addition to being completely unfair .
The private gains can be measured most directly in the form of executive compensation .
From 2000 to 2008 , the people running the top 14 US financial institutions received cash compensation ( salary , bonus , and the value of stock sold ) of around $ 2.6 billion .
Of this amount , around $ 2 billion was received by the five best-paid individuals , who were also central to creating the highly risky asset structures that brought the financial system to the edge of the abyss : Sandy Weil ( built Citigroup , which blew up shortly after he left ) ;
Hank Paulson ( greatly expanded Goldman Sachs , lobbied for allowing more leverage in investment banks , then moved to the US Treasury and helped save them ) ;
Angelo Mozilo ( built Countrywide , a central player in irresponsible mortgage lending ) ;
Dick Fuld ( ran Lehman Brothers into the ground ) ; and Jimmy Cayne ( ran Bear Stearns into the ground ) .
The public losses are massive in comparison : roughly $ 6 trillion , if we limit ourselves just to the increase in federal government debt .
And leading bank executives still insist that they should be allowed to run highly leveraged global businesses , in which they are paid based on their return on equity – unadjusted for any risk .
The world ’ s top independent financial minds have looked long and hard at these arrangements , and , given what we have learned in recent years , have found them worse than wanting ( see the Web page of Anat Admati at Stanford ’ s Graduate School of Business for the details ) .
In their view , the big banks should be funded much more with equity – perhaps as much as 30 % of their capitalization .
But bankers strongly reject this approach ( because it would likely lower their pay ) , as do central bankers ( because they are too much persuaded by the protestation of bankers ) .
There are many advantages to having an independent central bank run by professionals who can keep their distance from politicians .
But when the people at the apex of these institutions insist that the crisis response went well , and that everything will be fine , even as the financial behemoths that caused the crisis lumber forward , their credibility inevitably suffers .
That should worry central bankers , because their credibility is pretty much all they have .
The US Constitution , after all , does not guarantee the Fed ’ s independence .
Congress created the Fed , which means that Congress can un-create it .
By assuming away the damage that highly leveraged megabanks can do , the myth of a “ good crisis ” merely makes political pressure on central banks all the more likely .
