The Burma Road Goes Through Beijing
NEW YORK amp # 45 ; amp # 45 ; Three hard facts are setting the boundaries for the talks United Nations negotiator Ibrahim Gambari is undertaking as he shuttles between Burma ’ s ruling generals and the detained opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi .
First , despite the heroic leadership of the Buddhist clergy and the pro-democracy community , almost 50 years of military misrule and terror tactics have worn down Burma ’ s people , who will likely find it hard to maintain their defiance without obvious splits among the ruling generals or widespread desertions among ordinary soldiers .
Second , Burma ’ s generals know that they face a stark choice : either maintain power or risk imprisonment , exile , and possible death .
In their eyes , this leaves them with virtually no choice but to hold on to power at all costs .
Finally , as long as China provides political , financial , and military support for Burma ’ s rulers , it will be all but impossible for any meaningful change to occur .
Until China decides that it has more to gain from a more legitimate government in Burma than it does from the current incompetent military regime , little can happen .
China ’ s decision to block the UN Security Council from condemning the Burmese regime ’ s assault on the Buddhist monks and other peaceful protestors underscores its long-standing political support for the junta .
This past January , China , alongside Russia , vetoed a Security Council resolution that condemned Burma ’ s human rights record and called on the government to stop attacks on ethnic minorities , release political prisoners , and begin a transition towards national reconciliation and democracy .
For years , China has also blocked meaningful sanctions against Burma .
China ’ s economic ties to Burma ’ s rulers are strategically important for both sides .
Annual bilateral trade , estimated at $ 1.1 billion – a huge figure , given Burma ’ s total GDP of $ 9.6 billion – provides an economic lifeline for the Burmese government .
China is also Burma ’ s largest military supplier .
At the same time , the $ 2 billion oil pipeline that China is seeking to build from Burma ’ s southern coast to China ’ s Yunnan province will allow China to get Middle East oil to its southern provinces more easily and securely .
When completed , the pipeline will make China much less susceptible to foreign military pressure in the event of international conflict .
So the stakes in Burma are high for China , as are Chinese fears of about how any future “ national reconciliation ” government might react to China ’ s record of complicity with the corrupt military rulers .
It should be remembered that America and its allies , faced with strategic fears of a similar type during the Cold War , also supported repugnant and oppressive regimes in places like Zaire , Chile , and Indonesia .
But America and the West did , at key turning points , realize that times had changed so much that these dictators had outlived their usefulness .
Thus , despots like Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines and Chun Doo-hwan in Korea were jettisoned , because the price of supporting their despicable regimes became greater than the benefits .
In today ’ s Internet age , the costs of China ’ s support for Burma ’ s generals are rising fast .
Just as in Darfur , where China ’ s perceived support for the Sudanese government translated into harsh criticism and threats to brand the 2008 Olympics the “ Genocide Games , ” China ’ s backing of the Burmese generals , particularly if the death toll rises , could cause similar problems .
Indeed , an Olympic boycott will become more likely if scenes of murdered or brutalized Buddhist monks are flashed around the world .
Moreover , Burma ’ s public health woes and drug and human trafficking are increasingly being exported to southern China .
Although China has expressed some vague concerns over the crisis to the Burmese government , it has not taken any action that could meaningfully affect the regime ’ s calculations , despite its singularly unique leverage .
To encourage China to take the lead in fostering national reconciliation in Burma , the international community must convince China that pushing for reform and change can be a win-win proposition .
The international community must make clear that China ’ s interests would be protected during a transition to a more open society in Burma , and that some version of the oil pipeline project will be supported by any new regime .
Because China has been competing with India for access to Burma ’ s natural resources , India also needs to be actively included in efforts to pressure the Burmese regime , a process that the Association of Southeast Asian Nations ( ASEAN ) might effectively coordinate .
In a statement issued on September 27 , ASEAN foreign ministers expressed a surprising degree of condemnation of the crackdown in Burma .
They could play an essential leading role in a process including the Burmese parties , China , India , the European Union , Russia , and the United States that could devise a roadmap for change in Burma .
Such an international process simply cannot happen without China .
The road to change in Burma runs through Beijing .
