The Debt Death Trap
NEW YORK – The Greek financial saga is the tip of an iceberg of problems of public-debt sustainability for many advanced economies , and not only the so-called PIIGS ( Portugal , Italy , Ireland , Greece , and Spain ) .
Indeed , the OECD now estimates that public debt-to-GDP ratios in advanced economies will rise to an average of around 100 % of GDP .
The International Monetary Fund has recently put out similar estimates .
Within the PIIGS , the problems are not just excessive public deficits and debt ratios ( in different degrees and measures in the five countries ) .
They are also problems of external deficits , loss of competitiveness , and thus of anemic growth .
These are economies that , even a decade ago , were losing market share to China and Asia , owing to their labor-intensive and low value-added exports .
After a decade that saw wages grow faster than productivity , unit labor costs ( and the real exchange rate based on those costs ) appreciated sharply .
The ensuing loss of competitiveness manifested itself in large and growing current-account deficits and slowing growth .
The final nail in the coffin was the appreciation of the euro between 2002 and 2008 .
So , even if Greece and other PIIGS had the political resolve to reduce massively their large fiscal deficits – and that is a big if , given the political resistance to spending cuts and tax increases – fiscal contraction may , at least in the short run , make the current recession worse as higher taxes and lower spending reduce aggregate demand .
If GDP falls , achieving a certain deficit and debt target ( as a share of GDP ) becomes impossible .
This , indeed , was the debt death trap that engulfed Argentina between 1998 and 2001 .
Restoring sustained growth requires real currency depreciation .
There are only three ways that this can occur .
One is deflation that reduces prices and wages by 20-30 % .
But deflation is associated with persistent recession ( see Argentina again ) , and no country ’ s society and political system can accept years of recession and fiscal austerity to achieve real depreciation .
Default and an exit from the euro would occur well before that .
The second path is to follow the German model of accelerating structural reforms and corporate restructuring to increase productivity growth while keeping wage growth moderate .
But it took a decade for Germany to reduce its unit labor costs that way ; if Greece or Spain were to start today , the short run costs of resource reallocation would be large , while the benefits in terms of higher growth would take too many years to achieve .
Finally , the euro could fall sharply in value .
But the main beneficiary would be Germany .
And , in order for the euro to fall far enough , the risk of default in Greece would need to be so large , and the contagion to sovereign spreads of PIIGS so severe that the widening of those spreads would cause a double-dip eurozone recession before currency depreciation could yield benefits .
Short of a miracle , Greece looks close to insolvency .
At the onset of its crisis , Argentina ’ s budget deficit , public debt , and current-account deficit ( as a share of GDP ) were about 3 % , 50 % and 2 % , respectively . Those ratios for Greece are far worse : 12.9 % , 120 % and 10 % .
So it will take a Herculean effort , luck , and support from the European Union and the IMF to reduce the probability of an eventual default and exit from the eurozone .
Greece is currently too interconnected to be allowed to collapse : since it has about $ 400 billion of public debt – three-quarters of which is held abroad , mostly by European financial institutions – a disorderly default would lead to massive losses and risk a systemic crisis .
So , despite revulsion on the part of Germany and the European Central Bank at the idea of a “ bailout , ” Greece needs large official financial support this year at rates that are not unsustainable to prevent its current illiquidity from devolving immediately into insolvency .
But official support will only kick the can down the road until next year . The magic trifecta of sustainable debt and deficit ratios , a real depreciation , and restoration of growth looks unlikely to be achievable even with official financial support .
All successful rescues of countries in financial distress – Mexico , Korea , Thailand , Brazil , Turkey – require two conditions : the country ’ s credible willingness to impose the fiscal austerity and structural reforms needed to restore sustainability and growth ; and massive amounts of front-loaded official support to avoid a self-fulfilling rollover crisis of maturing public and / or private short-term debts .
Reform without money on the table does not work , as nervous and trigger-happy investors would rather pull their money out if the country lacks the foreign-currency reserves needed to prevent the equivalent of a bank run on its short-term liabilities .
So , after a totally flawed plan that would have given money to Greece too late – only when the country risked a refinancing crisis – and at market rates that would make its debt unsustainable , the EU regained its senses and designed a new scheme that is closer to typical IMF conditionality : tranched support with some early front-loaded support and a semi-concessional interest rate .
Only time will tell if this plan will work : i.e. whether Greece will turn out to be illiquid but solvent , conditional on credible fiscal austerity and structural reforms and with the help of large amounts of financial support .
But , as with Argentina , Russia , and Ecuador , Greece may also be insolvent if adjustment fails to restore debt sustainability and growth .
For now , the official community has decided to stick with Plan A ; if that fails , Plan B is default to reduce unsustainable debts and a Greek exit from the eurozone to allow depreciation and restoration of competitiveness and growth .
