Going Against Conventional Wisdom
CAMBRIDGE – When I finished my graduate studies in 1974 , I had the wonderful fortune of doing postdoctoral work with Harvard Medical School ’ s Judah Folkman .
Dr. Folkman had a theory that the progression of tumors could be arrested by cutting off their source of nourishment .
He suggested that tumors emit a substance called tumor-angiogenesis factor , which causes surrounding blood vessels to grow toward it , supplying nutrition and removing waste .
Folkman hypothesized that this process , angiogenesis , is crucial to the tumor ’ s survival .
This theory went strongly against conventional wisdom .
Scientists who reviewed Folkman ’ s grants said that the new blood vessels were simply due to inflammation .
But Folkman persevered , and eventually he proved that such chemical substances do exist .
Today , four decades later , such substances have been used to treat more than 10 million people with neovascular diseases such as macular degeneration and many different forms of cancer .
I had a similar experience when I was working in his lab , trying to isolate the first inhibitors of blood-vessel growth ( which were large-molecular-weight substances ) .
This required developing a bioassay that would enable us to observe the inhibition of blood-vessel growth in the presence of tumors .
Given that tumors take several months to grow , biocompatible systems had to be developed that could release proteins and other large-molecular-weight substances slowly and continuously in the body – something that scientists were convinced was impossible .
However , after two years of work , I discovered that I could modify certain types of polymers to release molecules of virtually any size over a 100-day period .
For several years , many of the field ’ s most respected chemists and engineers said that our work had to be incorrect .
The negative feedback had practical consequences , inhibiting my ability not only to secure research grants , but also to find faculty positions ( especially given the work ’ s interdisciplinary nature , which made it difficult to fit into a single university department ) .
But I kept at it , and , step by step , addressed different key issues – such as biocompatibility , manufacturing , reproducibility of release , and bioactivity .
Today , systems based on these principles have been used to treat more than 20 million people .
Another area I started thinking about involved creating new polymer materials .
Working in a hospital , I saw that almost all polymers used in medicine were derived from household objects .
For example , the materials used in girdles for women are used in artificial hearts because of their good flex life .
The polymers in mattress stuffing are used in breast implants .
Yet such an approach often leads to problems .
Artificial hearts , for example , can cause clots to form when blood hits their surface – the girdle material – and these clots can cause strokes and death .
So I began thinking that we needed to find alternatives to solving medical problems other than by searching for materials in everyday settings .
I believed that researchers could take an engineering-design approach : Ask the question , “ What do we really want in a biomaterial from the standpoints of engineering , chemistry , and biology ? ” and then synthesize the materials from first principles .
As a proof of principle , we decided to synthesize a new family of biodegradable polymers , called polyanhydrides , for medical use .
The first step was to select monomers – a polymer ’ s building blocks – that would be safe in the human body .
We then synthesized these polymers and discovered that by changing their composition , we could make them last in the body for a period ranging from days to years .
With Henry Brem , now the chief of neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital , we thought we could use these polymers to deliver drugs locally in the treatment of brain cancer .
But I had to raise money for this project , so I wrote grant applications to government agencies that were reviewed by other professors .
Their reviews were very negative .
In our first grant proposal , in 1981 , the reviewers said that we would never be able to synthesize the polymers .
Yet one of my graduate students synthesized the polymers for his doctoral thesis .
We sent the proposal back for another review , only to be told that the grant should still not be funded , because the polymers would react with whatever drug we wanted to deliver .
Several researchers in our lab showed that there was no reaction .
We returned the proposal for another review ; it came back with the comment that the polymers were fragile and would break .
This time , two other researchers addressed the problem .
The revised proposal was sent again for evaluation , and now the reviewers ’ reason for rejecting it was that new polymers would not be safe to test on animals or people .
Another graduate student showed that the polymers were safe .
Such reviews continued for a long time ; but , in 1996 , the Food and Drug Administration approved the treatment – the first new treatment for brain cancer to be approved in more than 20 years .
Moreover , the FDA ’ s approval of polymer-based local chemotherapy created a new paradigm in the drug-delivery field , helping to pave the way for drug-eluting stents and other local delivery systems .
Something similar happened when Jay Vacanti , a surgeon at Massachusetts General Hospital , and I had an idea in the 1980 ’ s to combine three-dimensional synthetic polymer scaffolds with cells to create new tissues and organs .
Once again , the idea was met with great skepticism , and it was extremely difficult to obtain peer-reviewed government grants .
Today , this concept has become a cornerstone of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine , leading to the creation of artificial skin for patients with burns or skin ulcers – and someday , one hopes , to the creation of many other tissues and organs .
My experiences are hardly unique .
Scientists throughout history have often had to fight conventional wisdom to validate their discoveries .
In modern times , Stanley Prusiner ’ s discovery of prions , Barry Marshall and Robin Warren ’ s findings that bacteria can cause peptic ulcers , and Dan Shechtman ’ s determination of the structure of quasicrystals are just a few examples ( all received Nobel Prizes for their research ) .
The lessons are simple to understand , if difficult to master : Don ’ t believe everything you read , be willing to challenge dogma , and recognize that you may pay a price for it career-wise in the short run , even if you are correct .
But the rewards of scientific discovery are worth it : technology advances , and the world can become much better for it .
