Emerging Markets ’ Feminine Future
LONDON – According to the United Nations , 70 % of women worldwide experience violence in their lifetime .
The World Bank adds that women aged 15-44 are more likely to experience rape or domestic violence than cancer , car accidents , war , or malaria .
Such indicators are even more alarming in emerging markets , where discrimination and gender inequality are particularly prevalent .
This partly reflects the failure of public policy to ameliorate the distributive consequences of rapid economic growth .
With the informal sector continuing to play a major role in emerging economies , women often have access to only unreliable and transitory employment that offers casual and irregular wages .
Meanwhile , unprecedented urbanization has disrupted traditional family structures , further undermining the role that women can play in economies and societies .
The damaging impact of active gender discrimination – such as bride burning and female infanticide – is clear .
But passive discrimination – tolerating rules and institutions that deny women equal say in reproductive decisions , equal access to education and employment , equal pay for equal work , equal rights before the law , and equal political influence – is similarly destructive .
In all of its forms , gender discrimination makes women vulnerable to sexual slavery , trafficking , and forced marriage , deprives women of their inalienable rights , and diminishes their quality of life .
At the same time , it stunts the capacity of boys and men to understand women ’ s plight , thus diminishing their motivation to change the situation .
While these issues are global , they are most urgent in emerging markets , where they are undermining the social and economic progress on which the rest of the world increasingly relies .
In the wake of the global economic crisis , emerging markets have become the engines of worldwide growth .
But these countries face growing constraints to sustainability , social cohesion , and political stability , including erosion of their international competitiveness , environmental degradation , weaknesses ( including corruption ) in national , local , and corporate governance , wasted human capital , and growing social , economic , and gender inequality .
Failure to make full use of women ’ s talents undermines emerging markets ’ economic development , while the marginalization and abuse of women threatens their social advancement and impairs their political stability .
With most countries worldwide facing continued economic uncertainty , the international community has a vested interest in emerging economies ’ resilience , collective capacity to sustain global demand for goods and services , and ability to confront the challenges , such as gender inequality , that threaten their success .
The importance of overcoming these barriers to development was emphasized at a recent symposium ( of which I was the chair ) at Green Templeton College , Oxford .
Fifty leaders from government , business , civil society , and academia identified gender inequality as the most urgent constraint to sustainable growth , social cohesion , and political stability , and agreed on the steps needed to address the issue effectively .
First and foremost , national policymakers must take concrete , comprehensive action to ensure that women are forced to abandon neither productive nor reproductive activities .
To this end , governments should implement measures that guarantee , directly or indirectly , affordable child- and elder-care support systems for working parents .
Moreover , private employers should be encouraged to build supportive workplaces by implementing creative solutions to common constraints .
For example , MAS Holdings in Sri Lanka has incorporated into the workplace nursing stations , on-site banking , and company buses that ease employees ’ commutes and facilitate participation in sports programs .
Such measures not only lead to increased productivity ; they also bolster loyalty , morale , and thus employee retention .
At the same time , it is crucial that women enjoy total reproductive autonomy and sexual sovereignty .
This can be achieved only with the provision of universal and unfettered access to reproductive and other relevant health-care services .
But even healthy reproduction has a dark side .
Neonaticide ( killing infants that are less than one day old ) , infanticide ( killing infants that are more than one day old ) , and the practice of disposing of female children in favor of male offspring are not only barbaric ; they have led to imbalanced gender ratios in many emerging markets .
Policymakers must enforce criminal sanctions against these practices .
Subsequently , educational programs for children and adults should be launched , in collaboration with religious groups , in order to improve public understanding of gender inequality .
By promoting a shift in public perceptions , such programs can catalyze fundamental behavioral changes .
International action is also crucial .
The World Bank and regional development banks should be encouraged to incorporate gender-equality criteria into their eligibility criteria for loans and credit to emerging-market governments and private-sector corporations .
Such a clear economic link would help to motivate local policymakers to take strong action , while helping to bolster public support for policies promoting gender equality .
The international community has a profound stake in the future performance of emerging markets .
In order to bolster these countries ’ social and economic advancement , the development agenda in the coming years should include a robust commitment to promoting gender equality .
