The End of Nuclear Power
OXFORD – Japan ’ s nuclear crisis , and the approaching 25th anniversary of the nuclear meltdown at Chernobyl , have incited heated new discussions about the desirability of nuclear power . By awakening dormant fears , this debate threatens to halt what to many had seemed like a budding nuclear renaissance .
The stealth-like nature of radiation taps into deep-seated human anxieties .
But , however well founded those fears might be , they are probably the wrong reason to oppose nuclear energy .
There is an even stronger argument than safety alone for why a nuclear renaissance is neither likely nor necessary : cost .
The price of nuclear power has been escalating steadily for decades .
Since 1970 , the cost in constant dollars of new nuclear generating capacity has increased nine-fold , as additional safety features make plant designs more expensive .
New innovations , such as pebble-bed reactors , promise to increase safety further , but will be vastly more costly to adopt .
In addition , we have lost economies of scale because we build so few nuclear power plants .
As with fighter jets , adding features and building small quantities causes costs to skyrocket .
Globally , the median age of nuclear plants is now 27 years , so much of the learning from building the early plants has gone .
The exception is China , where a large-scale construction plan is showing evidence of lowering costs .
But with the next generation of safer reactors , costs are rising fast .
Xu Yuanhui of Chinergy , which is building two pebble-bed reactors , commented recently on the new design : “ The safety is no question , but the economics are not so clear . ”
The exact opposite is occurring with renewables .
We are learning quickly , and costs are plummeting through the sheer volume of construction : 40,000 wind turbines over the past decade in Europe alone .
And solar power will reach grid parity in sunny regions like South Africa , Greece , and Florida by 2015 .
As the price of nuclear power steadily rises and that of renewables falls , inevitably the cost curves will cross .
The only question is when – and it is likely to occur well within the decade that it will take for the next nuclear plant to come online in the industrialized world .
In other words , before we finish building the next nuclear plant , it will be an expensive and increasingly irrelevant relic of the 1950 ’ s dream of “ atoms for peace . ”
That dream always contained the seeds of a nightmare .
While the risk that nuclear power could fuel nuclear proliferation seems to have receded as a cause of public angst , by many accounts we have simply been lucky so far : the larger the nuclear economy becomes , the higher the chances of a mistake .
Even in the absence of proliferation risks , leaving dangerous trash for future generations is morally dubious .
We would judge Alexander the Great differently if his conquests had left a toxic legacy that we were still living with today .
Most advocates of nuclear energy now endorse solar and wind , but in the same breath claim that renewables alone simply are not a practicable solution for the necessary reduction of carbon emissions .
Every day brings another editorial arguing that nuclear energy is fundamental to a decarbonized power system .
But is it really true that a renewable power system is impossible ?
In 2010 , the European Climate Foundation ( ECF ) published a much-noted report called Roadmap 2050 , which modeled in great detail the cost and technical feasibility of various scenarios for a carbon-free power system in Europe by 2050 .
It describes a scenario of 80 % renewable power , complemented by a remnant of nuclear and fossil fuels with carbon capture and sequestration .
In a nutshell , the ECF ’ s conclusion is that a continent-wide renewable power system is both technically possible and economically affordable .
The much-maligned and very real intermittency of supplies of renewable power is addressed through additional back-up generation capacity and , crucially , a new direct-current supergrid that enables load balancing across the European continent .
Still , if it is affordable and doable in the long term , what about in the shorter term ?
The evidence of the link between carbon reduction , economic growth , and job creation is mounting .
In the past six months , studies by the United Nations Environment Program and Johns Hopkins University , as well as “ A new growth path for Europe , ” a blueprint proposed by six leading European universities , all project the creation of millions of job before 2020 .
Notably , these are not just “ Green Jobs ” ; they are “ Green Growth jobs ” across all industrial and services sectors .
What we are witnessing is a watershed in the debate on greenhouse-gas emissions .
A low-carbon growth path requires neither coal nor new nuclear power .
The way forward is to pursue more ambitious and consistent climate and energy policies that drive the massive deployment of renewables ; install new load-balancing electricity grids ; and ensure large-scale adoption of energy-efficiency measures .
This agenda promises to boost investments , stimulate economic growth , and create jobs while increasing competitiveness and energy security .
In both economic and ethical terms , nuclear power merits no role .
