The Old in the New Anti-Semitism
Why do so many Holocaust survivors sense emerging anti-Jewish threats before seeing them ?
Because they know how supposedly " innocent " insinuations grow into accusations and that accusations can become discrimination and soon after legislation .
It is then that hysteria is set loose .
Survivors sound the alarm because they know what is at stake .
By doing so they strengthen our democracies in ways that no other people can .
We listen to the survivors so that we survive .
That we have cause to listen is clear , as the results of the first round of the French presidential elections demonstrate .
But not only demagogues like Jean-Marie Le-Pen and Europe 's other lumpen extreme rightists incite trouble .
Throughout the 20 th century people who regarded themselves as " intellectuals " often became fellow travelers of fascism or communism without joining political parties based on those ideologies .
In the 21 st century - in the " chattering classes " linked to the mass media , to politics , government and universities - we encounter people who condemn Israel in language that reminds us of the fellow travelers of those fallen anti-democratic movements .
These are not majority voices in the Western world - not yet , thankfully - but are powerful and influential minority ones .
Take the case of the French Ambassador to Britain . At a dinner party in London not long ago he described Israel as " that shitty little country . "
His vulgar comments are not particularly frightful .
What is worrying is the response .
He was not recalled by his government ;
Tony Blair 's government did not request his recall ; popular opinion treated the matter as merely another scandal .
Indeed , the French press thought the ambassador a victim of Britain 's tabloid press , not of his contemptible sentiments .
Sadly , the French ambassador to the Court of St. James has many allies among Europe 's elites .
But Ambassador Bernard did provide a service ; he helped us to recognize how widespread this new anti-Jewishness is .
As one columnist notably said , Israel has become " the object of hate that dare not speak its name . "
But we must not only dare , we are obliged to speak .
We must not be silent about the daily attacks in France against Jews and synagogues .
It is a shame for all of Europe that many French Jews cannot send their children to school without worrying about their security .
Anti-Semitic outrages are also reported elsewhere : in Berlin and London , in Switzerland , Italy , Sweden , the Netherlands , and in parts of Eastern Europe .
We must not be silent about the fact that denial of the Holocaust is becoming routine ; so too the parallels that anti-Semites / anti-Zionists draw between Israel and the Third Reich .
We must " confront the new Nazi plague which is nesting in Israel , " wrote a Syrian paper as Palestinian TV portrays Israeli soldiers as rapists and cold-blooded murderers .
The Mufti of Jerusalem stated that " it 's not my fault that Hitler hated the Jews , they hate them just about everywhere . "
One Friday sermon on Palestinian TV told Muslims " to have no mercy on the Jews , no matter where you are ... kill them ... and those Americans who are like them . "
What we must remember about anti-Semitism is that , although it always starts with Jews , it never stops with Jews .
Jew-hatred , if not contained , almost always develops into assaults on other groups and minorities and finally undermines democratic institutions and the rule of law .
So the struggle against anti-Semitism is a task for Jews and non-Jews alike .
But it is now a more diffuse struggle than ever because an astonishing element in today 's anti-Semitism is its flexibility .
Although anti-Semitism never changes its goal - to attack Jews - it does change its face , its strategy , its rationalizations , even its vocabulary .
Once Jewish religion was the target .
When Judaism did not surrender , Jews were expelled or killed .
In the 19 th century , when race became an intoxicating theory , Jews were attacked for being an evil race .
Today , with Israel a source of pride and protection for most Jews , Zionism is slandered as a racist ideology .
I do not equate criticism of Israel with anti-Semitism .
It is as legitimate to oppose certain Israeli policies and decisions as it is to scrutinize any nation .
But anti-Zionism is becoming akin to anti-Semitism .
Sometimes anti-Zionists claim that they are not against Jews but are " only " against the Jewish state .
But suppose someone said : " I am only against the existence of Great Britain , I am not anti-British ! "
Or if somebody told me that " I love Swedes , but Sweden should be abolished . "
You would not believe them .
It is hard to love or respect a people and hate their state .
Yet people pretend that they can where Israel is concerned .
In several UN agencies , Israel-bashing is routine .
This demonization of the only democracy in the Middle East is a central part of the new anti-Jewishness .
When Israel is described " as the enemy of all good and the repository of all that is evil , " says Professor Irwin Cotler , a member of Canada 's parliament , it becomes a " teaching of contempt " within the UN .
This constant singling out of one nation as humanity 's enemy is in fact a campaign directed against the Jewish people .
Indeed , many anti-Jewish outbursts in a number of countries are rooted in condemnations of Israel that exploit anti-Semitic terminology .
Attacks on synagogues are often triggered by a defaming language about the Middle East .
Compared to previous anti-Jewish outbreaks , today 's anti-Semitism is less an attack on individual Jews than an attack on the " collective Jew , " the state of Israel .
Such attacks , however , have started a chain reaction of assaults across Europe and Latin America on individual Jews and Jewish institutions .
In the past the most dangerous anti-Semites were those who sought to make the world Judenrein , free of Jews .
Today the most dangerous anti-Semites are those who want to make the world Judenstaatrein , free of a Jewish state .
