The Closing of the European Mind
PARIS – Kishore Mahbubani , a prominent Asian voice from Singapore , and a man often highly critical of Europe , was recently asked what Asia could learn from Europe .
His reply : Europe was above all the continent of peace , compassion , and cooperation .
“ Asia ” may not exist culturally , historically , religiously , socially , and economically , the way that Europe does . It is a much more varied continent .
But “ Asians ” have been looking at , and reflecting upon , the European experiment for a long time .
Enlightened Japanese elites are fascinated by Franco-German reconciliation .
Could that model be applied to Japan ’ s relations with its former enemies , from Korea to China ?
And today , with the irresistible rise of a more assertive China , the European example of a continent where the prospect of war between traditional enemies – or contemporary rivals – has simply disappeared is more attractive than ever .
One does not naturally associate China with the quest for compassion .
Yet some Chinese have recently discovered the virtues of the Nordic social model , and Chinese delegations have been coming to Oslo regularly to see what lessons they can bring home .
The reasoning of China ’ s elites is pragmatic : if the Chinese were reassured by the existence of a social – welfare state , they would probably save less and spend more , allowing the domestic market to take over from export-led growth .
Although the European Union ’ s image has deteriorated , Asians still find Europe ’ s “ sharing of sovereignty ” model appealing in many ways .
For Mahbubani , the “ lessons of Europe ” are crystal clear .
If emerging Asia begins to look more and more “ like a socially and politically harmonious Europe , ” the world would be a much better place .
At a time when Europeans are full of self-doubt , though perhaps not as morose as the French , this praise from thoughtful Asians is more than welcome .
Europeans , unfortunately , too often fail to see the merits of their peaceful conquest over their own worst natures .
Moreover , Europeans should , in the same spirit of openness , ask themselves what they can learn from Asia .
In a multipolar world , the flow of examples and inspiration has become a two-way street .
Europeans can no longer look down upon Asians with a “ Western ” combination of arrogance and ignorance , perceiving themselves as the unique carriers of a universal message .
The problem , of course , is that the concept of Asia is largely a Western one .
Asians do not perceive themselves as Asians in the way that most Europeans view themselves as Europeans .
India ’ s historical patrimony is very different from China ’ s , for example , not to mention the singular experience of Japan .
Yet it is legitimate to ask what , for Europeans looking at Asia , would be the equivalent of the “ peace , compassion and cooperation ” that Asians see in Europe ?
Could it be a combination of hope , energy , long-term thinking , and curiosity ?
Hope is a state of mind and not only the result of economic growth .
Hope means confidence , and young Asians are exuding the stuff , whereas young Europeans – arrogant towards others and diffident towards themselves – too often lack “ appetite ” and cling to the status quo , seeming to demand protection from life .
Many Chinese may dream of spending like Europeans , but the nightmare of most Europeans nowadays is that they might have to start working as hard as the Chinese .
Beyond confidence and the energy that goes with an appetite for success , Europeans lack long-term thinking and curiosity about the “ other ” in general .
As a result , they know little about the history , culture , and languages of Asia .
By contrast , the large numbers of young Chinese and Indians who are graduating from the best Western universities ( mostly American ) know the Western mind from the inside , and thus feel that they understand “ what makes us tick . ”
Indeed , they are “ us ” while remaining themselves .
How many Europeans can claim such familiarity with the “ Asian Other ” ?
The fact that so many Asian students come to the West to study – and so few Europeans ( Westerners ) do so in Asia – is not a sign of the superiority of the Western mind and model . On the contrary , it impoverishes our mindset , if not our culture .
The need to open ourselves as Europeans to the Asian mind , and even to some different societal models , does not imply , however , that we should relinquish our values .
The peace , compassion , and cooperation Asians are contemplating with such admiration are the direct product of values which some of them see as “ Western , ” and that , yes , we regard as “ universal . ”
Given Asia ’ s rise , it is , of course , illusory for Europeans to consider their relations with the biggest Asian power , China , only through the prism of human rights . Moreover , Europe ’ s ability to exert pressure on China is extremely limited at best , and may be least potent where Chinese domestic matters are concerned .
Nevertheless , Europeans should not be deterred by the Chinese government ’ s anger at the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to the Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo .
In the name of Europe ’ s core values , all EU ambassadors to Norway should make a point of attending the Nobel award ceremony – which the imprisoned Liu cannot – despite China ’ s call for them to stay away .
It is simply a question of self-respect – and , ultimately , that of China .
