The Protocols of Rupert Murdoch
NEW YORK – Whenever I hear people on America ’ s Republican right call themselves “ conservative , ” I experience the mental equivalent of a slight electric shock .
A conservative is someone who , in the tradition of the eighteenth-century English parliamentarian Edmund Burke , believes that the established order deserves respect , even reverence .
A liberal , by contrast , is someone ready to alter the established order in pursuit of a vision of a better world .
The Whig historian of the nineteenth century Thomas Macaulay described this difference well .
There were “ two great parties ” in England , he wrote , which manifested a “ distinction ” that “ had always existed , and always must exist . ”
On the one side were liberals , “ a class of men sanguine in hope , bold in speculation , always pressing forward … and disposed to give every change credit for being an improvement . ”
On the other were conservatives , “ a class of men who cling with fondness to whatever is ancient , and who , even when convinced by overpowering reasons that innovation would be beneficial , consent to it with many misgivings and forebodings . ”
By this the standard , the right in the United States – the party of Fox News , the Tea Party , and , increasingly , of the Republican Party itself – are no longer conservatives .
They are radicals .
They are ecological radicals , denying the scientific consensus on global warming ; they are prepared to let the Earth cook .
( What could be less conservative than that ? )
They are legal radicals , supporting the form of torture called water-boarding , as well as widespread secret wiretapping .
And , on the basis of far-fetched “ originalist ” interpretations of the US Constitution , they would deny the federal government the power to engage in almost any form of economic regulation or support of the general welfare , including public health .
They are even nuclear radicals , and many seek to obstruct the New START treaty with Russia , which would modestly advance the arms-control agenda pursued by all Republican presidents since Richard Nixon . Tea Party candidates have even hinted that armed resistance to the US government may soon be justifiable .
But nothing illustrates the radicalism of the new right better than the recent attack by the Fox News commentator Glenn Beck on the financier and philanthropist George Soros .
Soros is of Hungarian and Jewish origin , and Beck ’ s attack , called “ The Puppet-Master ? ” , recycles , almost in carbon copy , the tropes of the most virulent anti-Semitic ideologies of the totalitarian movements of the first half of the twentieth century .
Beck , who denies that he is anti-Semitic , is a conspiracy theorist of classic vintage , though the content of his alleged conspiracies is , to put it bluntly , weird .
True , some of it is classic McCarthyite red-baiting .
Of Obama ’ s White House , he says , “ there are communists , Marxists , revolutionaries all around this president . ”
Stranger still is his attack on , of all people , US President Woodrow Wilson .
Wilson is fingered as the originator of “ progressivism , ” which in turn , is – believe it or not – also identified as the point of origin of Nazism and Bolshevism .
Beck regularly likens Obama ’ s policies to those of Hitler . ( Recently , Roger Ailes , Fox ’ s founder and president , said of the management of mild , sober National Public Radio , “ They are , of course , Nazis . ” )
Wilson , Hitler , and Obama are linked by a chain of highly permissive association altogether typical of conspiracy theorizing in general , and of its anti-Semitic variety in particular : Wilson was a “ progressive ” ; some progressives dabbled in eugenics ( never mind that some conservatives did as well ) ; the eugenics movement influenced Hitler ;
Thereforeprogressives , Hitler , and Obama are the same !
Of all this we can say what the political thinker Hannah Arendt said of the anti-Semitic forgery The Protocols of the Elders of Zion . Its effect is to “ reveal official history as a joke , to demonstrate a sphere of secret influence of which the visible , traceable , and known historical reality was only the outward façade … ”
Now a new epicenter for the Wilson-Hitler-Obama axis has been identified in the person of George Soros .
While horror-film music plays and clips of history ’ s disasters are shown on the screen , a voice intones , “ Eighty years ago , George Soros was born .
Little did the world know then , economies would collapse , currencies would become worthless , elections would be stolen , regimes would fall . And one billionaire would find himself coincidentally at the center of it all . ”
Going on to accuse Soros of creating a shadow government in the US , the show claims that this “ greatly resembles ” similar organizations that “ he has created in other countries ” supposedly “ before instigating a coup . ”
Thus , Beck falsely charges that Soros has instigated coups abroad while implying that he plans to carry one out in the US .
Beck doesn ’ t say so , of course , but what Soros has actually done is give support through his Open Society foundations to pro-democracy movements in many countries .
Many of them , including Czechoslovakia , Hungary , and Poland , were ruled by Communist regimes at the time .
One would think that a self-proclaimed conservative like Beck would support that sort of activity .
But since when have conspiracy-mongers been hampered by contradiction ?
Indeed , they have historically been no more bothered by engaging in contradictions than in ignoring facts .
After all , the Nazis accused Jews of being the secret force behind both capitalism andcommunism – a contradiction as well as lie that is resuscitated in “ The Puppet Master ? ” .
Since roughly 1994 , when Newt Gingrich engineered the Republican takeover of the US House of Representatives , Republicans have taken to calling themselves “ revolutionaries ” – not a word often found on the lips of conservatives .
Has the time come to take them at their word ?
Glenn Beck ’ s assault on Soros – and the unmistakable stench of its atrocious antecedents – suggests what sort of revolution they may have in mind .
