Love the Bank , Hate the Banker
NEW DELHI – Public discourse is rarely nuanced .
The public ’ s attention span is short , and subtleties tend to confuse .
Better to take a clear , albeit incorrect , position , for at least the message gets through .
The sharper and shriller it is , the more likely it is to capture the public ’ s attention , be repeated , and frame the terms of debate .
Consider , for example , the debate about bank regulation .
Bankers are widely reviled today .
But banking is also mystifying .
So any critic who has the intellectual heft to clear away the smokescreen that bankers have laid around their business , and can portray bankers as both incompetent and malevolent , finds a ready audience .
The critic ’ s message – that banks need to be cut down to size – resonates widely .
Bankers can , of course , ignore their critics and the public , and use their money to lobby in the right quarters to maintain their privileges .
But , every once in a while , a banker , tired of being portrayed as a rogue , lashes out .
He ( it is usually a man ) warns the public that even the most moderate regulations placed on banks will bring about the end of civilization as we know it . And so the shrillness continues , with the public no wiser for it .
A more specific example drives home the point . A significant number of banks operated at very high levels of leverage prior to the recent crisis , with debt / equity ratios of 30-1 ( or more ) in some cases , and with much of the debt very short-term .
One might reasonably conclude that banks operated with too little equity capital , and too little margin of safety , and that a reasonable regulatory response would be to require that banks be better capitalized .
But this is where the consensus breaks down .
The critics want banks to operate with far less leverage , especially regarding short-term borrowing ; indeed , some want all-equity banks , so that the system becomes safe .
The bankers retort that they must pay a higher return on any additional equity that they issue , so that more equity would increase their cost of capital , forcing them to raise interest rates on the loans they make , which would reduce economic activity .
Neither side is quite right in their public arguments .
The bankers do not seem to have internalized a fundamental axiom of modern finance : risk emanates from the assets that a bank holds .
According to the Modigliani-Miller theorem , the mix of debt and equity that it uses to finance its assets does not alter its average cost of financing . Use more “ cheap ” debt , and equity becomes riskier and costlier , keeping overall financing costs the same .
Use more equity , and equity becomes less leveraged and less risky , which causes investors to demand lower returns to hold it , and again the overall financing cost remains the same .
Put differently , given a set of cash flows from a bank ’ s assets , the bank ’ s value is not affected by how those cash flows are distributed among investors , so more leverage does not reduce the bank ’ s cost of funding .
If their public argument is incorrect ( and they must know it ) , why do bankers prefer short-term borrowing to long-term equity finance ?
The critics would say that it is because of the tax preference accorded to debt , or because banks are too big to fail .
But these arguments do not withstand scrutiny .
If the tax deductibility of interest made debt attractive , then bankers should be indifferent between long-term debt and short-term debt .
Yet they seem to prefer the latter .
Similarly , too-big-to-fail banks would not care about the failure risk associated with debt financing .
But , again , it is unclear why they should prefer short-term debt .
After all , if bankers were trying to benefit , would they not issue long-term debt , for which the default risk , and the gain from the implicit government guarantee , is high ?
Furthermore , why do small banks , which have no implicit backing from the government , also have so much leverage ?
The critics ’ arguments about the benefits of equity are equally unsatisfying .
Of course , given a set of bank assets , more equity would reduce the risk of failure .
But failure is not always a bad thing ; a banker operating an all-equity bank , with no need ever to repay investors , would be likelier to take unwarranted risk . The need to repay or roll over debt imposes discipline , giving the banker a stronger incentive to manage risk carefully .
For example , when Washington Mutual collapsed in 2008 , following an uncontrolled lending spree ( it was the largest bank failure in American history ) , it was not because equity holders decided to close it down , but because depositors did not trust it anymore .
How much more value would Washington Mutual ’ s management have destroyed if the bank had been all-equity financed ?
In sum , there are tradeoffs .
Too much short-term debt makes banks more prone to failure , while too much equity places little restraint on bankers ’ capacity to destroy value .
The truth lies somewhere between the positions of today ’ s strident critics and indignant bankers , which may be why the moderately leveraged bank has been a feature of Western economies for a thousand years .
Our distaste for the banker must not be allowed to destroy the bank .
