The New Nuclear Thing
WASHINGTON , D.C. : For half a century , nuclear war was avoided thanks to deterrence and the notion that striking first held little attraction because the other party could and would retaliate with devastating consequences .
This concept was codified in the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty ( ABM ) Treaty , in which the United States and the Soviet Union agreed to keep to a minimum their capacity to shoot down the ballistic missiles of the other side .
Subsequent arms-control agreements – the SALT and START pacts – were negotiated and implemented in this context .
Levels and types of nuclear weapons were permitted and limited so as not to challenge the fundamental reality of mutual vulnerability .
The nuclear proposals and counter-proposals of the recent summit between President Clinton and President Putin may be among the last put forward under these Cold War concepts .
For the question now is whether the time is ripe to make the transition to another strategic paradigm altogether , one in which the levels of offensive and defensive systems change in both absolute and relative terms .
More specifically , the question is whether it makes sense to move to a world of less nuclear offense and more missile defense .
This question results from several changes .
First is the end of the Cold War .
It makes no sense ( if it ever did ) for the US and Russia to maintain massive nuclear arsenals capable of destroying one another many times over .
The two countries may not be allies , but neither are they adversaries in a global struggle , bent on the other 's destruction .
Moreover , maintaining large inventories of missiles is dangerous – the chance of accidental or unauthorized launches can never be eliminated – and expensive .
Second , new threats are appearing ; more may follow .
A number of countries , including but not limited to North Korea , Iraq and Iran , are developing ballistic missiles and possibly nuclear weapons to go with them .
Depending on their range , these missiles could threaten US troops in critical regions , American allies or US territory .
Leaders of these countries may not be deterred by the same logic that worked vis-ŕ-vis the Soviet Union .
The third development involves the emergence ( and promise ) of new technologies that make the prospect of intercepting ballistic missiles at one or another stage of their flight – hitting a bullet with a bullet – more real than ever before .
This logic appears to have persuaded the Republican Party 's presidential nominee George W. Bush to support moving to a new strategic paradigm .
Speaking in Washington on May 23 , Bush committed himself to a nuclear weapons arsenal reduced to " the lowest possible number consistent with our national security . "
He advocated a defense designed " to protect all 50 states and our friends and allies and deployed forces overseas from missile attacks by rogue nations or accidental launches . "
Such new thinking is not universal .
Critics contend that a missile defense system will prompt Russia to refuse to reduce nuclear weapons and China to build more .
Critics also claim that missile defense will not work against incoming warheads surrounded by decoys , that it will be terribly expensive and that rogue-state proliferation can be better addressed through prevention ( using diplomacy and export controls ) and deterrence .
The Clinton administration has sought to split the difference by advocating a policy of somewhat smaller arsenals coupled with somewhat more defense .
It wants to persuade Russia to agree to amend the 1972 ABM Treaty to allow each side to build a limited national missile defense with 100 interceptor missiles located in Alaska and possibly 150 more at a second site .
This attempt to introduce modest changes within the existing strategic paradigm has won few converts .
Clinton 's brand of limited missile defense appears to be too much for the Russians , who fear it as the start of something bigger that threatens their strategic position .
It is too little for American advocates of missile defense , who fear being locked into a framework that will be overly confining .
It disconcerts many European leaders who appear to favor the strategic status quo to the alternatives .
Given these realities , President Clinton should defer taking any decision on missile defense in the final months of his presidency .
Too little is known about various options to commit the US to one and reject others .
Instead , the US should undertake three things : aggressive testing of various architectures for a missile defense system , including sea-based systems that could intercept missiles in the immediate post-launch , boost phase before warheads and decoys can be released ; careful study of the consequences of moving to various mixes of offensive and defensive systems ; and intense consultations with Russia , China and America 's allies in Europe and Asia about how to maintain strategic stability in the post-Cold War era .
Paradigm shifts , particularly in diplomacy and security issues , are by definition major undertakings .
Americans never would alter the way entitlement programs are funded or education administered without serious study and widespread debate .
Maintaining stability in what remains a nuclear age warrants no less responsible an approach .
