The America that Can Say No
NEW YORK – ­ Early this month , Kyrgyzstan ’ s president Kurmanbek Bakiyev went cap in hand to Moscow to ask for financial aid .
To make his request more palatable , Bakiyev announced that he was demanding that the United States close its airbase in Kyrgyzstan , which resupplies NATO troops in neighboring Afghanistan .
Similarly , late last year , Iceland ’ s government asked Russia to help bail out its banking system , while Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari visited China in hopes of securing an emergency infusion of cash .
Some observers cite these episodes as evidence of decline in America ’ s international clout .
But there ’ s a larger point : so far , except for relatively small sums offered to the Kyrgyz , Russia and China haven ’ t offered much help .
Amid much talk of a “ post-American world , ” many observers see a shift from a US-dominated international order toward a multipolar system , in which countries like China , Russia , and several others compete for global leadership on a range of common challenges and risks .
More than five years ago , China ’ s President Hu Jintao proclaimed that , “ the trend toward a multipolar world is irreversible and dominant . ” When Vladimir Putin complained during a conference in Munich last year that US unilateralism stoked conflict around the world , an offended Senator John McCain responded that confrontation was unnecessary in “ today ’ s multipolar world . ”
When Putin welcomed Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez to Russia last September , he observed that , “ Latin America is becoming a noticeable link in the chain of the multipolar world that is forming . ” Chávez agreed : “ A multipolar world is becoming reality . ”
All of them have it wrong .
US dominance is clearly on the wane , but a multipolar order implies that several emerging powers hold competing views about how the world should be run , and that they are prepared to act to advance their global agendas .
That is not the case .
Instead , we are witnessing the birth of a non-polar order , in which America ’ s chief competitors remain too busy with problems at home and in their immediate neighborhoods to shoulder the heaviest international burdens .
None of the emerging powers has even begun to use its growing political and economic clout to advance truly global ambitions – or to take on responsibilities that Washington can no longer afford .
Start with Russia .
Despite its growing ties with Venezuela and efforts to coordinate energy policy with natural gas-rich countries in North Africa , the Kremlin has no aspirations to rebuild Soviet-scale influence in Latin America , Africa , or Southeast Asia .
Nor does it have Soviet-style ideological appeal .
Instead , Russia ’ s leaders are busy protecting Russian markets , banks , and companies from the worst effects of the global financial crisis , consolidating state control over domestic economic sectors , and extending their foreign-policy leverage across former Soviet territory .
China ’ s need to satisfy its hunger for imported oil and other commodities has given it an international presence .
But its influence is more commercial than political . China ’ s leaders must devote their attention to a staggering array of pressing problems at home : averting an economic slowdown that could push millions out of work and into the streets , the fallout from rural land reform , and efforts to manage enormous environmental and public health problems .
India must hold its own in China ’ s lengthening shadow .
Facing elections next year , the ruling Congress Party is spending the government ’ s time and money on subsidies for consumers , wage hikes for state employees , and debt relief for farmers .
Brazil is similarly preoccupied , appearing to have no grander near-term aspirations than to promote stability in Latin America , manage the effects of the global financial crisis , and inspire others in the developing world .
In short , there is a vacuum of global leadership just at the moment when it is badly needed .
President Barack Obama ’ s attention is now concentrated on stimulating the anemic US economy , crafting tax cuts , reforming energy and health-care policies , and restoring confidence in US financial institutions .
The European Union continues its internal debate over how best to bail out its failing banks and industries , handle the fallout from EU and euro-zone expansion , and manage increasingly rocky relations with Russia .
Who , then , can take the lead on efforts to create a new global financial architecture that reflects the complexities of twenty-first-century commerce ?
Who can drive consensus on a multilateral response to climate change ?
Who will replace an obsolete nonproliferation regime , provide collective security in emerging international hotspots , and build momentum behind Middle East Peace talks ?
The international summit meeting in Washington in November 2008 underlined the problem .
The world ’ s richest countries ( the G7 ) turned to the emerging powers within the G20 to help coordinate a response to the global financial slowdown .
Difficult as it is for seven countries to agree on anything , imagine the challenge of building consensus among 20 .
Consider the competing views within this group on democracy , transparency , the proper economic role of government , new rules of the road for financial markets and trade , and how best to ensure that the United Nations , International Monetary Fund , and the World Bank fairly reflect today ’ s global balance of power .
For the next several years , when those in crisis turn to the US for help , they are increasingly likely to hear the word no .
And it is not at all clear that anyone else is willing and able to say yes .
