The Euro in a Shrinking Zone
LONDON – The recent European Union summit was a disaster .
Both Britain and Germany played the wrong game : British Prime Minister David Cameron isolated Britain from Europe , while German Chancellor Angela Merkel isolated the eurozone from reality .
Had Cameron brought an economic-growth agenda to the summit , he would have been fighting for something real , and would not have lacked allies .
As it was , he fully accepted Merkel ’ s austerity agenda – which his own government is implementing independently – and chose to veto proposals for a new European treaty to protect the City of London .
This cheered up the Euroskeptics in Cameron ’ s Conservative Party , but it offered nothing to counter the lethal medicine prescribed by Germany ’ s Iron Lady .
The agreement reached in Brussels forecloses any possibility of Keynesian demand management to fight recession . “ Structural ” budget deficits would be limited to 0.5 % of GDP , with ( as yet undisclosed ) penalties for violators .
This is the wrong cure for the eurozone crisis .
The Merkel doctrine holds that the crisis is the result of government profligacy , so only a “ hard ” balanced-budget rule can prevent such crises from recurring .
But Merkel ’ s analysis is utterly wrong .
It was not deficit spending by governments that fueled the economic collapse of 2007-2008 , but excessive lending by banks .
Government ’ s mounting debts have been a response to the economic downturn , not its cause .
What ought to have been hard-wired into the EU ’ s institutional structure was not permanent fiscal austerity , but tough financial regulation .
Of this there is little sign .
More immediately important is the failure of the proposed “ fiscal union ” to do anything for European recovery .
The figures are grim : before the summit , the European Central Bank slashed its eurozone GDP growth forecast for 2012 from 1.3 % to 0.3 % .
That is almost certainly optimistic .
In fact , the eurozone will contract in the first half of next year – and probably in the second half , because of the deficit-cutting policies now being pursued – placing further pressure on banks and sovereigns .
The reason why recovery from the crash of 2007-2008 has been so anemic is straightforward .
When an economy shrinks , government debt grows automatically , because its revenues decline and its expenses rise .
When it cuts spending , its debt grows even more , because its cuts cause the economy to shrink further .
This makes the government more , not less , likely to default .
In the eurozone , most government debt is held by private banks .
As this debt increases , the value of banks ’ assets falls . So the crisis of the sovereigns engulfs the banks .
To put weakened governments on iron rations , as Merkel did , was to make a financial crisis inevitable .
To continue to preach salvation through austerity as the economy declines and banks collapse is to repeat the classic mistake of German Chancellor Heinrich Brüning in 1930-1932 .
To be sure , the eurozone needs more than a bailout .
The periphery needs to recover competitiveness , and some have taken heart from the Mediterranean countries ’ shrinking trade deficits – the structural trade imbalances within the eurozone are correcting themselves , they say .
Unfortunately , these corrections are not based on increased exports , but on declining imports , owing to depressed levels of economic activity .
The idea that a country can achieve a trade surplus by importing nothing is as fanciful as the idea that a government can repay its debt by starving itself of revenue .
One person ’ s spending is another person ’ s income .
In insisting that its main trade partners cut their spending , Merkel is cutting Germany off from the main sources of its own growth .
So , will the single currency survive ?
Two policies that might , in combination , save it are off the agenda .
The first is quantitative easing ( printing money ) on a heroic scale .
The ECB should be empowered to buy any amount of Greek , Italian , Spanish , and Portuguese government bonds needed to drive down their yield to near the German rate .
This might stimulate real growth through several channels : by reducing lending rates , by raising the nominal value of public and private assets , and by weakening the euro against the dollar and other currencies .
But the effects of quantitative easing on economic activity are uncertain , and such an inflationary policy might well invite retaliation from Europe ’ s trading partners .
That is why quantitative easing should be run in conjunction with a eurozone-wide investment program designed to modernize the creaking infrastructure of eastern and southern Europe .
Capital spending by governments , unlike current spending , can be self-financing through user charges .
But , even if it is not , well-chosen public investment produces high returns : new roads reduce transportation costs , and new hospitals produce a healthier workforce .
An institution , the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) , already exists to carry out such a program .
It should be recapitalized on a sufficient scale to offset the contractionary effects of Europe ’ s national deficit-reduction programs .
Quantitative easing , combined with public investment , would impart the growth impetus that the eurozone sorely needs to bring about a gradual reduction in its aggregate debt burden .
But it is almost certain that neither policy , much less both , will be implemented .
The ECB is stealthily buying government bonds on the secondary market , but its new governor , Mario Draghi , insists that such intervention is temporary , limited , and intended solely to “ restore the functioning of monetary transmission channels . ”
No one at the recent EU summit suggested making the EIB an engine of growth .
So the bleeding will go on .
This means that the eurozone is beyond saving ; the euro will survive , but the zone will shrink .
The only question is the scale , timing , and manner of its breakup .
Greece , and probably other Mediterranean countries , will default and regain the freedom to print money and devalue their exchange rates .
This will send shock waves throughout the world .
But sometimes shock waves are needed to break the ice and start the water flowing again .
