The Great Brain Race
WASHINGTON , DC – For decades , research universities in the United States have been universally acknowledged as the world ’ s leaders in science and engineering , unsurpassed since World War II in the sheer volume and excellence of the scholarship and innovation that they generate .
But there are growing signs that the rest of the world is gaining ground fast – building new universities , improving existing ones , competing hard for the best students , and recruiting US-trained PhDs to return home to work in university and industry labs .
Is the international scholarly pecking order about to be overturned ?
There is no question that the academic enterprise has become increasingly global , particularly in the sciences .
Nearly three million students now study outside their home countries – a 57 % increase in the last decade .
Foreign students now dominate many US doctoral programs , accounting for 64 % of PhDs in computer science , for example .
Tsinghua and Peking universities together recently surpassed Berkeley as the top sources of students who go on to earn American PhDs .
Faculty are on the move , too .
Half of the world ’ s top physicists no longer work in their native countries .
And major institutions such as New York University and the University of Nottingham are creating branch campuses in the Middle East and Asia .
There are now 162 satellite campuses worldwide , an increase of 43 % in just the past three years .
At the same time , growing numbers of traditional source countries for students , from South Korea to Saudi Arabia , are trying to improve both the quantity and quality of their own degrees , engaging in a fierce – and expensive – race to recruit students and create world-class research universities of their own .
All this competition has led to considerable hand-wringing in the West .
During a 2008 campaign stop , for instance , then-candidate Barack Obama spoke in alarmed tones about the threat that such academic competition poses to US competitiveness . “ If we want to keep on building the cars of the future here in America , ” he declared , “ we can ’ t afford to see the number of PhDs in engineering climbing in China , South Korea , and Japan even as it ’ s dropped here in America . ”
Nor are such concerns limited to the US .
In some countries , worries about educational competition and brain drains have led to outright academic protectionism .
India and China are notorious for the legal and bureaucratic obstacles they place in front of Western universities that want to set up satellite campuses catering to local students .
And sometimes students who want to leave face barriers .
Several years ago , the president of one of the prestigious Indian Institutes of Technology effectively banned undergraduates from accepting academic or business internships overseas .
There are other impediments to global mobility , too , not always explicitly protectionist , but all having the effect of limiting access to universities around the world .
In the years following the terrorist attacks of September 11 , 2001 , for example , legitimate security concerns led to enormous student-visa delays and bureaucratic hassles for foreigners aspiring to study in the US .
Student numbers have since rebounded , despite intermittent problems , but there remain severe limits on work and residency visas , which should serve as an enticement for the best and brightest to study in the US .
Perhaps some of the anxiety over the new global academic enterprise is understandable , particularly in a period of massive economic uncertainty .
But educational protectionism is as big a mistake as trade protectionism .
The globalization of higher education should be embraced , not feared – including in the US .
There is every reason to believe that the worldwide competition for human talent , the race to produce innovative research , the push to extend university campuses to multiple countries , and the rush to train talented graduates who can strengthen increasingly knowledge-based economies will be good for the US as well .
Above all , this is because the expansion of knowledge is not a zero-sum game .
More PhD production and burgeoning research in China , for instance , doesn ’ t take away from America ’ s store of learning ; on the contrary , it enhances what we know and can accomplish .
Because knowledge is a public good , intellectual gains by one country often benefit others .
Chinese research may well provide the building blocks for innovation by US entrepreneurs – or those from other countries .
Indeed , the economic benefits of a global academic culture are significant .
Just as free trade provides the lowest-cost goods and services , benefiting both consumers and the most efficient producers , global academic competition is making free movement of people and ideas , on the basis of merit , more and more the norm , with enormously positive consequences for individuals , universities , and countries .
Today 's swirling patterns of mobility and knowledge transmission constitute a new kind of free trade : free trade in minds .
The US should respond to the globalization of higher education not with angst but with a sense of possibility .
Neither a gradual erosion in the US market share of students , nor the emergence of ambitious new competitors in Asia , Europe , and the Middle East means that American universities are on an inevitable path to decline .
By resisting protectionist barriers at home and abroad , by continuing to recruit and welcome the world ’ s best students , by sending more students overseas , by fostering cross-national research collaboration , and by strengthening its own research universities , the US can sustain its well-established academic excellence while continuing to expand the sum total of global knowledge and prosperity .
