The Past is Now
In the debate over what went wrong with Argentina , too much analysis has focused on the country 's exchange rate policy or the mistakes the IMF may have made ; too little attention has been paid to the social and political factors that contributed to the country 's demise .
Argentina is unique among the world 's emerging economies because its problem is not underdevelopment , but arrested development .
Seventy years ago , it was one of the world 's richest countries .
Over time , however , political instability and misguided economic policies have left it lagging behind its former peers .
Despite that , until recently , literacy levels were high by Latin American standards and there was a broad middle class .
The social welfare state never reached par with its European counterpart , but life was reasonably good on the pampas .
Democracy was restored in 1983 , but decades of economic mismanagement began catching up to the country with a vengeance .
The troubles were compounded by the failure of the first post-dictatorship government , headed by Raul Alfonsin , to adapt to the emerging new global economy .
Shortly after taking office , the next President , Carlos Menem , reversed half a century of economic and foreign policy .
The country was opened to foreign trade and investment and state-owned companies were privatized .
To whip hyperinflation , the peso was pegged one-to-one with the dollar , and a once standoffish relationship with the United States became , in the words of the foreign minister at the time , " carnal . "
While the money flowed and the economy boomed with a stable currency , everybody went along for the ride .
But distaste for Menem 's economic " model " and his autocratic , corruption-tainted ways ran deep .
When a new center-left government took office in the midst of a recession in 1999 , there was hope it would correct the excesses of the Menem years .
There was little effort , however , to engage in the needed institution building or to weed out corruption .
As the recession deepened and unemployment grew , blame fell increasingly on the " model , " though questioning the wisdom of its central feature , the dollar peg , was taboo .
Nor could anyone articulate an alternative that didn 't sound like a return to the statist , protectionist policies of the past .
The public 's reaction was thus contradictory .
Despite the growing disenchantment with the model , people were still more afraid of what would replace it .
The increasingly unpopular President De la Rua 's stuck to his austerity program , while Argentines stopped spending and investing .
Then they lost confidence in the banking system and rushed to take their money out .
The end result was De la Rua 's forced resignation and today 's economic chaos .
Many developing countries have grown disenchanted with the free market model in recent years .
But it is difficult to explain why Argentina , a country that a generation ago had more in common with Australia than Peru , has been unable to make the transition to modernity .
One factor is the still prevailing myth that Argentina is a rich country , or would be , if it weren 't for a cabal of corrupt politicians , greedy local businessmen , and international financiers who have robbed the place blind .
There is certainly some truth in that , but what many Argentines fail to realize is that a country 's wealth is no longer measured by its endowment of natural resources but by the strength of its institutions , the quality of its human resources , and its productivity .
Oblivious to this , all the major political forces in Argentina are still populist , more intent on figuring out how to distribute the country 's fictitious wealth than on how to create it .
Echoing the corporatist , nationalistic rhetoric of Juan Peron , his party 's founder , the new President , Eduardo Duhalde has promised to implement a new " economic model " founded on an alliance between the government and the domestic manufacturers and agricultural producers .
That kind of nationalistic talk strikes a chord and sends a collective shiver down the Argentine spine .
But the Argentines are as schizophrenic in their attitude toward nationalism as in their attitude to modernity in general - not for nothing does Argentina have , per capita , the world 's highest number of psychoanalysts .
Nationalism is widespread , but its roots are shallow .
Anti-US sentiment is common , but the only currency people trust is the U.S. dollar .
The Argentine 's contempt for his own country is unsurpassed anywhere in the world .
Indeed , thousands of Argentines reacted to the crisis by lining up at the embassies of North American and European countries in the hopes of obtaining a visa that would allow them to leave .
Another factor in Argentina 's inability to reform can be traced back to the Dirty War of the last military dictatorship .
Most of today 's politicians , intellectuals , and other professionals over the age of 40 were the victims of that unequal conflict .
As the economic model began taking shape a decade ago , they saw many of the same people who had sided with the military in the 1970s turn into some of the biggest beneficiaries of the new economy .
Had Argentina managed to get through the ideologically charged 60s and 70s relatively unscathed , the mostly educated opponents of the " model " would have probably mellowed with age .
Like their counterparts in the north , they would still be socially committed , but mindful of their stock options , as they bored their children with stories of the " I was at Woodstock " variety .
But the murderous events of the past have left scars that a brief , unsustainable lapse of prosperity was unable to make disappear .
As a consequence , much of the political elites could never be won to back the impersonal market , which made no distinction between them and their old enemies .
The question now - one that few are willing to ask openly - is : will the downward economic spiral reopen the wounds of the past - and renew conflicts that are unbearable to even think about ?
