The Fall of the House of Murdoch
NEW YORK – During the four decades since the Watergate affair engulfed US President Richard Nixon , politicians have repeatedly ignored the scandal ’ s main lesson : the cover-up is worse than the crime .
Like Nixon , they have paid a higher price for concealing their misdeeds than they would have for the misdeeds alone .
Now , for once , comes a scandal that breaks that rule : the United Kingdom ’ s phone-hacking affair , which has shaken British politics to its foundations .
Over the past decade , the tabloid newspaper The News of the World , owned by Rupert Murdoch ’ s News Corporation , targeted 4,000 people ’ s voicemail .
The list includes not only royalty , celebrities , and other VIPs , but also the families of servicemen killed in Afghanistan and Iraq , and those of victims of the July 2005 terrorist attack in London .
It all unraveled when The Guardian reported that the tabloid had hacked into the voicemail of missing 13-year-old Milly Dowler , apparently in the hope of obtaining some private expressions of family members ’ grief or desperation that it could splash on its front page .
When the girl ’ s murdered body was found six months later , the family and the police thought she might still be alive , because The News of the World ’ s operatives were deleting messages when her phone ’ s mailbox became full .
( According to Scotland Yard , Murdoch hacks reportedly bribed mid-level police officers to supply information as well . )
In the extensive annals of eavesdropping , all of this is something new .
Not even Stalin wiretapped the dead .
A cover-up ensued .
James Murdoch , Rupert ’ s son and Chairman and Chief Executive of News Corporation ’ s European and Asian operations , authorized a secret payment of £ 1 million ( $ 1.6 million ) to buy the silence of hacking victims .
Millions of in-house emails reportedly have been destroyed .
Still , it seems safe to say that the peculiarly repellant inhumanity of the original deeds will remain more shocking than the details of this or any other cover-up .
Even so , the political consequences of the phone-hacking scandal will depend on far more than the outcome of the official investigations now underway in Britain .
Above all , the scandal ’ s impact will depend on how governments and citizens assess what News Corporation really is .
The Murdochs call News Corporation a journalistic enterprise .
In fact , it is , first , an entertainment company , with the bulk of its revenue coming from its film and television holdings .
Second , and more importantly , it is a propaganda machine for right-wing causes and political figures .
This is News Corporation ’ s main face in the US , in the form of Fox News , whose hallmark has been relentless propagation of right-wing ideology .
Whereas political propaganda had once been the domain of governments and political parties , Fox News is formally independent of both – though itoverwhelmingly serves the interests of America ’ s Republican Party .
In Britain , News Corporation has been creating a sort of state unto itself by corrupting the police , assuming police powers of surveillance , and intimidating politicians into looking the other way .
In the US , it has behaved similarly , using corporate media power to breathe life into a stand-alone political organization , the Tea Party .
All of this is far removed from what a journalistic organization is supposed to do .
Journalism ’ s essential role in a democracy is to enable people to fulfill their roles as citizens by providing information about government , other powerful institutions , civil movements , international events , and so on .
But News Corporation replaces such journalism with titillation and gossip , as it did when it took over the 168-year-old News of the World and turned it into a tabloid in 1984 , and with partisan campaigns , as it did when it created Fox News in 1996 .
Not surprisingly , at Fox News , as at many other News Corporation outlets , editorial independence is sacrificed to iron-fisted centralized control .
News and commentary are mingled in an uninterrupted stream of political campaigning .
Ideology trumps factuality .
And major Republican figures , including possible contenders for the party ’ s presidential nomination , are hired as “ commentators . ”
Indeed , its specific genius has been to turn propaganda into a popular and financial success .
Given The News of the World ’ s profitability , no one should be surprised if the Murdochs have been replicating their sunken British flagship ’ s reprehensible behavior elsewhere .
But , whatever else is revealed , the UK phone-hacking scandal is of a piece with the Murdochs ’ transformation of news into propaganda : both reflect an assault on democracy ’ s essential walls of separation between media , the state , and political parties .
The Murdochs are fusing these entities into a single unaccountable power that , as we see in Britain today , lacks any restraint or scruple .
That effort should compel us to confront an uncomfortable reality underlying both the British phone-hacking scandal , with its penumbra of appalling cruelty and wanton corruption , and Fox News , America ’ s most popular news channel : too many people want what the News Corporation has been offering .
And what too many people want can be dangerous to a civilized , law-based society .
To glimpse just how dangerous , consider Italy , where Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi ’ s MediaSet conglomerate has seduced broad swathes of the electorate since the 1980 ’ s with a Murdoch-like combination of insipid variety shows and partisan political theater .
When Italy ’ s postwar party system collapsed in the early 1990 ’ s , Berlusconi was able to establish his own political party , win power , and , over the course of three governments , bend laws and government institutions to serve his business and personal interests .
The News Corporation seems determined to take Britain and the US down a similar path .
But now , at least in Britain , the political class is in revolt .
Prime Minister David Cameron – who previously cultivated close ties with News Corporation leaders , even employing as his press secretary The News of the World ’ s former editor , who was recently arrested for his role in the scandal – called the phone hacking “ disgusting . ”
Meanwhile , Labour leaders , who had also sought the Murdochs ’ favor , have vowed to block News Corporation ’ s bid for full ownership of Britain ’ s largest pay-television broadcaster .
Whether the rebellion will jump across the Atlantic remains to be seen .
