The Doha Round ’ s Premature Obituary
NEW YORK – The Doha Round , the first multilateral trade negotiation conducted under the auspices of the World Trade Organization , is at a critical stage .
Now in their 10th year , with much negotiated , the talks need a final political nudge , lest Doha – and hence the WTO – disappear from the world ’ s radar screen .
Indeed , the danger is already real : when I was in Geneva a year ago and staying at the upscale Mandarin Oriental , I asked the concierge how far away the WTO was .
He looked at me and asked : “ Is the World Trade Organization a travel agency ? ”
The threat of irrelevance is understood by leading statesmen , who have committed themselves to putting their shoulders to the wheel .
British Prime Minister David Cameron , German Chancellor Angela Merkel , and Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono have unequivocally endorsed the recommendation of the High-level Expert Group on Trade , which Peter Sutherland and I co-chair , that we ought to abandon the Doha Round if it is not concluded by the end of this year .
Our idea was that , just as the prospect of an imminent hanging concentrates the mind , the deadline and prospective death of the Doha Round would galvanize the world ’ s statesmen behind completing the last mile of the marathon .
( The analogy is all the more appropriate , given that WTO Director-General Pascal Lamy , who has brilliantly kept the process going , is a marathon runner . )
But even as these efforts are gathering momentum , The Financial Times , which used to be a staunch supporter of multilateral free trade , dropped a cluster bomb on Doha , even congratulating itself that , in 2008 ( when a ministerial meeting failed to reach closure ) , it “ argued that leaders should admit the negotiations were dead . ” But if skeptics forget Mark Twain ’ s famous response to a mistaken obituary – “ The reports of my death are greatly exaggerated ” – were the negotiators who have continued to work since then akin to Gogol ’ s “ dead souls ? ”
The Financial Times recommends working out a Plan B here and now , which would sabotage the political efforts to conclude the Doha Round .
Despite rhetorical bromides about requiring “ ministers to unlearn ingrained habits and focus on substance , not rhetoric , ” and about “ business associations engaging with the granular detail of what companies want , ” this proposed Plan B would strengthen the bilateral and regional trade initiatives that have diverted energy and attention from Doha and the WTO .
The irony here is that the proliferation of such preferential trade agreements ( PTAs ) is usually justified by pointing to the lack of progress in concluding the Doha talks .
Never have cause and effect been so dramatically reversed in arguments over trade policy .
It has become increasingly obvious that such PTAs are what I call “ termites in the trading system . ”
Indeed , evidence is mounting that they foster harmful trade diversion by increasing discrimination against non-members through differential use of anti-dumping actions .
Thus , recent work by the economists Tom Prusa and Robert Teh has produced convincing evidence that anti-dumping filings decrease by 33-55 % within a PTA , whereas such filings increase against non-members by 10-30 % .
More importantly , PTAs are used by hegemonic powers to foist on weaker trading partners demands unrelated to trade but desired by domestic lobbies , at times in a markedly asymmetric way .
Thus , Peru saw its labor legislation virtually rewritten by United States Congressmen indebted to American unions before the US-Peru PTA was concluded .
Similarly , Claude Barfield has documented how Colombia has been intimidated into making it a crime ( with prison terms of up to five years ) to engage in acts that “ undermine the right to organize and bargain collectively . ” Colombia must also pass a law dictating prison terms for anyone who “ offers a collective pact to non-union workers that is superior to terms for union workers . ”
Such overreach is typical of what goes on in hegemon-led PTAs , unlike at the WTO , where stronger countries like India ( which asked the European Union to take all non-trade-related measures out of the proposed PTA ) and Brazil cannot be so intimidated .
The danger is that overreach will lead civil society and voters in democratic developing countries to react against self-serving displays of hegemonic might by jettisoning free trade itself , on the assumption that such openness is little more than neo-colonialism .
