John Kerry ’ s Tricky Bid
LONDON – In Why You Lose at Bridge ( the funniest book about bridge ever written ) , my uncle , S. J. Simon , advised players to aim “ not for the best possible result , but the best result possible ” with the partner you have .
This advice applies to the long-stalled Israel-Palestine peace process , newly revived by US Secretary of State John Kerry .
The United Nations spelled out the “ best possible result ” in 1947 : Palestine – then a British mandate – was to be partitioned into two states of approximately equal size .
Israel accepted this , but the Palestinians did not , so the Palestinian state was never established .
In successive wars , Israel seized all the land allocated to Palestine , mainly the West Bank of the Jordan River and Gaza , now swarming with millions of Palestinian refugees .
Since the Oslo Accords of 1993 , which envisaged a Palestinian state on the West Bank and in Gaza , “ facts on the ground ” have whittled down the putative Palestinian state still further .
Part of the West Bank has been annexed outright by Israel or seized by Israeli settlers . The Palestinian Authority has been given limited autonomy over 25 % of it , in non-contiguous parcels .
Kerry ’ s formidable task is to persuade the Palestinians to accept a smaller state than they want and the Israelis to accept a smaller state than they have .
But , with the security situation in the “ occupied territories ” under control , Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu ’ s government is content with the status quo .
So Kerry ’ s blandishments are directed toward the Palestinians .
His strategy seems to be to bribe them with $ 4 billion to accept a ( temporary ) “ bantustan ” solution ( so named for the nominally autonomous states to which South Africa ’ s apartheid regime confined most of the country ’ s black majority ) .
It just might work .
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas might be attracted by the money if it is accompanied by the trappings and symbols of statehood .
At 78 , he is a president in urgent need of a state .
The Netanyahu government , too , might conceivably agree to a Palestinian “ entity ” on 75 % of the West Bank , provided that Israel remained in overall control .
Kerry ’ s initiative would have a greater chance of success were more money on the table .
One way to increase it would be to convert the Palestinian demand for a “ right of return ” ( to Israeli lands from which they fled in 1947-1948 ) into a right to compensation .
At the failed Camp David summit in 2000 , Israeli negotiators suggested a $ 30 billion international fund that would make payments to genuine refugees .
By revisiting the Israeli offer , Kerry could neatly combine economic stimulus with fulfillment of a key Palestinian demand .
Nevertheless , even with the extra cash , neither side would be likely to accept such a simulacrum of the two-state solution .
Although such a deal might satisfy Israel ’ s security needs , it would mean abandoning the Greater Israel project championed by hardline Zionists and religious extremists .
And , although Abbas might be tempted by cosmetic changes to the status quo , most Palestinians probably would reject them as fraudulent .
A peace settlement should not be impossible .
There would need to be agreement on the amount of territory reserved for the Palestinian state .
Since no Israeli government would surrender the West Bank border areas that have the thickest settlements , land in Israel would need to be offered as compensation .
Jerusalem would have to be divided , with UN administration of holy sites , and an agreement would be needed to police the porous frontier with Jordan .
But there is little chance that such an agreement will emerge from the current round of talks .
Most Israelis – certainly the current government – are convinced that Palestinians must be prevented by force from killing Jews . “ How do we resolve the contradiction between our extreme morality and our blatantly immoral circumstances ? ” asks the writer Uri Avnery .
The desire for peace is more urgent in Ramallah than in Tel Aviv .
But Abbas has his own intransigents in the form of Hamas , which has ruled Gaza since 2006 , and whose commitment to violence is a mirror image of Netanyahu ’ s “ peace through strength . ”
A genuine two-state solution thus requires a change of heart – and leadership – on both sides .
On the Israeli side , this means a less paranoid view of the Palestinians , coupled with a recognition that Israel ’ s behavior runs contrary to modern ethics .
Past conquest cannot be a legitimate basis for current rule .
That is why all civilized countries have given up the claim to rule by force .
The Palestinian side , for its part , must accept that Israel is here to stay , and that huge benefits can be reaped from economic cooperation .
Both sides need political leaders willing to take real risks for peace , including the risk of being killed .
After all , ordinary soldiers take this risk , so why should political leaders – who can do much greater good or ill – be immune to it ?
But external pressure may create new facts .
Hamas has always believed that only violence can achieve a genuine Palestinian state , so the Israelis must fear a third intifada if Abbas cannot deliver .
Such a popular uprising would be brutally suppressed , strengthening both sides ’ intransigents in the short run and undermining America ’ s automatic support for Israel in the long term .
Pressure for change may also come from unfolding events in the Middle East , with regional turmoil bound to affect the West Bank and Gaza .
Increasingly unstable Arab neighbors might give the Israelis a motive to make peace in a small area and thereby hold at bay the chaos outside .
The likeliest outcome of the current flurry of diplomacy will be a fudge , which both sides will present as the “ best result possible . ”
There will be another roadmap to final two-state status , with some timetable for Palestinian statehood , conditional on Hamas ’ s renunciation of violence .
The Israelis will claim to have conceded nothing essential ;
Abbas ’ s Fatah will claim to have secured a road paved with gold .
And the peace process will creep forward – & # 160 ; more process than peace – until it encounters the next roadblock .
