The Euro \ u0027s Troubles
CAMBRIDGE : The script for the euro has become pure improvisation .
Everyone remembers the popping champagne corks and pride that greeted the birth of European Monetary Union .
At long last the dollar would be challenged ; perhaps even dethroned .
Europe 's great political project - the EU - now had an equal economic project .
Today , however , all those dreams seem up for grabs .
Daily , the euro sinks .
No longer is it inconceivable that the US Treasury may step in to bail out Europe 's new money .
What an irony : a currency designed to challenge the dollar for supremacy among global currencies , now needs US assistance to stop its meltdown .
But that is where we may be heading .
All this is happening as Europe approaches the introduction of real euro notes in January 2002 .
Small wonder that , in Germany , the coming disappearance of the D-mark in favor of euro notes is causing deep disquiet .
No wonder that the French , who have rarely had a hard currency to call their own , are nervous and want something , anything , to be done .
Such anxieties are exaggerated .
It is painful for Europe to lose pride in its new currency so fast , but in strict economics terms , no harm arises from the euro 's present weakness .
Europe 's embarrassment is not likely to worsen , nor last very long .
Five questions are useful at this point :
- Who is to blame ?
- What can be done ?
- Is the bottom near or can things get worse ?
- How long will the euro 's weakness last ?
- What will bring about change ?
Looking for something , or someone , to blame comes naturally to politicians and those who fear having made a big mistake .
In these circumstances , however , that instinct is wrong . The new European Central Bank , the main public suspect , is not to blame .
The ECB 's performance so far is unimpressive , but it has nonetheless handled the euro 's decline well .
There has been no loss of nerve , no departure from the ECB 's price stability target , and its public presentation is increasingly good .
The chief reason for the euro 's pains is the performance of the US economy .
Even when things look more difficult in the US , as when inflation began to run higher recently and productivity growth lowered , the stock market sell-off that followed did not burst the overall market bubble .
The euro 's slide is based upon Europe 's absolute and relative decline in reference to the American economy .
What can be done ?
Here another common mistake beckons : do something , anything , just do it !
But anything Europe could do at this stage would make matters worse .
Raising interest rates to the sky won 't be credible because it would cause a recession and the ECB could not hold to such a policy for long .
Intervention is even less plausible .
The world has too many currency choices .
So this is the time to let markets take their course .
True , the US could turn the euro around , something no European head of government or finance minister could accomplish .
Alan Greenspan might achieve this result simply by muttering that the Euro is too weak , but he rightly saves his words for more important issues .
The euro has not necessarily reached the bottom .
In 1985 , the value of European currencies as a basket reached 67 US cents , 25 % below today 's levels .
It is unlikely , but not impossible , that the euro could fall that low again .
More likely , the euro will stabilize at some point in the range of 80 US cents , then begin to climb back up .
But it is worth remembering that a weak euro is not all pain ; it makes European businesses highly competitive .
Without such stimulus , growth might be significantly less than today 's 3 % .
What will make the euro recover ?
The answer almost certainly has to come from America .
If and when America 's economy slows , and when the valuations of US assets become far more dubious , the euro will become an attractive investment .
At that point , disenchanted holders of euro positions will take a fonder view of their holdings and outsiders from the US and Japan will begin to believe that diversification into the euro is viable .
After all , the euro can now be bought cheap .
If and when that point is reached , a bit of ECB intervention can initiate the long march upwards .
That time could be months or a year off .
Meanwhile , the fragile euro is certain to remain on front pages , and debates about whom to blame and what to do will remain alive .
Benign neglect is the right answer , but let no European banker say it loud .
