The Historical Significance of China \ u0027s Entry to the WTO
CAMBRIDGE : Yesterday , America joined Europe in agreeing on the principles of economic reform in China that will permit China to enter the World Trade Organization .
This sets the stage for China 's membership in the WTO by the end of 2000 .
China 's addition to the WTO brings 1.3 billion people - more than one-fifth of humanity - formally into the mainstream of the international economy .
This is an epochal change of direction for China 's relations to the world that trace back to events five centuries ago .
For economists and historians with a long view , China 's situation in the world poses a puzzle .
Simply put , why is China so poor today ?
GNP per person averages around $ 3,200 , compared with around $ 25,000 on average in the US and Europe , when such calculations are made at a standardized set of prices .
The puzzle is that , from 550 to 1500 AD , Chinese civilization once led the world in technology and probably in economic well-being .
China 's relative decline for the last 500 years is one of the greatest themes of world history .
Turn the clock back six centuries , to the early 1400s .
China could boast technological wonders - the compass , navigational abilities , the printing press , fireworks and explosives - that barely touched the rest of the world .
China 's state had been unified for more than 1500 years ; its statecraft was considerably sophisticated .
Chinese fine arts , exemplified by its porcelains that would be craved by the world for centuries to come , were remarkable by the standards of any age .
Perhaps the greatest symbol of these accomplishments in the early years of the 15th century were the great naval expeditions of the Chinese fleet , in which ships of monumental proportion sailed the routes of Southeast Asia , to India , and even to East Africa during the years 1405 to 1431 .
Archeologists today find Chinese porcelain shards in Kenya and Tanzania .
Then China 's dominance faded .
While economists , historians , political theorists , and demographers , can all add something to the puzzle , my view is that , more than anything , China turned its back to the world .
In the 1430s , China abandoned naval expeditions , dismantling its fleet .
The imperial court , under a financial squeeze and threatened by nomadic incursions from Central Asia , canceled the naval expeditions in the 1430s , moved the capital inland to Beijing , and began isolating China for centuries to come .
Decree followed decree , eliminating the shipyards , closing ports , and forbidding Chinese to leave the mainland .
Trade and exchange continued only at a trickle .
China unilaterally abandoned its role in the world .
By the time Adam Smith wrote AThe Wealth of Nations @ ( 1776 ) he could accurately describe China as a rich civilization held back by archaic laws of trade isolation .
He noted that the Chinese held foreign commerce Ain the utmost contempt . @ While China retreated into a shell , Europe exploded on the world scene .
Smith described the European discoveries of the sea passage to Asia ( around the southern tip of Africa ) and the Americas as the two greatest events in world history .
Globalization was born , but it was Europe , not China , which grabbed the lead .
China squandered its economic and technological potential by itself , not because of external force .
By the time Europe and China crossed paths in the Opium Wars of 1839-42 , a technologically superior Europe had vast military advantages and so forced China into a series of unilateral , humiliating concessions .
China 's imperial state and society were destabilized by European incursions .
The imperial dynasty collapsed in 1911 , under external pressures and internal demands for change .
Change , however , did not come smooth .
The dynasty 's collapse was followed by civil strife , Japan 's invasion of China in the 1930s , World War II , civil war , and thirty years of disastrous and cruel dictatorship under Mao Zedong and the Chinese Communist Party .
It wasn 't until 1978 , under Deng Xiaoping , that China opened up to the world .
Of course , Deng was more interested in economic reform than political liberalization , but the liberalization of the 1980s and 1990s was extraordinary by any standard , essentially the first time in several centuries that a sovereign China willingly adopted policies of open trade with the rest of the world .
Admission of China to the WTO will consolidate the reforms started in 1978 , as China formally accepts open trade and shared rules of international economic life , as a sovereign and equal member of the international community .
Critics of free trade with China say that its political system remains authoritarian .
They have a point , but not a decisive one .
China is indeed burdened by an authoritarian political system , one that has been authoritarian for two millennia .
Indeed , only an authoritarian state could have closed China by edict for several centuries , and only an authoritarian state could have led China into the disasters of man-made famine , failed economic policy , and cultural destruction that marked Mao 's rule .
China 's turn towards openness is making deep inroads , creating a more open , free , and vibrant society than in the past .
China 's young generation , and the ones that will follow , will want and demand political freedoms to accompany their increased economic opportunities and participation in world events .
In the coming decades China 's opening to the world will also prove to be an opening to Chinese democracy , good for China and good for the rest of us as well .
