The Battle of the Bonds
LONDON – Everyone knows that Greece will default on its external debt .
The only question concerns the best way to arrange it so that no one really understands that Greece is actually defaulting .
On this topic , there is no shortage of expert plans – among them bond buy-backs , bond swaps , and the creation of Eurobonds , a European version of the “ Brady ” bonds issued by Latin American countries that defaulted in the 1980 ’ s .
What all such schemes amount to is piling one lot of bonds on top of another in an attempt to square the circle of Greece ’ s inability to pay , and to minimize the losses faced by its creditors – mostly European banks .
Every week , a preposterous coterie of European bankers and finance ministers drags itself from one capital to another to discuss which default / restructuring plan to adopt .
Meanwhile , Greece ’ s agony continues , and the “ markets ” wait to swoop down on Portugal , Ireland , Italy , and Spain .
No one who is not well versed in financial legerdemain can make much sense of this battle of the bonds .
But behind it lie two moral attitudes , which are much easier to grasp .
The first is traditional disapproval of debt .
The oldest rule in personal finance is to avoid debt – that is , never spend more than you earn .
Economists and moralists have been united in believing that you should actually spend less than you earn – in order to “ save ” for the proverbial rainy day or for old age .
Getting into debt was long associated with profligacy or fecklessness .
And , if a person became indebted , it was a point of honor to repay the obligation when it fell due , by selling assets , reducing consumption , working harder , or some combination of the three .
Indeed , it was often more than a point of honor : failure to repay debt on time landed the debtor in prison .
The same attitude governed institutional debt .
Banks grew out of a practice by gold smiths and silver smiths , who , for a small price , accepted deposits for safekeeping .
When they became lending institutions , their earliest rule was to keep almost 100 % of cash reserves against their loans , so that they would not be caught short if most of their depositors decided to withdraw their money at the same time .
Similarly , before the introduction of limited liability in the nineteenth century , a company ’ s shareholders or partners were each liable for all of the firm ’ s debts , which severely restricted businesses ’ willingness to borrow to finance trade .
For public finance , too , the orthodox rule was that budgets should always be balanced ; except in emergencies , governments should never spend more than they “ earned ” in taxation .
Again , it was a point of honor for governments to pay back such debts as they were incurred , whatever the sacrifice to the country .
Until recently , the conventional view was that “ mature ” sovereigns always honored their debts , while only banana republics failed to do so .
These historically embedded norms and practices were only slowly superseded .
But , in the twentieth century , with greater security of conditions and continuous economic growth , it became normal for individuals , companies , and governments to borrow in anticipation of earnings – to spend money they did not have , but that they expected to have .
With fear of bank runs and defaults receding , banks ’ reserve ratios became ever smaller , thus increasing their lending facilities .
On this bedrock rose an imposing edifice of bond markets and banks that drove down the cost of finance , and thus sped up the rate of economic growth .
It was this system of financial intermediation whose near-collapse in 2008 seemed for many to justify the ancient warnings of the perils of indebtedness .
In their exhaustive historical review of financial crises , Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff write : “ Again and again , countries , banks , individuals , and firms take on excessive debt in good times without enough awareness of the risks that will follow when the inevitable recession hits . ”
But there is a contrary moral attitude , the essence of which is that , whereas excessive debt is to be deplored , the blame for it lies with the lender , not the borrower . “ Neither a borrower nor a lender be , ” Polonius admonished in Hamlet .
Lending money at interest was identified with “ usury , ” or making money from money rather than from goods and services – a distinction that goes back to Aristotle , for whom money was barren .
The moneylender was the most hated figure in medieval Europe .
The last legal restrictions on taking interest on money were lifted only in the nineteenth century , when they succumbed to the economic argument that lending money was a service , for which the lender was entitled to charge whatever the market would bear .
But the theory of usury survived in the view that it was morally wrong to extract some additional amount that was made feasible by the borrower ’ s weak bargaining position or extreme need .
These two moral attitudes confront each other today in the battle of the bonds .
The demand for debt repayment confronts the philosophy of debt forgiveness .
In the lender ’ s view , the 17 % interest rate that Greece ’ s government now has to pay for its 10-year bonds accurately reflects the lender ’ s risk in buying Greek government debt .
It is the price of past profligacy .
But in the borrower ’ s view it is usurious – taking advantage of the borrower ’ s desperation .
The sensible middle position would surely be an agreed write-off of a portion of the outstanding Greek debt , combined with a five-year moratorium on interest payments on the remainder .
This would immediately relieve pressure on Greece ’ s budget and give its government the time and incentive to put the country ’ s economy in order .
In the long run , however , we will have to answer the broader question that the eurozone ’ s various debt crises have raised : Is the social value of making finance cheap worth the days of reckoning for stricken debtors ?
