The New Revolt of the Masses
PARIS – Is the current economic crisis uniting the democratic world in anger as much as in fear ?
In France , with many factories closing , a wave of executive hostage-taking – “ bossnapping , ” as this newfangled crime is called – is agitating board rooms and police across the country .
In the United States , big bonuses given to executives from firms receiving billions of dollars in taxpayer bailouts – the insurance giant AIG , in particular – has infuriated public opinion , with a populist press and Congress fueling popular rage .
Similarly , in Great Britain , an increasingly inquisitive and critical public is now lumping together bankers and members of Parliament in a common climate of suspicion .
Is the current crisis creating or revealing a growing split between rulers and ruled ?
Populist anger is one of the most predictable , and certainly inevitable , consequences of today ’ s financial and economic crisis .
The unifying factor behind this rising “ anger ” is rejection of both real and perceived inequality – inequality in both treatment and economic conditions .
In terms of the French Republic ’ s credo , “ Liberty , Equality , Fraternity , ” the first principle , liberty , became the motto of our age after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 ; the second is gaining greater precedence today as the economy falters .
Can a renewed quest for equality close the traditional gap that has existed between America and Europe ?
Will the “ American dream ” be Europeanized ?
And , with their country ’ s economy humbled , will countless Americans ’ secret hope that they , too , might one day be rich now give way to European-style envy ?
It would be dangerous for America if things went that far .
America is not France – at least not yet .
But it seems obvious that increasing economic inequality in the US and , indeed , throughout the OECD , has stoked a perception of injustice and growing anger .
In the US , as the financial sector soared , the manufacturing base contracted sharply .
It is clear that all over the western world , particularly in the last 20 years , those at the top of the income ladder have done much better than those in the middle or at the bottom .
While the rich got richer , the poor did not get poorer , but the gap between rich and poor expanded significantly .
The current crisis may have seriously eroded the wealth of many of the very rich , destroying their assets in an unprecedented way .
But the fear , if not despair , of the poor and not-so-poor has increased tremendously .
Of course , inequalities between countries are one thing , and inequalities within countries are quite another .
But today the two processes are taking place simultaneously and at an accelerating pace .
Anger is no longer restricted to extreme anti-capitalist , anti-globalization forces .
A deep feeling of injustice is spreading across large swaths of society .
This sense of injustice is only partly contained by political considerations in the US , thanks to the “ Obama factor , ” a rare phenomenon that can be described as the restoration of trust in one ’ s political leaders .
But the more you distrust politics and your politicians , the more anger will manifest itself in uncontrollable ways , especially if your country is imbued with a romantic “ revolutionary ” tradition and culture .
This is obviously the case in France , where , contrary to what the French historian François Furet thought in the immediate aftermath of communism ’ s collapse 20 years ago , the French Revolution is neither over nor a closed chapter in history .
In France the decreasing popularity of President Nicolas Sarkozy and of his main “ classical ” opponent , the Socialist party ( still deeply divided and in search of a leader ) , favors the rise of the extreme left behind the energy and charisma of its young leader , Olivier Besancenot .
In the US , the reverse is true .
President Barack Obama ’ s popularity remains largely intact and acts as a kind of buffer against an uncontrolled explosion of anger .
It is possible , but far from certain , that what Obama describes as a “ glimmer ” of hope in the US could be sufficient to keep popular anger at bay and bring about a recovery in trust in politics and politicians .
And European discontent will probably continue to grow , whatever happens in the US .
Economic recovery , when it comes , will probably start in America , but it is likely that the public ’ s sharpened sense of injustice , and the resulting resentments , will linger , poisoning politics in the Western world long after the crisis has passed .
