The Dollar and the Dragon
CAMBRIDGE – For several years , American officials have pressed China to revalue its currency .
They complain that the undervalued renminbi represents unfair competition , destroying American jobs , and contributing to the United States ’ trade deficit .
How , then , should US officials respond ?
Just before the recent G-20 meeting in Toronto , China announced a formula that would allow modest renminbi appreciation , but some American Congressmen remain unconvinced , and threaten to increase tariffs on Chinese goods .
America absorbs Chinese imports , pays China in dollars , and China holds dollars , amassing $ 2.5 trillion in foreign-exchange reserves , much of it held in US Treasury securities .
To some observers , this represents a fundamental shift in the global balance of power , because China could bring the US to its knees by threatening to sell its dollars .
But , if China were to bring the US to it knees , it might bring itself to its ankles in the process .
China would not only reduce the value of its reserves as the dollar ’ s value fell , but it would also jeopardize America ’ s continued willingness to import cheap Chinese goods , which would mean job losses and instability in China .
Judging whether economic interdependence produces power requires looking at the balance of asymmetries , not just at one side of the equation .
In this case , interdependence has created a “ balance of financial terror ” analogous to the Cold War , when the US and the Soviet Union never used their potential to destroy each other in a nuclear exchange .
In February 2010 , angered over American arms sales to Taiwan , a group of senior military officers called for the Chinese government to sell off US government bonds in retaliation .
Their proposal went unheeded .
Instead , Yi Gang , China ’ s director of state administration of foreign exchange , explained that “ Chinese investments in US Treasuries are market investment behavior , and we don ’ t wish to politicize them . ” Otherwise , the pain would be mutual .
Nevertheless , this balance does not guarantee stability .
There is always the danger of actions with unintended consequences , especially as both countries can be expected to maneuver to change the framework and reduce their vulnerabilities .
For example , after the 2008 financial crisis , while the US pressed China to let its currency appreciate , officials at China ’ s central bank began arguing that America needed to increase its savings , reduce its deficits , and move toward supplementing the dollar ’ s role as a reserve currency with IMF-issued special drawing rights .
But China ’ s bark was louder than its bite .
China ’ s increased financial power may have increased its ability to resist American entreaties , but despite dire predictions , its creditor role has not been sufficient to compel the US to change its policies .
While China has taken minor measures to slow the increase in its dollar-denominated holdings , it has been unwilling to risk a fully convertible currency for domestic political reasons .
Thus , the renminbi is unlikely to challenge the dollar ’ s role as the largest component of world reserves ( more than 60 % ) in the next decade .
Yet , as China gradually increases domestic consumption rather than relying on exports as its engine of economic growth , its leaders may begin to feel less dependent than they now are on access to the US market as a source of job creation , which is crucial for internal political stability .
In that case , maintaining a weak renminbi would protect the trade balance from a flood of imports .
Asymmetries in currency markets are a particularly important aspect of economic power , since they underlie global trade and financial markets .
By limiting the convertibility of its currency , China is avoiding currency markets ’ ability to discipline domestic economic decisions .
Compare , for example , the discipline that international banks and the IMF were able to impose on Indonesia and South Korea in 1998 , with the relative freedom of the US – bestowed by denomination of American debt in dollars – to increase government spending in response to the 2008 financial crisis .
Indeed , rather than weakening , the dollar has appreciated as investors regard the underlying strength of the US as a safe haven .
Obviously , a country whose currency represents a significant proportion of world reserves can gain international power from that position , thanks to easier terms for economic adjustment and the ability to influence other countries .
As French President Charles de Gaulle once complained , “ since the dollar is the reference currency everywhere , it can cause others to suffer the effects of its poor management .
This is not acceptable . This cannot last . ”
But it did .
America ’ s military and economic strength reinforces confidence in the dollar as a safe haven .
As a Canadian analyst put it , “ the combined effect of an advanced capital market and a strong military machine to defend that market , and other safety measures , such as a strong tradition of property rights protection and a reputation for honoring dues , has made it possible to attract capital with great ease . ”
The G-20 is focusing on the need to “ re-balance ” financial flows , altering the old pattern of US deficits matching Chinese surpluses .
This would require politically difficult shifts in consumption and investment , with America increasing its savings and China increasing domestic consumption .
Such changes do not occur quickly .
Neither side is in a hurry to break the symmetry of interdependent vulnerability , but both continue to jockey to shape the structure and institutional framework of their market relationship .
For the sake of the global economy , let us hope that neither side miscalculates .
