The Bailout Bias
WARSAW – The seemingly never-ending debate over the eurozone ’ s fiscal problems has focused excessively on official bailouts , in particular the proposed purchase of government bonds on a massive scale by the European Central Bank .
Indeed , we are warned almost daily – by the International Monetary Fund and others – that if bailout efforts are not greatly expanded , the euro will perish .
For some , this stance reflects the benefits that they would gain from such purchases ; for others , it reflects mistaken beliefs .
Creditors obviously support bailing out debtor countries to protect themselves .
Many political leaders also welcome official crisis lending , which can ease market pressure on them .
The media , meanwhile , always thrives on being the bearers of bad news .
Mistaken beliefs , on the other hand , are reflected in metaphors like “ contagion ” and “ domino effect , ” which imply that financial markets become blind , virulent , and indiscriminate when they are disturbed .
Such terms provoke fear that , once confidence in any one country is lost , all others are in danger .
According to this logic , it follows that only a formidable countervailing power – such as massive official intervention – can halt the ravenous dynamics of financial markets .
Widespread use of expressions like “ aim a bazooka at the eurozone , ” and “ it ’ s them or us , ” demonstrates a pervasive Manichean view of financial-market behavior vis-à-vis governments .
But financial markets , even when agitated , are not blind .
They are capable of distinguishing , however imperfectly and belatedly , between macroeconomic conditions in various countries . This is why interest-rate spreads within the eurozone have been widening , with Germany and the Nordic countries benefiting from lower borrowing costs and the “ problem ” countries being punished by a high-risk premium .
Another , related , fallacy is the assumption that reforms can reap benefits only in the long run .
This misconception reduces the short-term solution to affected governments ’ sharply higher borrowing costs to bailouts .
In fact , properly structured reforms have both short- and long-term effects .
For example , one does not need to wait for the completion of a pension reform to see reduced yields on government bonds .
Markets react to credible announcements of reforms , as well as to their implementation .
The countries that have been severely affected by the financial crisis illustrate the impact of reform .
One group – Bulgaria , Estonia , Latvia , and Lithuania ( BELL ) – experienced a surge in yields on their government bonds in 2009 , followed by a sharp decline .
Another group – Portugal , Ireland , Italy , Greece , and Spain ( PIIGS ) – has had more mixed outcomes : yields have soared on Greek and Portuguese bonds , while Ireland ’ s were falling until recently .
These differences can be explained largely by the variations in the extent and structure of these countries ’ reforms .
Proper reforms can produce confidence and growth .
Official crisis lending can buy time to prepare , and it can help to stop a banking-sector crisis , but it cannot substitute for reform .
All bailouts can create moral hazard , because they weaken the incentive to implement reforms that will avoid bad outcomes in the future .
To some extent , official crisis lending replaces the pressure from financial markets with pressure from experts and creditor countries ’ politicians .
Among the proposed eurozone bailouts , none has come under the spotlight as much as the idea that the ECB should purchase massive quantities of the problem countries ’ bonds .
Advocates of this approach stretch the concept of “ lender of last resort ” to suggest that providing liquidity to commercial banks is the same as funding governments .
They also present the alternative to a bailout as a “ catastrophe . ”
Finally , they cite similar policies implemented by the United States Federal Reserve , the Bank of England , and the Bank of Japan – as though merely mentioning past examples is evidence that ECB lending will work .
These rhetorical devices must not overshadow careful analysis of the various options .
There has been surprisingly little comparative analysis of the effects of quantitative easing ( QE ) in Japan , the US , and Britain .
Yet the evidence indicates that QE is no free lunch .
Although it may offer potential benefits in the short run , costs and risks invariably emerge later .
In Japan , QE may have contributed to delays in economic reform and restructuring , thereby weakening longer-term economic growth and exacerbating fiscal distress .
In the US , it failed to avert the slowdown during 2008-2011 , while America ’ s 2011 inflation figures may turn out to be higher than they were in 2007 .
In Britain , economic growth is even slower , while inflation is much higher . And these countries ’ QE has also fueled asset bubbles in the world economy .
Massive purchases of government bonds by the ECB would be the worst type of bailout .
The fact that such purchases are potentially unlimited would exacerbate the problem of moral hazard .
It would also increase the risk of inflation , along with other negative economic consequences .
Moreover , such a bailout could undermine the ECB ’ s trustworthiness as guardian of the euro ’ s stability , particularly in light of the new political power that it would obtain .
And it would further undermine the rule of law in the EU at a time when confidence in the Union ’ s governing treaties is already fragile .
The key to resolving the eurozone crisis lies in properly structured reforms in the ailing countries .
Indeed , experience shows that there is no substitute .
