The IMF after DSK
PRINCETON – How the mighty International Monetary Fund has fallen .
More than a decade ago , the French magazine Paris Match carried a picture of the Fund ’ s then Managing Director , Michel Camdessus , with the title : “ The Most Powerful Frenchman in the World . ”
One unanticipated result of the lurid New York sex scandal involving DSK is that the question of his successor is attracting an unprecedented level of public interest and concern .
Indeed , the scandal has exposed some fundamental problems about the IMF ’ s governance , and even about its existence .
DSK tried to remake the IMF into a doctor of global finance , rather than a policeman .
In mitigating or even preventing financial crises , however , sometimes policemen are needed .
At the moment , the combination of excesses still evident in the financial sector and in public finance in many countries calls for some fairly tough police action .
Any organization is always much more than simply the person who happens to lead it , but a weak or politicized figure at its head can do great damage .
Unfortunately , about half of the IMF ’ s past managing directors have been either weak or overly political – or both .
The IMF ’ s first two managing directors , the Belgian Camille Gutt and the Swede Ivar Rooth , were both weak figures .
Indeed , the Fund almost disappeared into complete oblivion during their tenure .
The IMF ’ s two most recent managing directors before DSK , a German and a Spaniard , were also weak .
Horst Köhler , appointed in 2000 , got the millennium started on a bad note .
He had been an influential state secretary in Germany ’ s finance ministry , before becoming the head of the associations of savings banks .
Germany ’ s then chancellor , Gerhard Schröder , pressed hard for a German appointee to lead the Fund , but Köhler was always an implausible second-choice candidate .
He resigned in 2004 to run as Angela Merkel ’ s candidate for the largely ceremonial office of President of the German Federal Republic , a job he performed capriciously until he abruptly resigned .
Köhler ’ s successor , Rodrigo Rato , had been the leader of Spain ’ s center-right party , which was unexpectedly defeated in the 2004 general election by current Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero .
He was sent to Washington as a consolation prize , and was never very happy there .
The IMF ’ s influence dwindled , and he resigned in 2007 “ for personal reasons . ”
DSK , too , began his tenure at the IMF as a politician-in-exile , after emerging as French President Nicolas Sarkozy ’ s most formidable domestic opponent .
Sarkozy and his strategists , no doubt , thought that sending DSK to the Fund , which before the global financial crisis looked unimportant and marginal , was a brilliant coup .
They may have even calculated that his private life might cause a stir in a country that is both more prudish and prurient than France .
But when the IMF reemerged after 2008 as a central global institution , with DSK appearing to reorient it with substantial political and economic skill , he started to look again like a threat to Sarkozy ’ s re-election bid .
The IMF ’ s heavy engagement in resolving Europe ’ s sovereign-debt crisis adds another element of political complexity .
Non-Europeans suspected that the Europeans were getting favorable deals under a French politician-turned-economist who wanted to return to politics .
And some Europeans worried that the Fund was taking sides in a polarized intra-European dispute about how the costs of the financial crisis should be shared .
Recent appointments to head the IMF have all been pushed through after high-level bargaining among European governments .
There is now a need to break decisively with the discredited political logic that drives such decisions .
The convention that the IMF ’ s managing director needs to be a West European is not written down anywhere , least of all in the Fund ’ s Articles of Agreement .
Indeed , even back in 1973 , there was substantial support for a non-European candidate , Roberto Alemann , the distinguished economist and former Argentine economics minister .
The IMF ’ s history is also a guide to the kind of figure who works most productively in Washington .
None of the three most powerful and influential managing directors had been a politician or government minister .
Per Jacobsson , the Swedish economist who brought the Fund back from obscurity in the 1950 ’ s , had been an official at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel .
As the BIS ’ s chief economist in the 1930 ’ s , Jacobsson knew how to use economic analysis as a basis for influence .
Jacques de Larosière and Michel Camdessus were French civil servants who combined high-level technical and managerial expertise with a vision of how the world economy should operate .
Today , the world ’ s overwhelming strategic problem is to adjust to a new economic and political geography , in which the weight of the global economy is shifting eastwards and southwards .
It is tempting to conclude that appointing a well-connected figure from an emerging-market economy could solve the problem .
But such an outcome would be to repeat the thinking of the past , when the main need was to broker influence between Europe and the US .
Appointing an Asian political icon would merely change the names of the players ; it would not reinvent the game .
The IMF needs a managing director who transcends political logic and can lay out the economics of the new global order .
The next one should be Eastern rather than Western , an economist rather than a politician , and a visionary rather than a tactician .
