The New Economy of Fealty
PRINCETON – Since the 2008 financial crisis , most industrial economies have avoided anything like the collapse that occurred during the Great Depression of the 1930 ’ s .
But , despite large-scale fiscal and monetary stimulus , they are not experiencing any dramatic economic rebound .
Moreover , the pre-crisis trend of rising income and wealth inequality is continuing ( in marked contrast to the post-Great Depression period , in which inequality declined ) .
And survey data show a rapid decline in people ’ s satisfaction and confidence about the future .
The explanation of the post-crisis malaise – and people ’ s perception of it – lies in the combination of economic uncertainty and the emergence of radically new forms of social interaction . Long-term structural shifts are fundamentally changing the nature of work , and thus of the way that we think of economic exchange .
In the early twentieth century , a large share of even advanced economies ’ populations was still employed in agriculture .
That proportion subsequently fell sharply , and the same decline could later be seen in industrial employment .
Since the late twentieth century , most employment growth has come in services , particularly personal services – a pattern that looks like a reversal of a previous historical trend .
At the beginning of the twentieth century , upper-middle-class households had a substantial staff of cooks , maids , nannies , and cleaners .
In the interwar years , these employees largely disappeared from the lives of all but the ultra-rich .
The iconoclastic British historian A. J. P. Taylor quipped that laments about the decline of Britain were really generalized reflections of Oxford academics ’ view of the “ servant problem . ”
By the end of the twentieth century , however , many of these old service occupations were reappearing on a large scale , as dual-career households needed additional “ help . ”
The employment of nannies , au pairs , babysitters , and day mothers reflected carefully differentiated approaches to the problem of looking after children .
After child care , there followed hordes of private tutors , test coaches , and university admissions consultants .
And , beyond childhood and adolescence , the need for specialized personal support only grew .
Some of the new services would stretch the imagination of previous ages .
Dating agencies have developed increasingly complex algorithms to sort out their clients ’ romantic lives .
Lawyers work out prenuptial contracts , and then the complexities of divorce negotiations .
Design consultants choose our interiors and clothing .
Personal trainers look after our fitness .
Cosmeticians , skin-care specialists , and tattoo artists shape our appearance .
Two of the largest areas of service-employment expansion have been education and health services . And yet this has not been a result of adding more teachers or doctors .
Instead , a new division of labor has surrounded the classical providers of education and healing with more and more layers of administration .
Doctors need experts to deal with insurance forms , negotiate with other doctors and pharmaceutical providers , and manage legal risks .
Educational specialists fill every conceivable logistical and administrative gap , run sports and arts programs , guarantee diversity , and oversee technology transfer to the private sector .
Indeed , a rapidly growing army of administrators is overrunning our universities .
None of these new services can easily be standardized , or dealt with at long distances ( as can some types of clerical legal and financial work ) .
The caregivers and consultants need to be on location .
And that raises a question of control .
How can child-care providers be trusted ?
Cautious parents seek agents to select their employees and technology to monitor them as they work . So , to find out about the reputation of service providers , we need still more service providers : ratings and surveys and agents to tell us about agents .
The new service economy extends market relations to areas of life in which , previously , informal assistance and guidance within family units prevailed .
To the extent that employment and income in the new services can be easily recorded , this change implies an increase in measurable economic wealth and output , because unpaid household services are ignored in GDP calculations .
Experts might thus interpret the macroeconomic consequences as largely positive .
But the element of personal dependence is a throwback to the preindustrial world .
The zenith of the old service economy was the court of Louis XIV , where specialist courtiers attended to the Sun King ’ s every need , even the most intimate ( there was a Groom of the King ’ s Close Stool ) . In that pre-modern world , private life was extraordinarily public , whereas the social movements of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries dramatically expanded the realm of individual privacy and self-definition .
Today ’ s new service economy is driven by the resulting uncertainty over identity .
We need advice on every aspect of life , provided in a complex world by people whom we think to be experts in ever-narrower and more specialized fields .
We can easily monitor that advice and subject it to statistical testing : are our children doing better on tests ?
Are we more fit ?
Are we dating more people who share our perceived interests ?
Paradoxically , the new technological possibilities are also eliminating privacy .
We are moving back to the Sun King ’ s world , in which everything personal is known , rumored , or whispered .
But now , with electronic surveillance , personal dependence has never been more extreme , more humiliating , and more depressing .
This might explain some of the public dissatisfaction captured in so many surveys , even when economic conditions are not dire .
Subjectively , modern growth feels problematic , and perhaps even immoral .
