The Latin Difference
PRINCETON – It is increasingly popular to think of Europe in binary terms .
French President François Hollande is constantly flirting with the idea of building a new Latin bloc , in which Spain and Italy would join France in the struggle against fiscal austerity .
In this vision , Latin superiority consists in a more expansive view of the state ’ s capacity to secure incomes and create wealth , and less of the “ Protestant ” obsession with the individual ’ s work .
The proposal is not altogether new .
As the Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben recently emphasized , it appeared at the beginning of the postwar era .
In August 1945 , a French intellectual , Alexandre Kojève , submitted to General Charles de Gaulle a sketch for a new foreign policy , based on a Latin “ third way ” between Anglo-American capitalism and Soviet-Slavic Marxism .
But there are even older variants of the French vision of Europe .
In the middle of the nineteenth century , the French Emperor Napoleon III actually created a Latin Monetary Union , which included Belgium , Italy , and Switzerland .
Napoleon saw the scheme as a potential basis for a single world currency .
The British economist Walter Bagehot replied at the time that there would probably be two competing world currencies , which he termed Latin and Teutonic .
By Teutonic , Bagehot seemed to mean the Protestant world : the United States , recovering from the Civil War , Germany , and Britain .
He had no doubt about which vision would win out : “ Yearly one nation after another would drop into the union which best suited it ; and looking to the commercial activity of the Teutonic races , and the comparative torpor of the Latin races , no doubt the Teutonic money would be most frequently preferred . ”
The modern tendency to regard economic differences in terms of religion was stimulated by Max Weber ’ s reflections on the Protestant work ethic .
But that interpretation is clearly unsatisfactory , and cannot account for the dynamism of the deeply Catholic world of Renaissance Italy and Flanders .
A better way to understand economic differences is to view them as a reflection of alternative institutional and constitutional arrangements .
In Europe , that difference stems from two revolutions , one peaceful and wealth-enhancing ( 1688 in England ) , and the other violent and destructive ( 1789 in France ) .
In the late seventeenth century , in the wake of Britain ’ s Glorious Revolution , when Britain revolted against the spendthrift and autocratic Stuart dynasty , the British government that was formed after William and Mary assumed the throne adopted a new approach to debt .
Voting budgets in parliament – a representative institution – ensured that the people as a whole were liable for the obligations incurred by their government . They would thus have a powerful incentive to impose controls on spending to insure that their claims could be met .
This constitutional approach limited the scope for wasteful spending on luxurious court life ( as well as on military adventure ) , which had been the hallmark of early modern autocratic monarchy .
The result was a dramatic reduction in the British state ’ s borrowing costs and the emergence of a well-functioning capital market , which caused private borrowing costs to fall as well .
Representative government , and its logical outgrowth , the democratic principle , became part of the classic model of good debt management .
The alternative model to British constitutionalism was ancien régime France .
Official bankruptcy , a regular occurrence , required prolonging maturities on state debt and reducing interest payments .
But this solution raised the cost of new borrowing , so France began to consider the British model .
The problem was that the imitation was imperfect .
After the conclusion of the American War of Independence , instead of returning to the old model of default , which had been applied as recently as 1770 , the French elite did everything it could to avoid that outcome .
Fearing that the system was fragile , the government opened its coffers in 1787 , bailing out private investors who had lost in an immense speculative scheme to corner shares in a reorganized East India Company .
But there was an immediate problem : the existing tax system had reached its limits , and no more revenue could be raised without ending time-honored privileges and immunities .
In the end , the only viable course was massive confiscation – the creation of biens nationaux as the basis for the issuance of state debt . But that measure , instead of restoring financial calm , led to an escalation of expectations regarding what the state could and should do , and exacerbated social tensions .
Adherence to the principle of non-default produced the French Revolution , the lesson being that political systems will collapse if they take on too much debt and try to pay at any cost .
The situation was the reverse of Britain .
In France , there was no adequately functioning market that differentiated among risks .
The state ’ s commitments became incredible as it absorbed losses produced in the non-functioning market .
The French experience exacted a high long-term price : French society was poorer relative to Britain in the century after the Revolution .
But the French Revolution also produced a powerful and attractive myth of social transformation . Far from discrediting the flawed approach to debt management , the “ nation , ” which succeeded absolutist monarchy as the basis of political authority , remained wedded to statist solutions .
