The Politics of Islamophobia
NEW YORK – There are many roads to political disaster : greed , hubris , the charisma of the demagogue , and , perhaps most dangerous of all , fear .
When people panic , they can become hysterical , and hysteria often leads to mass violence .
When politicians convince people that they are in a life-or-death battle – that survival is a matter of “ us or them ” – anything becomes possible .
Adolf Hitler combined all the elements of political catastrophe : hubris , charisma , greed , and the idea that “ Aryans ” and Jews were locked in a struggle for survival .
Of course , none of the demagogues in the West today – from Donald Trump in the United States to Marine Le Pen or Geert Wilders in Europe – are comparable to Hitler .
None has promoted dictatorship , let alone mass murder .
But they are definitely stirring up the politics of fear .
Trump , for one , also promotes greed , openly boasting of his wealth , and has somehow refined outlandish hubris and contradictory posturing into a bizarre form of charisma .
On the one hand , he promises to fix all the world ’ s problems , and to show China , Russia , the Islamic State , or anyone else who is boss .
On the other hand , he claims that his vast and powerful country cannot take in desperate refugees from Syria , because , he warns , Muslim asylum-seekers might stage “ one of the great military coups of all time . ”
Trump ’ s Republican colleagues in the race for the US presidency , such as Ted Cruz , Ben Carson , and Marco Rubio , stoke similar fears about refugees .
Cruz , as well as the supposedly more moderate Jeb Bush , even suggested that only Christians should be allowed into the US .
More than 10,000 people are killed every year by gun violence in the US – all but a handful for reasons having nothing to do with Islam .
And yet all of the Republican candidates are proud of opposing gun-control measures ; indeed , they have no problem allowing people to enter a school or a bar bearing concealed weapons .
But even a relative handful of Muslim refugees is too dangerous to contemplate .
This is not to say that terrible acts of Islamist terror could not happen in the US , or elsewhere .
They have , and there probably will be more of them , so long as the Middle East remains in turmoil and revolutionary Islam appeals to disaffected Western youth .
But it is hardly an existential threat .
An American friend of mine speculated that , “ We might be one terrorist act away from a Trump presidency . ” A spectacular murder spree by Islamists could spook Americans enough to vote for the greatest fear-monger .
Anything is possible , but I don ’ t believe American voters would be that stupid .
The greater danger is , however , that the demagogues will drive even mainstream politicians into their camp .
Since the November 13 terror attacks in Paris , François Hollande , the unpopular but altogether sensible French president , has been so afraid of being labeled a weakling by politicians of the right and far right that he has declared a national state of emergency – and war on the Islamic State ( ISIS ) .
As long as France ’ s state of emergency lasts , police may arrest people without warrants , break down the doors of private residences in the middle of the night , take over restaurants and other public places with armed force , and generally behave like agents in a police state .
Most French citizens are now so frightened of Islamist attacks that such measures are widely supported .
But they are almost certainly counter-productive .
A national leader can declare war on a state , not on a network of revolutionaries .
ISIS , despite its claims , is not a state , and Hollande should not treat it as one .
Besides , even if bombing ISIS strongholds in Iraq or Syria makes military sense , it won ’ t break the spell of Islamist revolution for frustrated , bored , and marginalized young people in French slums .
On the contrary : The canny leaders of ISIS also rely on an apocalyptic “ us or them ” view of the world .
Most Muslims are not violent revolutionaries who condone , let alone admire , mass violence .
ISIS seeks to broaden its support , especially among young Muslims , by convincing them that true Muslims are in an existential war with the West – that the infidels are their mortal enemies .
For them no less than for Trump , fear is the most powerful weapon .
So the more a Western government allows its policemen to humiliate and bully Muslims in the name of security , the more ISIS is likely to win European recruits .
The only way to combat revolutionary Islamist violence is to gain the trust of law-abiding Muslims in the West .
This will not be easy , but arbitrary arrests are surely the wrong way to go about it .
Likewise , when it comes to civil wars in the Middle East , Western restraint is usually a better strategy than hasty military intervention driven by domestic fear .
Republican candidates in the US are already using the recent murder spree in Paris to blame President Barack Obama , and by extension any future Democratic candidate , for being weak .
Trump has promised to “ bomb the shit out of ISIS . ”
This bellicosity has had the effect of pushing Hillary Clinton , the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination , into distancing herself from Obama .
Like Hollande , she has to assuage public fear by talking tough and promising more military action .
Obama has consistently resisted the temptation to unleash more wars .
His policies have sometimes been inconsistent and irresolute .
But in his refusal to give in to panic and act rashly , he has been far braver than all the big talkers who accuse him of being a wimp .
