The Spirit of September 12
WASHINGTON , DC – The terrorist attacks on the United States ten years ago provoked a powerful reaction : the dispatch of American troops , first to Afghanistan and then to Iraq , and the creation of a sprawling new federal agency , the Department of Homeland Security , to coordinate and supervise measures and programs aimed at protecting the US from further assaults .
This expensive , intensive effort – known as the “ global war on terror ” – can be counted as a success , a diversion , and an example .
The most important fact about the last decade is that , since 9 / 11 , there has been no successful foreign terrorist attack in the US .
For that , US government efforts deserve credit .
No doubt a good deal of the money spent to make the US safe has been wasted .
And the group that launched the initial attacks , Al Qaeda , never posed the kind of massive threat that America ’ s great Cold War adversary , the Soviet Union , once did .
Still , it was clear in the wake of September 11 that a small number of people , motivated by a radical form of Islam , was determined to inflict as much harm on America and Americans as they could .
Had they managed even a few more attacks similar to the ones on New York and Washington , they could have done serious damage .
At worst , the US might have become a more closed , suspicious country , retreating from the openness that has been its hallmark .
Fortunately , they failed , surely in part because the American government , in cooperation with other governments , worked hard to thwart them , killing and capturing some and discouraging others .
In terms both of money and bureaucratic procedures – carefully scrutinizing all airline passengers , for example – Americans may have overpaid for a decade of avoiding terrorist attacks .
But overpaying was far preferable to suffering more attacks .
The highest cost of the war on terror has come not from what the US did over the last decade , but from what it failed to do .
As Thomas L. Friedman and I write in our new book That Used To Be Us : How America Fell Behind in the World It Invented and How We Can Come Back , America ’ s future depends on meeting four major challenges : globalization , the revolution in information technology , America ’ s rapidly growing deficits and debt , and its pattern of energy usage .
Failure to deal effectively with these challenges will lower America ’ s rate of economic growth , thereby blocking generational upward mobility and undercutting the basis of US global influence .
Over the last ten years , the US has not successfully addressed these four challenges .
There are several reasons for this , but prominent among them is America ’ s decade-long focus on the threat of terrorism .
While necessary in some form to protect the country , the war on terror as it played out has served to divert America ’ s attention and resources from the problems that it must solve in order to ensure its future prosperity and power .
The most pressing of these problems is the condition of the education system , which does not adequately prepare young Americans for the jobs available in an economy transformed by globalization and information technology .
Moreover , while over-investing in airport security and in nation-building in the Hindu Kush and Mesopotamia , the US underinvested in the roads , bridges , laboratories , and scientists that it needs for economic growth .
To meet its major challenges , America will have to cut major government programs on which many people rely – the two programs that affect older Americans , Social Security and Medicare , in particular – and increase revenue by raising some taxes .
At the same time , America will need to invest in domestic infrastructure and research and development , which are key to innovation and economic growth .
The formula of cutting , taxing , and investing is not a popular one in America ’ s current political climate , and can be implemented only through the emergence of a broadly shared sense of sacrifice and purpose .
The terrorist attacks ten years ago created just such a political climate . & # 160 ;
They produced the kind of resolve that will be required in the years ahead to address the equally important tasks that the US now faces .
In the decade to come , the US must remain vigilant in order to prevent the kind of attacks that took place on September 11 .
But , at the same time , America and Americans must recapture the spirit of September 12 and harness it to meet the great challenges they face .
