Tony Blair ’ s Long Goodbye
In early 1999 , Paddy Ashdown , then the leader of Britain ’ s Liberal Democratic Party ( and since then , as Lord Ashdown , Europe ’ s envoy in Bosnia ) , was found with a woman not his wife and forced to resign his post .
In his diaries , he describes calling on Prime Minister Tony Blair to inform him in advance of his intention to quit :
“ Blair said : ‘ Going is the most difficult thing to do in politics .
Too many people stay for too long .
I would rather stop when people said , “ Why is he going ? ” than when they said , “ Why isn ’ t he going ? ” Or , even worse , “ When is he going ? ”
This leaves us with an enduring mystery .
Britain ’ s most adept and skillful politician has evidently known for years exactly what not to do about arranging his departure , and yet he has chosen to ignore his own advice .
The mystery deepens when we recall that this consideration has been a part of Blair ’ s calculations ever since he became leader of the Labour Party in 1994 .
At a dinner in a London restaurant named Granita , in what has since become the best-known coffee-stage chat in British history , Blair made a proposal to Gordon Brown , his rival for the leadership .
That proposal fell in two parts .
He , Blair , was demonstrably more “ electable , ” and should lead Labour in deposing the ramshackle Tory regime of John Major .
Then , with Labour in power , Brown could expect in due time to receive the mantle .
On this condition , Brown agreed to give Blair a clear run .
That was three elections ago .
What has kept Blair going ?
When I called on him in January this year , his press officer advised me not to bring up the obvious question .
( I readily agreed , since an unanswerable question is a waste of time . )
But no sooner had I asked the Prime Minister how he was than he replied with a grin : “ It ’ s nice to know one doesn ’ t have to fight another election . ”
So there was the topic , inescapably , right in the middle of the room .
For the rest of the conversation , and on the trip to the outskirts of London that I also took with him , Blair talked and acted as if he had a full Prime Ministerial agenda on everything from global warming to the reconstruction of Afghanistan .
He also behaved , when talking to voters and citizens , as if he was tirelessly running for office for a fourth time .
Some of the motivations for this are purely human : he likes being Prime Minister and is good at it .
Moreover , next year he will have been Prime Minister for a decade , longer than any previous Labour leader .
A little longer , and he would outlast Margaret Thatcher ’ s record-breaking tenure , which must have been a temptation .
But Blair inexplicably chose to compound the mistake he had made with Brown , by announcing publicly , after having defeated the Tories for the third straight time , that he would not stand again .
From then on , there was really only one question on peoples ’ minds , and it was the third – the worst – of the three questions he had mentioned to Ashdown : “ When is he going ? ”
Blair ought to have known that politics is a pitiless business .
For years , his backbench members of parliament kept quiet because they knew that they owed their seats , and their majority , to him .
Now , with the country insisting on an answer to the question he posed , they see him as a liability .
And the trade unions , whose power he has done so much to reduce , have been open in saying that they want a new party leader .
Thus , his announcement that he will leave Downing Street next year is no more than a reluctant acceptance of what has been reality for some time .
No politician is free from a sense of destiny , and I think that Blair ’ s got the better of him .
In the decision to send British forces to defend Sierra Leone from a barbaric invasion from Liberia , he faced down all those who warned of disaster and won great moral credit .
In deploying soldiers to Afghanistan and Iraq , he was convinced that he was both morally correct and politically right to stand by Britain ’ s main historic ally , the United States .
( It is reasonably certain that he would not have trusted Brown to do any of these things in the face of any serious opposition , and also reasonably certain that he was correct to think so . )
When I first interviewed Blair , as newly elected Labour leader in 1994 , he answered my question about the role of his Christianity in his politics by saying , “ I can ’ t stand politicians who go on about religion . ” If I had to date the moment when my own misgivings about him began , it would be the time – starting after September 11 , 2001 – when he began to emphasize his own “ faith ” as a motivating factor in his moral stand .
A saving element in British politics is that such appeals are usually considered embarrassing .
They may also suggest a slight tendency , on the part of those uttering them , to believe in some kind of supernatural endorsement .
So Blair ’ s concession that he must leave office , a decision so long postponed and so disastrously protracted , represents among other things a triumph of the mundane over the permanent temptation to believe that politics is about anything else .
