Time to Bring Mahatma Gandhi Back
NEW YORK – The Congress Party ’ s unexpected landslide in India ’ s general election was greeted with euphoria .
Many believe that Congress – with its commitment to secular values , economic growth , and helping the poor – now has a mandate to transform India into a great power .
Business and financial interests , in particular , are delighted with the outcome , crowing about the bonanza about to be unleashed as Congress liberalizes India ’ s economy further .
The Americans are happy that India ’ s pesky left , reduced to a paltry 24 seats , has been all but eliminated from national government .
India ’ s Communists had tried to topple the Congress-led government last year in an attempt to scuttle the nuclear deal brokered by the United States , and had vowed to upend it .
As for the threat from the right , anyone hoping for peace in the region and reduced tensions within India between religious communities is relieved by the defeat of the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) .
The BJP ’ s strategy of painting the Congress as soft on terror and demonizing Muslims as an existential threat to India badly misfired .
Unfortunately , however , the economic trajectory that Congress is plotting , though it may well boost growth in the short term , is ultimately on a collision course with both equity and sustainability .
Despite rhetoric about “ inclusive growth , ” India ’ s wealth gap has widened during the years of exceptionally rapid economic expansion .
The majority of the world ’ s malnourished children live in India .
While private wealth management is a growth industry among India ’ s 200,000 or so nouveaux riches , 800 million Indians live on less than $ 2 per day .
India ’ s water supply is stretched to the limit , even as global warming is fast melting the Himalayan glaciers on which millions depend for water .
Moreover , climate change threatens to reduce agricultural output by up to 40 % by 2080 , when India will have another 450 million people .
At that point , the consultancy McKinsey & amp ;
Company projects India ’ s middle-class consumer market will have hit 600 million people , twice the size of the current US population .
That ’ s exciting news to retailers looking for new markets .
But what about India ’ s other billion people ?
And where will the resources come from to manufacture all the stuff these new consumers will buy ?
The die was cast for India ’ s development path on July 22 , 1947 , when India ’ s Constituent Assembly resolved to replace Mahatma Gandhi ’ s spinning wheel , or charka , with the emperor Ashoka ’ s wheel of dharma on the Indian national flag .
The move symbolically rejected what the incoming government abandoned upon assuming office : Gandhi ’ s vision of an equitable and sustainable agrarian society based on self-sufficient , pared-down consumption .
For Gandhi , the spinning wheel symbolized the need to assume personal responsibility for consumption as a first step toward achieving justice and freedom for all .
But Jawaharlal Nehru , India ’ s first prime minister , believed in industrialization and urbanization , famously calling the new mega-dam projects his government underwrote the “ temples of modern India . ”
In his famous speech on India ’ s “ tryst with destiny , ” Nehru promised Indians that his government would seek to “ bring freedom and opportunity to the common man , to the peasants and workers of India ; to fight and end poverty and ignorance and disease ; … to ensure justice and fullness of life to every man and woman . ” For 63 years , the vast majority of India ’ s people have waited for this promise to be fulfilled .
As Congress retakes power , it is Rahul Gandhi , the 39-year-old great-grandson of the man who made that promise , who is the heir-apparent to current Prime Minister Manmohan Singh .
Observers expect the young Gandhi to become prime minister within two years .
The essential challenge before him and his country is not transitioning from a more to a less state-directed economic system , as many of those cheering Congress ’ s electoral victory believe .
While bureaucratic excess , entrenched corruption , and other inefficiencies beg remedy , the real challenge before India is its allegiance to a twentieth-century vision of modernity .
Former Finance Minister Palaniappan Chidambaram has said that his dream is to see 85 % of Indians living in cities and only 15 % , as opposed to the current 60 % , engaged in agriculture , because to be an agrarian society in the modern era is to be poor and powerless . To be “ developed ” means to be industrialized and urbanized .
But , for better or worse , we are no longer in the modern era .
The post-modern realities of our grave present make a mockery of modernity .
When asked what he thought about Western civilization , Gandhi famously replied , “ It would be a good idea . ” He also said that “ Earth provides enough to satisfy every man ’ s need , but not every man ’ s greed . ”
For Gandhi , greed led to violence , violence to militarism , militarism to war , and war to annihilation . His philosophy of non-violence was aimed at the most basic form of human aggression : the appetite for more than one ’ s share .
India ’ s essential challenge is to take up Gandhi ’ s mantle and boldly imagine a future that is different from the West ’ s present .
Of course , no one is under the illusion that India or any other country will abandon its cities for a life as simple as the one Gandhi strove to live ; but that doesn ’ t mean that India can ’ t look to Gandhi ’ s core values for inspiration .
Rahul Gandhi bears the name , if not the lineage , of the Mahatma ( to whom he is not related ) .
If India is lucky , when he assumes leadership of the Congress Party he will let himself be as inspired by Mahatma Gandhi ’ s vision for India as by that of his great-grandfather .
After all , it was out of their complicated marriage of ideas that independent India was born .
Nehru ’ s vision has had a good run ; now it is time to bring back Gandhi ’ s .
