When Democracies Collide
BERLIN – The multipolar nature of today ’ s international system will again be on display at the upcoming G-20 summit in Los Cabos , Mexico .
Global problems are no longer solved , crises managed , or global rules defined , let alone implemented , the old-fashioned way , by a few , mostly Western , powers .
Incipient great and middle powers , such as India , Brazil , Indonesia , South Korea , Turkey , and South Africa , also demand their say .
Some of these powers are still emerging economies .
Politically , however , most of them have crossed the threshold that has long limited their access to the kitchen of international decision-making .
The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council ( the “ P-5 ” ) still defend their right to veto resolutions , and their military power is unmatched .
But they can no longer dispose of sufficient resources , competence , and legitimacy to cope with global challenges or crises on their own .
Bipolarity is a thing of the past , and it is unlikely to re-emerge in a new Sino-American “ G-2 . ”
It is equally unlikely for the foreseeable future that any one club of countries , such as the G-7 or G-8 , will again assume a quasi-hegemonic position .
Even the G-20 in its current composition may not really represent the forces that can and will shape the twenty-first century .
For the Unites States , the European Union , Japan , and other members of the “ Old West , ” the good news is that most of the emerging powers that are positioning themselves for a more active global role are also democracies .
Within the G-20 , only two states – China and Saudi Arabia – explicitly do not want to be liberal democracies , while a third , Russia , has developed into an autocracy with a democratic façade .
The not-so-good news is that these new democratic powers do not necessarily share the Old West ’ s political agenda .
For example , they differ about climate policies , seeing a threat to development .
Similarly , while new middle and great powers do not always agree , they are generally more skeptical of both international sanctions and military interventions .
Moreover , some of the most important of these states differ substantially with the US , and often also with the EU , about the right approach toward regional conflicts , especially in the Middle East .
Thus , in 2010 , the US found itself in a serious diplomatic dispute with Turkey and Brazil about how to resolve the conflict with Iran over its nuclear program .
Without actually admitting it , the US was clearly unhappy that these two states tried to play a diplomatic role of their own in the dispute .
Differences are also apparent where new democratic middle or great powers have formed new groups or clubs , such as the BRICS , together with non-democratic powers .
India , Brazil , and South Africa are using such formats in a pragmatic way to pursue their interests , or simply to demonstrate their increased international weight .
There is little agreement between them and Russia or China – both P-5 members – with regard to political values or to fundamental questions of international order .
Along with many other states in the global South , however , Russia and China tend to defend the principle of non-interference , and they are generally reluctant to support any US or European attempts to project democracy or defend human rights in other countries .
Not a few policymakers in the US and in Europe have reacted with astonishment , or even annoyance , to these emerging democratic powers ’ attempts to pursue their own agendas on the world stage .
Such reactions partly reflect old thinking rooted in the Cold War , when democratic countries might differ over details , but would agree about the main questions of international politics .
Those who pursued a different agenda on substantial matters were either not part of the “ democratic camp ” or were not important international players .
By contrast , a central feature of today ’ s globalized , multipolar world is that shared democratic values do not guarantee agreement about substantial questions of international politics .
The more democracies there are , the more conflicts of interests and differences are likely to emerge between democratic countries .
There is little reason to react with anger when states like Turkey , Brazil , and South Africa set priorities different from those of Europe or the US , or have different views about how to deal with the Arab-Israeli conflict , Iran , development aid , democracy promotion , or environmental protection .
The US example shows clearly that democratic great powers often pursue their interests with little regard for a global common good that others have defined .
In other words , the international order is becoming more pluralistic .
The task for established Western democracies is to accept and cope with such “ democratic differences ” on the international level , and to seek multilateral coalitions to manage or solve problems .
In principle , the EU is better positioned than the US ( and certainly than China ) to take on this task .
Europeans are well practiced in dealing with differences and shaping consensus among principally like-minded states .
That said , Europe needs to learn to be clearer and more transparent about the interests underlying its own policies , rather than suggesting that its positions on a specific subject represent the only rational implementation of democratic values and norms .
