Why Eurobonds are Un-American
BRUSSELS – The emerging consensus in Europe nowadays is that only “ debt mutualization ” in the form of Eurobonds can resolve the euro crisis , with advocates frequently citing the early United States , when Alexander Hamilton , President George Washington ’ s treasury secretary , successfully pressed the new federal government to assume the Revolutionary War debts of America ’ s states .
But a closer look reveals that this early US experience provides neither a useful analogy nor an encouraging precedent for Eurobonds .
First , taking over a stock of existing state debt at the federal level is very different from allowing individual member states to issue bonds with “ joint and several ” liability underwritten by all member states collectively .
Hamilton did not have to worry about moral hazard , because the federal government did not guarantee any new debt incurred by the states .
Second , it is seldom mentioned that US federal debt at the time ( around $ 40 million ) was much larger than that of the states ( about $ 18 million ) .
Thus , assuming state debt was not central to the success of post-war financial stabilization in the new country ; rather , it was a natural corollary of the fact that most of the debt had been incurred fighting for a common cause .
Moreover , the most efficient sources of government revenues at the time were tariffs and taxes collected at the external border .
Even from an efficiency point of view , it made sense to have the federal government service public debt .
Federal assumption of the states ’ war debts also yielded an advantage in terms of economic development : once states no longer had any debt , they had no need to raise any revenues through direct taxation , which might have impeded the growth of America ’ s internal market .
Indeed , after the federal government assumed the states ’ debt ( already a small part of the total ) , state revenues fell by 80-90 % .
The states then became for some time fiscally irrelevant .
Finally , the key to the success of financial stabilization was a profound restructuring .
Hamilton estimated that the federal government could raise enough revenues to pay approximately 4 % interest on the total amount of debt to be serviced – significantly less than the 6 % yield on the existing obligations .
Holders of both state and federal bonds were thus offered a basket of long-dated bonds , some with an interest rate of 3 % , and others with 6 % ( with a ten-year grace period ) .
The basket was designed in such a way as to result in an average debt-service cost of 4 % .
In modern terms , the “ net present value ” of the total debt ( federal and state ) was reduced by about one-half if one were to apply the usual exit yield of 9 % .
Moreover , the new federal bonds ’ very long maturities meant that there was no rollover risk .
It would have been very dangerous to expose the federal government to this danger , given that the operation was rightly perceived at the outset as extremely risky .
For the country ’ s first few years , debt service swallowed more than 80 % of all federal revenues .
The slightest negative shock could have bankrupted the new federal government .
Fortunately , the opposite happened : federal revenues tripled under the impact of a rapid post-war reconstruction boom , and continued to grow rapidly , aided by the country ’ s ability to remain neutral while wars ravaged the European continent .
By contrast , growth prospects in Europe today are rather dim , and interest payments , even for Greece or Italy , account for less than 20 % of total revenues .
The real problem is the rollover of existing debt in a stagnating economy .
For example , Italy will soon have a balanced budget in structural terms , but must still face the problem of refinancing old debt as it matures each year .
Assuaging doubt about the sustainability of public debt in the eurozone would thus probably require a deep restructuring as well .
The eurozone crisis could certainly be resolved if all existing public debt were transformed into 20-year Eurobonds with a yield of 3 % , and a five-year grace period on debt service .
One can easily anticipate the impact that this would have on financial markets .
More interesting in view of the current situation in the eurozone is what followed roughly a half-century after Hamilton acted .
In the 1830 ’ s and 1840 ’ s , a number of states had over-invested in the leading transport technology of the time – & nbsp ; canals .
When the canal-building boom ended , eight states and the Territory of Florida ( accounting for about 10 % of the entire US population at the time ) were unable to service their debt and defaulted on their , mostly British , loans .
British bankers threatened that they would never again invest in these untrustworthy Americans .
They could point to the precedent set by Hamilton , and had probably invested on the implicit understanding that , if necessary , the federal government would bail out the states again .
But , despite foreign creditors ’ threats , the federal government did not come to the rescue .
The bailout request did not succeed because it could not muster a simple majority of the states ( represented by the Senate ) and the population ( represented by the House of Representatives ) under the normal decision-making procedure ( the “ Community method , ” in European Union jargon ) .
The defaults proved to be costly .
The 1840 ’ s were a period of slow growth , and continued pressure from foreign creditors forced most of the official debtors to resume payments after a while .
Default was not an easy way out , and all US states ( with the exception of Vermont ) have since embraced balanced-budget amendments to their constitutions as a way to shore up their fiscal credibility .
