The Russian Revival
Russia ’ s national revival and new assertiveness under President Vladimir Putin is not really home made but reflects highly auspicious international conditions .
Oil and gas prices are sky high , the United States is overwhelmed by serious problems in Iraq and the Middle East , and the West is divided about how it should deal with Russia .
Putin ’ s administration has been keen to take advantage of this favorable environment .
Yet , although some of the Kremlin ’ s moves seem clear and reasonable , others can scarcely be described as rational or forward-looking .
For example , Russia ’ s desire to take ownership stakes in Europe ’ s gas distribution markets makes perfect sense and is fully legitimate given Russia ’ s energy assets and pipeline capacity .
Likewise , Russia ’ s effort to expand its influence in the energy-rich countries of Central Asia is aimed at consolidating Russia ’ s stature as a major energy supplier .
Asserting itself as a major power outside the Western realm , Russia has boosted the Shanghai Cooperation Organization , which includes China and most Central Asian countries .
Indeed , Russia is increasingly attaching ever greater significance to its relations with China , something of a strategic shift in foreign policy , even if it is not yet clear how close Russia wants to be get to China .
But bullying Georgia and Moldova , demonstrating support for Hamas , or indulging North Korea do not seem to be guided by any strategic sense of Russia ’ s far-reaching interests . They seem guided by pure and simple spite .
Russia ’ s heavy-handed pressure on Georgia and its support of secessionist movements in South Ossetia and Abkhazia , two unrecognized republics within Georgia , inflames passions and risks destabilizing the already tense Northern Caucasus .
Should instability ignite into open warfare , Russia will find it impossible to avoid the consequences .
Of course , Georgia ’ s President Mikhail Saakashvili may at times be thoughtless and arrogant .
But if Russia ’ s policy toward him lets events in Georgia get out of control , Russia will be held accountable .
Because Russia claims the status of a world power , it is expected to show restraint and responsibility .
But the urge to project strength for the mere sake of doing so now seems overwhelming for the Kremlin .
This urge stems from a desire to make up for the years of Russia ’ s humiliation after the USSR collapsed , years when the West contemptuously disregarded Russia ’ s views and interests .
This lingering resentment may explain Putin ’ s somewhat uncivil behavior and dubious jokes when dealing with his Western counterparts .
It may also have been behind Russia ’ s irrational decision to renege on its promise to give Poland the files that document the massacre of thousands of Polish officers on Stalin ’ s orders in the forest at Katyn at the outbreak of WWII .
What possible benefits can Russia gain by breaking this pledge ?
The motive seems to be brutally simple : “ Precisely because you want it , we won ’ t deliver .
We can do what we like because we ’ re strong again . ”
But this renewed vigor is too fresh for Russia to feel truly confident .
Putin ’ s irresistible urge to remind everyone that Russia has recovered its strength suggests underlying insecurity .
In an episode recently reported by The New York Times , at one of Putin ’ s informal meetings with Bush , Putin showed the US president his Labrador and said , “ Bigger , tougher , stronger , faster , meaner than Barney ” ( Bush ’ s dog ) .
Though Putin barely implied that the dog ’ s superiority indicates Russia ’ s domination over the US , his remark appears to be in line with his general message : don ’ t you ever dare to doubt our high status .
Russia is by no means seeking to isolate itself .
Russia needs America and the West in order to realize its ambitious initiative to establish international centers of uranium enrichment , and it needs Western markets , which are the largest consumers of Russia ’ s gas and oil .
Moreover , it is in the West where the rich and powerful Russian elite likes to travel , go shopping , and send their kids to school .
But Russia ’ s muscle-flexing behavior leaves Western leaders perplexed and wary , which seems a dubious way for the Kremlin to secure Russia ’ s new stature .
Contentious foreign policy makes contacts uneasy and agreements difficult to reach .
It damages the trust needed for stronger trade relations .
As Russia ’ s conflict with Ukraine in early January over gas prices demonstrated , when Russia plays rough , the West grows apprehensive and suspicious rather than more amenable .
What will happen should crude strength and hard language prove inadequate to the task of insuring Russian national interests ?
No one can say , but Russia ’ s history in this regard is not a source of hope .
