The Case for Turkey in Europe
ANKARA – Turkey ’ s wider neighborhood is engulfed in crises .
To its east lie political instability , civil war , and terrorism , while its neighbors to the west are struggling to regain their financial footing , following an economic collapse nearly on the scale of the Great Depression .
In the midst of all this turmoil , Turkey represents an island of peace , democracy , security , and stability – something that the European Union should keep in mind when considering the current paralysis in accession talks .
Over the last decade , the Turkish government has overseen a social and economic transformation , in which millions of people have moved into the middle class .
A recent report by the World Bank , highlighting the steady growth that has brought Turkey to the threshold of high-income status , describes the country ’ s progress as socially inclusive : Poverty has been reduced by more than half , and access to high-quality health , education , and municipal services has expanded .
Indeed , since 2009 , the Turkish economy has created four million new jobs , many of which require highly skilled workers .
This has sharply reduced the gaps in the quality of health services and education both within the country and between it and other OECD members .
Moreover , Turkey is among the fastest-improving countries with respect to the quality of its infrastructure , including transport , telecommunications , and energy .
And , during the 2008 global financial crisis , Turkey was the only OECD country that did not need to inject any public funds into its banks .
Turkey has also been diligent in its efforts to consolidate its democracy through the expansion of civil rights and liberties .
Over the past 12 years , Turkey has adopted more than 2,000 pieces of legislation to reach EU standards in various fields .
Given the many fires raging around Turkey , this has been achieved with a focus on striking the right balance between freedom and security .
Indeed , Turkey has implemented comprehensive reforms covering a wide range of issues , from civilian-military relations to minority rights .
In particular , Turkey has taken bold steps that aim to achieve a peaceful settlement of the Kurdish issue , which has been a source of concern for decades .
Undeniably , the EU accession process has played a role in stimulating this transformation .
Yet , despite its bold steps , Turkey is frequently , and unfairly , criticized , particularly with respect to media freedom .
The Committee to Protect Journalists claims that seven journalists are in prison in Turkey .
But two of them are actually free .
And when the remaining five cases are examined individually , it becomes clear that not one of them has been jailed for their journalistic activities or for expressing dissenting views .
Instead , they are facing a variety of criminal charges , including murder with a firearm , bank robbery , and the bombing of police stations .
As in all democracies where the rule of law prevails , members of a specific profession , including journalists , are not granted any form of immunity from these types of serious criminal charges .
Freedom of expression and of the press are guaranteed by Turkey ’ s constitution and statutes .
For the last 13 years , the Turkish government has proved to be the main guarantor of freedom of expression , particularly through its reform of the judiciary .
Furthermore , it should be noted that more than 7,000 newspapers and magazines are published in Turkey , with a total daily circulation of nearly five million copies .
Of the country ’ s five most widely read newspapers , four favor the opposition over the government .
Roughly two-thirds of newspaper columnists oppose government policies on a regular basis , and , every evening , Turkey ’ s 18 national television channels air a broad spectrum of opinion from some 100 talk-show guests .
Given such free and vibrant daily debate in Turkey , allegations of rising authoritarianism are without merit .
There simply can be no reasonable doubt about the country ’ s credentials in fulfilling the political conditions of the Copenhagen criteria for EU membership : commitment to democracy , the rule of law , human rights , and respect for and protection of minorities .
Many of the major turning points of the last several years – from the attacks on the United States on September 11 , 2001 , to the global financial crisis and the Arab Spring – have served to highlight the strategic importance of the relationship between Turkey and the EU .
In a region of predominantly Muslim countries , Turkey has proved itself to be the only one that can maintain and strengthen genuine democracy .
Turkey ’ s example in this regard should not be underrated .
Clearly , Turkey is a key country for the EU in terms of securing stability and prosperity in its immediate neighborhood .
Yet accession negotiations between Turkey and the EU have been deadlocked , owing to prevailing political attitudes in some EU member states .
Turkey is ready to open negotiations on any chapter in the accession talks , and at any time .
But , even in areas where EU interests are directly at stake – such as Chapter 23 , which deals with the Judiciary and Fundamental Rights , and Chapter 24 , which deals with Justice , Freedom , and Security – there has been no progress .
This is not because Turkey is refusing to embrace the criteria that these chapters demand , but because a few European governments are , for their own domestic political reasons , blocking the negotiations unilaterally .
It would be a wise step for Turkey ’ s European friends to facilitate the accession process .
At the end of the day , Turkey ’ s prospective membership will change the dynamics of the EU and the region for the better .
