Whose Champions , Anyway ?
The links between states and companies have grabbed headlines , most recently in Russia , where President Vladimir Putin seems obsessed with creating “ national champions ” in the energy and aerospace sectors .
Such efforts seem but a part of a surge of protectionism in European political debate about business , especially when it comes to cross-border acquisitions .
Across Europe , governments position themselves to be seen as defending “ national ” players from “ foreign ” competitors .
“ Economic patriotism , ” the slogan coined by France ’ s Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin following PepsiCo ’ s rumored attempt in July 2005 to takeover Danone , perhaps best encapsulates the political imperative .
Although de Villepin ’ s speeches are more flamboyant than those of most political leaders , the underlying sentiment extends far beyond France .
The same impulse appears to be at work behind Italy ’ s policy on Autostrade , Spain ’ s on Endesa , Poland ’ s on its banking sector , the former Swedish Prime Minister ’ s on Volvo , German unease about “ locust ” -like funds on Deutsche Börse , or the United Kingdom ’ s ever louder defense of the London Stock Exchange ’ s independence from the United States .
The basic belief that underpins “ economic patriotism ” is that of an alignment of interests between companies considered “ national ” ( most prominently the largest ones or so-called “ champions ” ) , their national employees , and the national community .
According to de Villepin , “ to defend the employees ’ interests well , we must protect the interests of our companies . ”
He later argued that Danone should be considered “ French ” because its “ milk collection and its water sources are in France . ”
But Danone ’ s own filings indicate that only 22 % of its global sales and less than 14 % of its global workforce are in France .
In fact , the link between European companies and national communities is becoming more tenuous by the day .
Research that I carried out for Bruegel surveyed the largest 100 listed companies headquartered in Europe ( ranked by market capitalization ) and analyzed the geographical distribution of their revenue , which is increasingly transparent since the adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards ( IFRS ) last year .
Europe was divided into eight broad zones , comprising individual countries like Germany , France , and Italy , or groupings of smaller countries such as Benelux and the Nordic area .
The survey then calculated the share of revenue earned by each company in the zone in which it is headquartered ( or “ home base ” ) , the rest of Europe , and the rest of the world .
Where relevant information for companies was available , the comparable distribution of employees was also examined .
The results show that the share of the home base in total revenue has become , on average , relatively low : just three-eighths , or 37.5 % , on average for Europe ’ s largest 100 companies .
Of course , this figure covers a wide diversity of industries , and also some geographical differences across the continent .
For example , the averages for German ( 34 % ) or French ( 35 % ) companies are markedly lower than for their Spanish ( 56 % ) or Italian ( 65 % ) counterparts .
But the general trend is unambiguous .
For a broadly representative sub-sample of 55 companies that could be tracked since 1997 , the proportion of revenue generated in the home region has fallen sharply on average , from 50.2 % to 36.9 % .
For these companies , sales to the “ rest of Europe , ” which represented an average of less than 30 % of total European sales in 1997 , rose above 43 % in 2005 .
If the trend is extrapolated , the home bases of Europe ’ s largest companies will account , on average , for less than half of their European revenue , and less than a third of their global revenue , before the end of this decade .
These companies are “ Europeanizing ” fast , and the relative weight of their home base is declining even faster .
Moreover , this is not just a story about sales .
The survey also measured the geographical distribution of employees relative to the distribution of revenue .
While the distribution profiles between employees and revenue could be sharply dissimilar in some companies , on average they were almost identical : for a sub-sample of 73 companies among Europe ’ s top 100 , the home base represented 37 % of employees and 35 % of revenue on average in 2005 , while the rest of Europe accounted for 29 % of employees and 28 % of revenue .
This strongly suggests that jobs broadly “ follow ” sales ( or perhaps the other way round ) , even though , once again , this is true only on average and not for all companies .
What are the implications for policymakers ?
Put simply , the numbers show a growing gap of interests between these so-called “ champions ” and their national home bases .
For Europe ’ s governments , fostering champions increasingly means providing benefits to non-national customers and employees – a dubious use of taxpayer money .
Another consequence is that regulatory competition is likely to increase in Europe , as companies are less bound by local interests to keep their headquarters at “ home ” if the tax or regulatory environment becomes unfavorable .
The decision by Depfa Bank to shift its headquarters from Wiesbaden to Dublin in 2002 may be a sign of things to come .
The biggest risk is that the growing disconnect between the perception of “ national ” companies and the reality of Europeanization may lead to spectacularly ill-judged policies .
It is high time for business leaders to be more candid about where their real constituencies lie , and for national politicians to recognize that they can no longer wield control over the giants of today ’ s European business .
