Why is Obama Winning ?
PRINCETON – James Carville , Bill Clinton ’ s chief campaign strategist in 1992 , famously expressed a bit of established insider wisdom about winning elections : “ It ’ s the economy , stupid . ”
Incumbents win if the economic outlook is rosy , and are vulnerable – as George H. W. Bush was – when times are hard .
Indeed , throughout Europe – in France , Greece , Ireland , Portugal , Spain , and the United Kingdom – governments have been turned out of office in the face of a crisis that they have seemed unable to address .
By this standard , President Barack Obama should now be in a hopeless situation .
According to United States Census data , household income fell in 2011 for the fourth consecutive year .
Unemployment remains persistently high , despite the $ 787 billion stimulus package in 2009 , and house prices , though recovering slowly , remain far below their pre-2008 peak .
And yet Obama seems likely to be reelected in November .
One reason is that there is no reliable way to render an instant judgment about economic effectiveness , and the legacy that Obama inherited – coming to office in the middle of a major economic and financial catastrophe – clearly matters .
President George W. Bush and Prime Minister Gordon Brown are obviously more responsible for the financial crisis than are their successors , who have to clean up the mess .
Moreover , as Zhou Enlai memorably responded when Henry Kissinger asked him about the effects of the French Revolution , “ It is too early to tell ” ( though Zhou apparently thought he was being asked about the consequences of the 1968 Paris student uprising ) .
Tracing the precise consequences of policy measures or institutional reforms – & # 160 ; and estimating when they might “ pay off ” – is hopelessly complex .
Much else is happening .
Obama could not have known that a European crisis would have a big impact on US banks , and he could not have done much more to get European leaders to solve their problems .
The long-term success of the economy , and its capacity to build wealth and jobs , depends on productivity gains , which in turn depend on technical and organizational innovation .
Governments cannot just conjure that up by waving a magic wand .
But governments can influence the development of productivity .
And this is where legitimate debate begins , because immediate action to save jobs does not necessarily help .
The wrong kind of stimulus may get in the way of future productivity growth by channeling workers into the wrong kind of employment ( or keeping them there ) . Large-scale public projects , particularly when they are aimed simply at putting as many people as possible quickly back to work , will lead to a shortage of labor available for more productive jobs .
In the 1930 ’ s , some governments tried to make themselves popular with large-scale public work programs .
John Maynard Keynes and his disciples pushed the idea that even apparently useless projects , such as pyramid construction in ancient Egypt , made sense .
Keynes ’ s Cambridge disciple , Joan Robinson , was particularly worried because Hitler seemed to have grasped this point more quickly than democratic governments had .
Hitler , she noted sarcastically , had solved Germany ’ s problem by “ painting the Black Forest white and putting down linoleum in the Polish Corridor . ”
In fact , increased spending , which the Keynesians saw simply as boosting aggregate demand , produced distortions .
Under Hitler , the German economy in the 1930 ’ s shifted to a lower-productivity mechanism in order to churn out armaments and shoddy manufactured goods , neither of which would have any use in a market economy .
Such misallocation of resources was not just a menace of the interwar period .
The big pre-2008 construction boom in Spain did as much harm as subsequent high unemployment , because it encouraged a generation of young people to take high-paying , low-skill jobs in the building industry .
But simply permitting the crisis to continue is a terrible option .
A severe and long-lasting episode of large-scale unemployment is devastating , because it erodes an economy ’ s skill base , undermines human potential , and affronts human dignity .
Government policy should thus be subject to a longer-term test : How effectively is initiative being enabled and skills developed ?
But the answer to that question is not why the pundits are cheering Obama .
They are cheering because financial markets are cheering , following the Federal Reserve ’ s recent announcement of further stimulus .
Though the evidence that monetary stimulus produces increased investment and a business upturn is patchy , its effects on financial markets and asset prices are very easy to document quickly . Asset prices create a large “ wealth effect ” that determines how financially well off people feel .
With many Americans anxiously monitoring the monthly performance of their private pension plans , the only economic statistic that matters is that the S & amp ; P 500 has returned to its pre-2008 level .
As a result , the lesson about the economy ’ s electoral salience is being subtly reformulated .
It is no longer the real state of the economy , but rather the perception of asset markets , that is crucial .
And the perception can be far removed from reality , which means that the more the prevailing political wisdom assigns decisive electoral importance to the economy , the greater the temptation to view monetary policy ’ s impact on asset prices , and not on long-term growth , as crucial .
In America , the Federal Reserve is bound to become much more politicized as a result .
Republicans will blame their defeat in November on the Fed ’ s monetary stimulus ( if not on the ineffectiveness of Mitt Romney ’ s blunder-filled campaign ) .
Meanwhile , in Europe , many national leaders , looking at Obama and the Fed , may conclude that they would do better with more direct control over the central bank .
Given the difficulty of establishing such control over the European Central Bank , the euro ’ s next great challenge may be growing sentiment in favor of a return to national currencies .
