Three Paths for Indebted Democracies
CHICAGO – Democratic governments are not incentivized to take decisions that have short-term costs but produce long-term gains , the typical pattern for any investment .
Indeed , in order to make such investments , democracies require either brave leadership or an electorate that understands the costs of postponing hard choices .
Brave leadership is rare .
So , too , is an informed and engaged electorate , because the expert advice offered to voters is itself so confusing .
Economists of different persuasions find it difficult to reach a consensus about the necessity of any policy .
Consider , for example , the cacophony of arguments about government spending : is it the only thing keeping depression at bay , or is it moving us steadily down the road to perdition ?
The debate does not lead to agreement , moderate voters do not know what to believe , and policy choices ultimately follow the path of least resistance – until they run into a brick wall .
The build-up of public debt in industrial countries ( which was rising briskly well before the Great Recession pushed it to near-unsustainable levels ) reflects this kind of calculus .
The public rewards democratic governments for dealing with the downside risk caused by competitive markets – whether by spending to create jobs or by rescuing banks that have dodgy securities on their balance sheets .
Even if inaction ( or action oriented towards the longer term ) is the best policy , it is not an option for democratically elected politicians , whom voters expect to govern , which inevitably means action with the potential for quick results .
A sympathetic press amplifies heart-rending stories of lost jobs and homes , making those counseling against intervention or advocating longer-term fixes appear callous .
Democracies are necessarily softhearted , whereas markets are not ; government action has expanded to fill the gap .
With governments in many developed countries now reaching the limits of their gap-filling capacity , three undesirable possibilities loom large ( in addition to the desirable possibility that they will have no choice but to undertake long-postponed reforms that will create sustainable growth with less need for government buffers ) .
One is that they intervene directly in markets , both domestic and across borders , to reduce competition and volatility while they rebuild their buffering capacity .
Another is that they muzzle democracy to suppress public anger .
A third is that they find scapegoats .
All three were tried during the Great Depression of the 1930 ’ s .
The results were not encouraging .
One factor diminishing the likelihood of governments intervening more directly in markets is that the recent crisis seems to have discredited government as much as it discredited the financial sector .
During the Great Depression , matters were different .
As economic collapse caused the public to lose faith in the private sector and markets , faith in government grew .
For example , in the United States , public support for President Franklin Roosevelt ’ s New Deal was broad-based throughout the 1930 ’ s .
One possible reason for the difference in attitudes today is that bankers were visibly punished in the 1930 ’ s .
Legislation such as the US Glass-Steagall Act clipped their wings .
Many bankers also suffered direct losses as their banks collapsed , or as investigations exposed them to public ridicule , and even jail .
Today , by contrast , broad segments of the public see the big banks and big government as being run by the same elites who created the crisis , and then spent public money under one guise or another bailing the banks out .
Even as bankers are back to reaping enormous bonuses , taxpayers have been left to foot the bill for the economic collapse .
Many workers are unemployed and in danger of being evicted from their homes , while no important banker has been put in jail .
The biggest banks now account for an even larger share of the financial sector after benefiting from a government rescue , while efforts like the Dodd-Frank Act to legislate more constraints on banks have been lobbied into shadows of their original selves .
The elite , whether in government or big business , seems to look after itself and no one else .
In the US , this sentiment has fueled the Tea Party , which coalesces around opposition to government expansion ( and to elites more generally ) , even if that expansion is aimed at regulating big banks ( presumably because government regulations tend to be shaped by the powerful among the regulated ) .
Movements like the Tea Party have thus tended keep in check those who , after a crisis of the sort that America has had , typically want more government action , including curbing markets and competition .
The US is not alone in having a discredited government .
In the eurozone , in addition to the perceived nexus between banks and governments , the governing elite ’ s willingness to embrace European integration , and taxpayer-financed cross-border financial support , without broad public consultation has generated a similar sentiment .
In Japan , two decades of relentless economic malaise has decimated the public ’ s faith in politicians and the government bureaucracy .
The second undesirable possibility – that governments with little spending capacity to assuage public anger turn against democracy and free expression – is also remote for now .
Democratic institutions in industrial countries are stronger , and have deeper roots , than was the case in the 1930s .
That leaves the third undesirable possibility , the search for unprotected scapegoats upon whom public anger can be dissipated .
Unfortunately , several countries are taking this path , with undocumented immigrants and Muslims being the first targets .
Politicians who seek scapegoats might argue that they mean no harm to their targets , and that they are helping their societies to avoid worse possibilities .
But , as the 1930 ’ s showed , it is hard to imagine any possibility worse than where this type of behavior can lead .
