Turkey ’ s Rise and the Decline of Pan-Arabism
TEL AVIV – The deadly fiasco of the Turkish-led “ peace flotilla ” to Gaza highlighted the deepening strain in the Israeli-Turkish alliance .
But it mainly helped expose the deeper , underlying reasons for Turkey ’ s shift from its Western orientation toward becoming a major player in the Middle East – in alliance with the region ’ s rogue regimes and radical non-state actors .
Foreign policy cannot be separated from its domestic foundations .
The identity of nations , their ethos , has always been a defining motive in their strategic priorities .
Israel ’ s blunders did , of course , play a role in the erosion of its alliance with Turkey .
But the collapse of its old “ alliance of the periphery , ” including Turkey , the Shah ’ s Iran , and Ethiopia , had more to do with revolutionary changes in those countries – the Ayatollah Khomeini ’ s rise to power , the end of Emperor Haile Selassie ’ s regime , and now Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan ’ s Islamic shift – than with Israeli policies .
The current crisis reveals the depth of Turkey ’ s identity complex , its oscillation between its Western-oriented Kemalist heritage and its Eastern Ottoman legacy .
Snubbed by the European Union , Erdogan is tilting the balance towards the latter .
Kemalism always saw the Ottoman legacy as a burden , an obstacle to modernization .
In Erdogan ’ s vision , modernization does not preclude a return to Turkey ’ s Islamic roots , nor does it require it to abandon its destiny as a Middle East power , even if this means flouting United States-led policies in the region .
Indeed , Erdogan responded positively to Europe ’ s conditions for Turkey ’ s EU membership .
His reforms – economic liberalization , cooperation with the European Court of Human Rights , improving the Kurdish minority ’ s rights , and undercutting the army ’ s Praetorian ambitions – are major advances in the history of the Turkish Republic .
Yet Erdogan has also been eager to use Europe ’ s requirements as a pretext to curb the army ’ s capacity to check his Islamic revolution .
The election of his political ally , Abdullah Gul , as president , against the army ’ s will – indeed , against the entire Kemalist tradition – is a case in point .
To block a move aimed at outlawing his Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) , Erdogan also domesticated Turkey ’ s constitutional court – together with the army a watchdog of Kemalism – by arbitrarily changing its composition .
Now a constitutional reform supposedly aimed at “ promoting Turkey ’ s EU membership ” would further curb the army ’ s role as the guardian of the secular state and strengthen government control of the judiciary .
Erdogan ’ s Islamic revolution has also expanded into the educational system with the introduction of a markedly religious curriculum .
To back Turkey ’ s strategic shift , a new law has recently made the teaching of Arabic obligatory in schools .
It is difficult to imagine a more symbolic blow to Ataturk ’ s vision .
Erdogan believes that , by exercising Turkey ’ s capacity for mediation , he will recover the burden of his Ottoman forbears as the guarantors of peace and security in the Mashreq .
Turkey ’ s drive to serve as a peace broker between Israel and its Arab enemies , Erdogan ’ s vociferous championship of the Palestinian cause , and his pretension to be the mediator in the nuclear dispute between Iran and the West reflect Turkey ’ s changing perceptions of itself as a regional leader .
To both Israel and the West , the regional context of Turkey ’ s rise is especially disturbing .
Erdogan ’ s neo-Ottomanism is not a return to an idyllic Ottoman Commonwealth ; it is more a clash between a rising radical axis , led by two major non-Arab powers ( Turkey and Iran ) , and the declining Arab conservative regimes .
Turkey put Israel in the dock of world opinion over the “ peace flotilla ” in a way that might still force Binyamin Netanyahu ’ s government to opt for credible peace negotiations , while providing a boost to Hamas and bringing about the imminent end of Iarael ’ s Gaza blockade .
Such a spectacular success only serves to highlight the impotence of the West ’ s Arab allies .
Indeed , Turkey ’ s growing regional relevance is the measure of the Arabs ’ failure .
They failed to advance their peace initiative with Israel , and are complicit in the blockade of Gaza in the hope that Hamas will collapse , thereby humbling their own Islamist oppositions .
As Islamist democracies whose governments emerge from popular elections , Iran and Turkey – and their Hamas and Hezbollah allies – can claim an advantage over the incumbent Arab regimes , all of which suffer from a desperately yawning legitimacy deficit .
They are all secular autocracies kept in power by intrusive , all-powerful intelligence services .
Erdogan ’ s strategy makes him complicit with the agenda of the West ’ s most vicious enemies .
He even flirted with Sudanese president Omar al-Bashir ’ s perverted Islamist rule , welcoming Bashir to Turkey after he was indicted by the International Criminal Court for massacres in Darfur on the grounds that “ Muslims do not commit genocide . ”
Iran and Turkey are bound to assert their Islamic credentials more and more as they reach out to the Arab masses .
That a pan-Islamic discourse has now replaced the cause of pan-Arabism is a major setback for moderate Arab regimes .
Yet , despite Erdogan ’ s creeping Islamic revolution , Turkey is not a second Iran .
The AKP remains a progressive , heterogeneous party that sees no contradiction between Islam and democracy .
Nor has it entirely given up on Turkey ’ s European dream .
Moreover , an increasingly robust secular opposition , the Republican People ’ s Party ( CHP ) under the vigorous leadership of Kemal Kilicdaroglu , is bound to help stem the Islamist tide .
With Israel ’ s return to a sober peace strategy , and with an honest dialogue between Turkey and its NATO allies , the Turkish bridge between East and West can still be salvaged .
