Thailand ’ s Democratic Disorder
BANGKOK – From Thailand to Turkey to Ukraine , the relationship between ruling majorities and electoral minorities has become combustible – and is threatening to erode the legitimacy of democracy itself .
The unfolding crisis in Bangkok – where a political minority has taken to the streets to bring down Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra ’ s democratically elected government – is a case in point .
Yingluck ’ s Pheu Thai Party ( PTP ) won an outright majority in Thailand ’ s 2011 general election , gaining 265 MPs in the 500-member lower house .
But the opposition Democratic Party – which returned 159 MPs , mainly from Bangkok and southern Thailand – has lately been staging protests in the capital .
The so-called “ People ’ s Committee for Democratic Reform ” – led by former Democratic Party MP Suthep Thaugsuban and supported by the Bangkok-based establishment – has effectively attempted to stage a coup .
The protests began when the government tried to enact amnesty legislation that would have overturned the conviction of former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra – Yingluck ’ s brother and the PTP ’ s founder , who was overthrown by the military in 2006 – on charges of corruption and abuse of power .
( It also would have superseded the murder charges brought against the Democratic Party ’ s leader , former Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva . )
But Yingluck ’ s subsequent attempt to backtrack on the amnesty measure failed to mollify the opposition .
In fact , the street protests intensified , fueled by a new grievance .
The Yingluck government had refused to accept the Constitutional Court ’ s ruling against a bill to change the senate from a half-appointed to a fully elected chamber .
The government asserted that the court did not have jurisdiction over constitutional amendments .
The People ’ s Committee viewed this rejection as an attempt to pressure the king into countersigning the law – and thus as a threat to royal prerogatives and the king ’ s exalted role in Thailand .
The People ’ s Committee ’ s position deserves explanation , if not agreement .
Since the turn of the century , Thaksin ’ s party machines , powered by his populist policies , have overcome constant challenges – from both the military and the Constitutional Court – to beat the conservative-royalist Democrats in every election .
Opposition forces , fed up as much with Thaksin ’ s corrupt practices as with his longstanding popularity , have recently begun seizing government ministries and calling for a royally appointed government .
If they succeed , PTP supporters will likely descend on Bangkok , much as they did in 2009-2010 , after a “ judicial coup ” dissolved Thaksin ’ s People ’ s Power Party , the PTP ’ s predecessor , and the Democrats formed a coalition government .
But , this time , the protesters will be even angrier , and the stakes will be much higher , because the monarchy ’ s role in Thailand ’ s electoral democracy will be called into question .
The mere plausibility of such an outcome underscores Thailand ’ s deep political polarization .
The PTP ’ s supporters are happy with a system that grants them a political voice – indeed , predictable electoral majorities – and that safeguards their rights .
But the minority – which comprises up to two-fifths of the electorate – is at a loss .
Its legitimacy and influence depend not on winning electoral majorities , but on its strong alliances with the military , bureaucracy , and judiciary in defense of a traditional hierarchy that places the king at its apex .
Making matters worse , voters on both sides are tuning in only to views with which they agree , rather than attempting to understand and reconcile opposing arguments .
Social media – the much-lauded catalyst of democratization in authoritarian countries – has exacerbated the trend toward polarization in Thailand , just as it has in other electoral democracies that are struggling with a widening majority-minority divide , like Turkey and Malaysia .
In emerging democracies , electoral minorities tend to be tied to the old establishment , and often oppose change led by popular upstarts .
Feeling marginalized and resentful , they may turn to public platforms like social media and the streets to advance their causes and undermine their opponents ’ authority .
The proliferation of information technology , together with the unprecedented popular participation that it has fueled , means that electoral minorities have a growing number of increasingly powerful tools at their disposal to organize movements aimed at paralyzing their countries ’ governments and even shortening leaders ’ terms in office .
Indeed , with so much seemingly at stake , a four- or five-year term may seem too long to wait for change .
But , while the right to peaceful protest is critically important in a democracy , electoral minorities should not use endless demonstrations to take the political system hostage .
In order to create a peaceful , stable , and effective democratic system , electoral minorities must accept the ballot box as the arbiter of political legitimacy .
At the same time , majorities should not view an electoral victory as a license to act without regard for minority concerns .
While the government must deliver for its constituents , it must also protect its opponents ’ rights .
To this end , Thailand urgently needs a new social contract that allows elected representatives to do their jobs , without marginalizing the establishment-based minority .
Increasingly complex majority-minority dynamics are shaping the democratization prospects of a number of countries , and could influence democracy ’ s durability as a system of government .
Thailand ’ s experience suggests that efforts to subvert the system by thwarting the will of the majority may ultimately be fruitless , though not before imposing extremely high costs on everyone .
