Why Greece Declined a Euro Holiday
BRUSSELS – For the entire first half of this year , since the far-left , anti-austerity Syriza party came to power in January , the Greek saga virtually monopolized the attention of European policymakers .
Even as their country ’ s economy crashed , Greece ’ s new government remained adamant in demanding debt relief without austerity – that is , until mid-July , when they suddenly agreed to the creditors ’ terms .
Indeed , as of July 13 , Greece ’ s staunchly anti-austerity government has been obliged to impose even tougher austerity and pursue painful structural reforms , under its creditors ’ close supervision .
Why did the Greek government concede to terms that not only controverted its own promises , but also closely resembled those that voters had overwhelmingly rejected in a popular referendum barely a week earlier ?
Many believe that Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras was responding to an ultimatum from his European partners : Accept our demands or leave the euro .
The question is why a Greek exit from the euro ( “ Grexit ” ) amounted to such a potent threat .
In fact , from an economic perspective , Grexit no longer represents the potential catastrophe that it once did .
After all , the main short-term cost – financial-system disruption – has already materialized in Greece : banks and the stock market have been shut down , and capital controls have been imposed .
While those actions were needed to stem large-scale capital flight and prevent the banking system ’ s collapse , they also caused the Greek economy to contract sharply .
In this context , Greek negotiators might have considered another proposal , circulated informally by the German finance ministry , recommending that Greece receive immediate debt forgiveness , in exchange for leaving the euro temporarily .
If Greece remained in the euro , no relief would be granted – a proviso consistent with the German position that debt restructuring for eurozone countries would be illegal .
While the legal argument is probably spurious , an outright debt reduction for a eurozone country remains politically impossible .
The German proposal , spearheaded by Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble , highlights the fundamental change that has occurred in Greece ’ s relationship with its European partners since its last bailout package three years ago . In 2012 , Greece was offered hundreds of billions of euros in financial support , and its creditors , including Greek commercial banks , were pushed to accept substantial “ voluntary ” haircuts .
Tellingly , when George Papandreou , Greece ’ s prime minister at the time , proposed a referendum on the existing adjustment program and his country ’ s continued eurozone membership in 2011 , he was warned off in no uncertain terms by France ’ s then-President Nicolas Sarkozy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel .
Though Papandreou would have campaigned for the adjustment program and the euro , a referendum was a risk that his European partners were unwilling to take .
Tsipras ’ s government , by contrast , was able to hold its referendum , and even campaign against the creditors ’ proposed adjustment program ( which , it should be noted , was no longer on the table ) .
Even the resounding “ no ” delivered by Greek voters could not strengthen the government ’ s negotiating position , for a simple reason : Grexit is no longer considered a threat to the euro ’ s stability .
That is why German officials – especially Schäuble – have been encouraging Greece to leave .
One can only speculate about Schäuble ’ s motivation in pushing for Grexit .
He seems to believe that a more integrated eurozone , though certainly desirable , is not feasible with a country that cannot be trusted to abide by the terms to which its government has agreed .
Whatever Schäuble ’ s reasons , his proposal could have represented a way out for Greece , whose economy had been squeezed dry by austerity and whose banking system was already closed .
Immediate debt reduction and the recovery of economic sovereignty – even at the expense of exiting the euro , at least temporarily – would seem to have offered significant long-term benefits .
In a sense , it amounted to a golden opportunity , with Germany offering to pay for something that many believe Greece should be doing anyway .
Nonetheless , the Greek government rejected an exit , and instead accepted the creditors ’ tough terms .
This suggests that , during the negotiations , Greece ’ s leaders were driven by more than economics .
Perhaps , contrary to popular belief , countries ’ political attachment to Europe via the euro remains very strong , even where , as in Greece , people have endured unprecedented hardship since joining the monetary union .
The monetary union ’ s rationale , as many have noted , was always more political than economic .
For precisely that reason , it may well be too early to write off the single currency .
