Washington and the Art of the Possible
CHICAGO – These days , the United States media are full of ordinary Americans venting their rage at the incompetence and immaturity of their politicians .
Even though the US government ’ s debt limit was raised in the nick of time , the process was – and remains – fraught with risk .
Why , the public asks , can ’ t politicians sit down together like sensible adults and come up with a timely agreement that commands broad consensus ?
If we can balance our household budgets , they ask irately , why can ’ t our political leaders ?
The reality , though , is that US politicians reflect the views of the American electorate – views that are fundamentally inconsistent .
The absence of broad consensus is no wonder .
Indeed , the last-minute agreement to raise the debt ceiling is proof that the politicians did what they were sent to Washington to do : represent their constituencies and only compromise in the interests of the country as a whole .
The key question is whether the political gridlock exposed by the debt-ceiling debate will worsen in the run-up to the 2012 presidential and congressional elections – if not beyond .
That is possible , but we should not overlook cause for hope in what America ’ s politicians just accomplished .
Let ’ s start with why the electorate is so polarized .
There are two key divisive factors : income and age .
Income inequality has been growing in the US over the last three decades , largely because the labor market has increasingly demanded skills that the education system has been unable to supply .
The everyday consequence for the middle class is a stagnant paycheck and growing employment insecurity , as the old economy of well-paying low-skilled jobs with good benefits withers away .
Until the financial crisis , the easy availability of credit , especially against home equity , enabled the middle class to sustain higher consumption despite stagnant incomes .
With the collapse of the housing bubble , many people lost their jobs and health insurance , risked losing their homes , and suddenly had little reason for economic optimism .
The response from America ’ s Democratic Party , which has traditionally represented this constituency , was to promise affordable universal health care and more education spending , while also protecting government jobs and entitlement programs .
When added up , such spending is unaffordable , especially with current federal revenues at just 15 % of GDP .
The solution for many Democrats is to raise revenues by taxing the rich .
But the rich are not the idle rich of the past ; they are the working rich .
To balance the budget only by taxing the rich will require a significant increase in income taxes , to the point that it would lower incentives for work and entrepreneurial activity considerably .
This is not to say that taxes on the rich cannot be increased at all ; but such increases cannot be the primary way of balancing the budget .
Republicans , trying to give voice to many working Americans ’ ambient uneasiness with rising government expenditures , as well as to the growing anger of the working rich , find it easier to defend a principle than a particular constituency .
Hence their mantra : no additional taxes .
The neat divide based on income is muddled by the elderly .
It is understandable that older Americans who have few savings want to protect their Social Security and Medicare benefits .
However , even elderly Tea Party Republicans , who are typically against big government , defend these programs because they view them as a form of property right , paid for when they worked .
In truth , rising life expectancy and growing health-care costs mean that today ’ s elderly have contributed only a fraction of what they expect to receive from Social Security and Medicare .
The government made a mistake in the past by not raising taxes to finance these programs or reducing the benefits that they promised .
Unless the growth of these entitlement programs is curbed now , today ’ s young will pay dearly for that mistake , in the form of higher taxes now and lower benefits when they are old .
But the elderly are politically active and powerful .
Not only do many defend their entitlements strongly ; some oppose growth in other types of public spending for fear that it will weaken the government ’ s ability to pay for the benefits that they believe they are owed .
These then are the roots of America fiscal impasse , which has produced passionate constituencies viscerally opposed to compromise .
Any political deal significantly before the debt-ceiling deadline would have exposed politicians to charges of betrayal from their constituents .
And , given that President Barack Obama would ultimately be held responsible for a default , he needed the deal more than the Republicans did .
So he had to coerce his party into accepting a deal full of spending cuts and devoid of tax increases .
Will the deal deliver what it promises ?
A bipartisan committee has to propose $ 1.5 trillion in deficit reduction by the end of this year , and Congress must either accept that proposal , or see immediate , politically painful expenditure cuts , which would include defense spending – an area that America ’ s Republicans care about strongly .
If this structure works as advertised , Congress will be forced to reach a compromise , which can be sold once again by politicians to their polarized constituencies as being necessary to avoid a worse outcome .
This time , Obama ’ s Democrats will be on a level playing field , because both parties will be held equally responsible for a failure to reach a deal .
Ultimately , the big necessary decisions on curbing entitlement growth and reforming the tax code will probably have to wait until after the next election , giving the divided electorate an opportunity to reflect on its own inconsistency and send a clearer message .
In the meantime , US politicians might have done just about enough to convince debt markets that America ’ s credit is still good .
For that , Americans – and others around the world – should stop pillorying them and give them their due credit .
