Who ’ s Afraid of Climate Change ?
COPENHAGEN – Imagine that over the next 70 or 80 years , a giant port city – say , Tokyo – found itself engulfed by sea levels rising as much as 15 feet or more .
Millions of inhabitants would be imperiled , along with trillions of dollars worth of infrastructure .
This awful prospect is exactly the sort of thing global-warming evangelists like Al Gore have in mind when they warn that we must take “ large-scale , preventive measures to protect human civilization as we know it . ”
The rhetoric may sound extreme , but with so much hanging in the balance , surely it ’ s justified .
Without a vast , highly coordinated global effort , how could we possibly cope with sea-level rises on that order of magnitude ?
Well , we already have . In fact , we ’ re doing it right now .
Since 1930 , excessive groundwater withdrawal has caused Tokyo to subside by as much as 15 feet , with some of the lowest parts of the downtown area dropping almost a foot per year in some years .
Similar subsidence has occurred over the past century in a wide range of cities , including Tianjin , Shanghai , Osaka , Bangkok , and Jakarta .
In each case , the city has managed to protect itself from such large sea-level rises and thrive .
The point isn ’ t that we can or should ignore global warming .
The point is that we should be wary of hyperbolic predictions .
More often than not , what sound like horrific changes in climate and geography actually turn out to be manageable – and in some cases even benign .
Consider , for example , the findings of climate scientists Robert J. Nicholls , Richard S.J. Tol , and Athanasios T. Vafeidis .
In research funded by the European Union , they studied what the global economic impact would be if global warming were to result in a collapse of the entire West Antarctic Ice Sheet .
An event of this magnitude would likely cause the oceans to rise by perhaps 20 feet over the next hundred years – precisely the sort of thing that environmental activists have in mind when they warn about potential end-of-the-world calamities .
But would it really be all that calamitous ?
Not according to Nicholls , Tol , and Vafeidis .
Here are the facts .
A 20-foot rise in sea levels ( which , not incidentally , is about ten times more than the United Nations climate panel ’ s worst-case expectations ) would inundate about 16,000 square miles of coastline , where more than 400 million people currently live .
That ’ s a lot of people , to be sure , but hardly all of mankind .
In fact , it amounts to less than 6 % of the world ’ s population – which is to say that 94 % of the population would not be inundated .
And most of those who do live in the flood areas would never even get their feet wet .
That ’ s because the vast majority of those 400 million people reside within cities , where they could be protected relatively easily , as in Tokyo .
As a result , only about 15 million people would have to be relocated .
And that is over the course of a century .
In all , according to Nicholls , Tol , and Vafeidis , the total cost of managing this “ catastrophe ” – if politicians do not dither and pursue smart , coordinated policies – would be about $ 600 billion a year , or less than 1 % of global GDP .
This figure may seem surprisingly low , but that is only because so many of us have accepted the widespread view that we lack the capacity to adapt to large rises in sea levels .
Not only do we have this capacity , but we have demonstrated it many times in the past .
Like it or not , global warming is real , it is man-made , and we need to do something about it .
But we are not facing the end of the world .
Climate science is a subtle and fiendishly convoluted discipline that rarely yields unambiguous forecasts or straightforward prescriptions .
And after 20 years of much talk but precious little action on global warming , a certain amount of frustration is to be expected .
There is an understandable desire to want to cut through the verbiage and shake people by the shoulders .
Unfortunately , trying to scare the socks off of people doesn ’ t help matters .
Yes , a startling statistic , combined with some hyperbolic prose , will make us sit up and pay attention .
But we quickly become desensitized , requiring ever more outrageous scenarios to move us .
As the scare stories become more inflated , so , too , does the likelihood that they will be exposed for the exaggerations that they are – and the public will end up tuning the whole thing out .
This may explain recent polling data showing that public concern about global warming has declined precipitously in the last three years .
In the United States , for example , the Pew Institute reported that the number of Americans who regard global warming as a very serious problem had declined from 44 % in April 2008 to only 35 % last October .
More recently , a BBC study found that only 26 % of Britons believe that man-made “ climate change is happening , ” down from 41 % in November 2009 .
And in Germany , Der Spiegel magazine reported survey results showing that only 42 % feared global warming , compared with 62 % in 2006 .
Fear may be a great motivator in the short term , but it is a terrible basis for making smart decisions about a complicated problem that demands our full intelligence for a long period .
