Rule , Germania
PRINCETON – A persistent theme – indeed the leitmotif – of the way that German leaders discuss the eurozone is their insistence on the importance of following the rules .
That refrain is followed by a chorus from the rest of the monetary union demanding to know why Germany is taking such an inflexible approach .
The answer , it turns out , reflects the way Germany ’ s federal system of government has shaped its decision-making , as well as Germany ’ s historic experience with debt crises .
Germany ’ s obsession with rules long predates the current eurozone crisis .
The country ’ s policymakers always insisted that Europe could not have a common currency without first achieving economic convergence .
But that looked like it would never happen .
So , in the 1990s , as the eurozone was being established , Germany argued for rigorous enforcement of the “ convergence criteria , ” the requirements necessary for adopting the euro .
Economists in every other country ridiculed the Teutonic fixation on firm rules .
There is no reason , for example , why a debt-to-GDP ratio of 59 % should be considered safe , but 62 % regarded as irresponsibly dangerous .
But the Germans insisted – and ultimately got what they wanted .
That approach stemmed in part from Germany ’ s political structure .
The more federal a country ’ s system of government is , the more rules are needed to ensure its smooth functioning .
When the responsibilities of different levels of government are not clearly delimited , there is the danger that officials will try to pass burdens to higher levels .
In order to avoid this , federations often adopt a legalistic approach .
Indeed , there is a strong correlation , historically , between successful federations and a stable monetary policy undergirded by clear rules .
In the late twentieth century , Switzerland , Germany , and the United States – all federal countries – were pioneers in applying a stability-oriented monetary policy .
Given that the eurozone is in many ways federal in its structure , a clear commitment to the rules seemed to Germany to be a prerequisite for its success .
To be sure , even Germans know that rules sometimes need to be bent .
Thinkers as far back as Aristotle have argued that rules fail when they are too rigid .
In the Nicomachean Ethics , Aristotle pointed to the use by sculptors on the island of Lesbos of rulers made from flexible lead – rather than rigid iron – for cutting curved lines in stone .
The ability to reshape the rulers to fit the stone served as a metaphor for the need to adjust laws when circumstance change .
But when it comes to debt , Germans have insisted on using the most rigid of rulers .
Since the beginning of the eurozone crisis , the German government dug in its heels on European treaty provisions that it interprets as forbidding bailouts and monetary financing of government debt .
Recently , Germany reacted to a proposal to forgive a portion of Greece ’ s debt by maintaining that the treaty provision that proscribes bailouts also rules out state bankruptcies and debt forgiveness .
The lesson that Germany has taken from its history is that debt is an area in which flexibility must be steadfastly avoided .
This might come as a surprise to American commentators , who have argued that Germany is acting hypocritically , having defaulted on its debts in 1923 , 1932-1933 , 1945 , and 1953 , only to insist today that others do differently .
The truth is that Germans viewed nearly all of those defaults as destabilizing .
The internal default in 1923 , conducted via hyperinflation , weakened the German financial system and helped cause the Great Depression .
The defaults in the early 1930s became inevitable when Germany could not access private capital markets and the country had lost faith in its future .
Rather than set the stage for a sustainable economic recovery , deflation and default fanned the flames of nationalism – to disastrous effect .
The default of 1945 was the consequence of losing World War II .
Indeed , the tradition of so-called Ordoliberalism that has shaped Germany ’ s post-war economic policy was a response to the Nazis ’ destructive arbitrariness .
Only the debt cancellation of 1953 is viewed in a positive light in Germany , and a look at the circumstances in which it occurred reveals much about the country ’ s approach to the eurozone crisis .
As the Yale economist Timothy Guinnane has shown , the debt that was canceled was not the principal , but accumulated interest arrears that had not been paid between the Great Depression and WWII .
More important , from Germany ’ s perspective , was the political context in which the negotiations took place .
For starters , there had been a complete regime change in Germany .
The victorious Allies had removed those responsible for the destructive , destabilizing policies of the past , providing the country with a clean break and its debtors with confidence that Germany was on a new course .
Furthermore , Germany ’ s new policymakers had demonstrated their financial seriousness .
In 1950 , the country had undergone a severe balance-of-payments crisis .
Some officials were in favor of capital controls , but the government instead implemented monetary austerity .
This experience explains another of Germany ’ s obsessions : reforms in debtor countries .
Germany needed a complete change of its domestic regime to break out of its cycle of debt and default .
That might be a bit much to ask in the context of the eurozone ; but , without a fundamental reorientation of a country ’ s politics , the thinking in Germany goes , debt forgiveness will always remain a futile exercise .
