A Democratic Burma ?
TOKYO – Historic transformations often happen when least expected .
Mikhail Gorbachev ’ s liberalizing policies of glasnost and perestroika in the Soviet Union emerged at one of the Cold War ’ s darkest hours , with US President Ronald Reagan pushing for strategic missile defense and the two sides fighting proxy wars in Afghanistan and elsewhere .
Deng Xiaoping ’ s economic opening followed China ’ s bloody – and failed – invasion of Vietnam in 1978 .
And South Africa ’ s last apartheid leader , F. W. de Klerk , was initially perceived as just another apologist for the system – hardly the man to free Nelson Mandela and oversee the end of white minority rule .
Now the world is suddenly asking whether Burma ( Myanmar ) , after six decades of military dictatorship , has embarked on a genuine political transition that could end the country ’ s pariah status .
Is Burma , like South Africa under de Klerk , truly poised to emerge from a half-century of self-imposed isolation ?
And can Aung San Suu Kyi , the heroic opposition leader , and Thein Sein , Burma ’ s new president , engineer a political transition as skillfully and peacefully as Mandela and de Klerk did for South Africa in the early 1990 ’ s ?
Despite her two decades of house arrest and isolation , Suu Kyi possesses two of the gifts that enabled Mandela to carry out his great task : a reassuring serenity and an utter lack of vindictiveness .
As Burma ’ s authorities test reform , these gifts , together with her negotiating skills and , most of all , her vast moral authority , will be tested as never before .
Moreover , unlike Mandela during his 27-year imprisonment , Suu Kyi has had her hopes raised – and dashed – before .
In the mid-1990 ’ s , and again in 2002-2003 , reconciliation between Suu Kyi ’ s National League for Democracy ( NLD ) and the military junta seemed to be in the offing .
On both occasions , however , the regime ’ s hardliners gained the upper hand , crushing prospects for reform .
Yet Suu Kyi , and much of the Burmese opposition , is beginning to admit that today ’ s political liberalization might be the real thing .
Because Burma ’ s generals say almost nothing in public , it is difficult to fathom why they allowed elections that elevated Thein Sein to power , or to explain their willingness to embrace dialogue with the long-suppressed opposition .
Recent events suggest one possible explanation : Burma ’ s rulers have grown wary of China ’ s almost smothering embrace – a result of the country ’ s international isolation .
Indeed , public protests against China ’ s commercial exploitation of Burma ’ s natural resources became so widespread that the government called a halt to construction by Chinese investors on the huge and environmentally damaging Myitsone Dam on the Irrawaddy River .
Thein Sein ’ s decision to halt the project is clearly an important policy shift .
It is also a signal to the outside world that Burma ’ s new government may be much more willing than any of its predecessors to heed both public pressure and international opinion , both of which vehemently opposed the dam ’ s construction .
Almost simultaneously , Thein Sein offered even stronger signals that his was a very different Burmese administration : he freed political prisoners and invited Suu Kyi for direct talks with him .
Indeed , Suu Kyi now enjoys far greater freedom of movement than she has at any time since she received the Nobel Peace Prize 20 years ago , and the NLD recently announced that it will field candidates in the forthcoming by-elections to the country ’ s newly established parliament .
If Suu Kyi is permitted to campaign free of restraint , for both her own seat and to boost the electoral chances of her NLD colleagues , it will be clear that Thein Sein and his government are truly determined to bring their country in from the cold .
For both Suu Kyi and Thein Sein , every step from now on will be delicate , to be calibrated with the same care and deliberation that Mandela and de Klerk used in bridging their differences and leading their country out of isolation .
But the international community , too , must act with great care .
While Thein Sein would undoubtedly wish to see the myriad economic and political sanctions imposed on Burma quickly lifted , it is too soon for a general easing of such measures .
But the outside world should demonstrate that every clear move toward greater political openness will merit more international political and economic engagement .
The Japan Investment Bank ’ s decision to invest in port development in Burma – essential if the economy , too , is to be opened – is one positive sign that the world will keep pace with Thein Sein step for step .
And US President Barack Obama ’ s decision to send Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to Burma to meet Thein Sein is another clear sign that the world is ready to end the country ’ s isolation .
Closer to home , ASEAN ’ s recent decision to give Burma a chance to chair the organization in 2014 underscores its neighbors ’ desire for the country ’ s full participation in Asia ’ s growing prosperity .
No one should rush to judgment yet , but Thein Sein ’ s decisions , at least so far , are beginning to resemble those of South Africa ’ s de Klerk when he initiated his country ’ s reform process .
Fortunately , Burma already has in Aung San Suu Kyi its very own Nelson Mandela .
