Austria : Values and Responsibilities
VIENNA : The formation of a new government coalition in Austria has given rise to international criticism .
As Federal Chancellor of the Republic of Austria I take those concerns very seriously .
However , in studying international media reports , I cannot but notice that Austria has repeatedly been described in a rather undifferentiated and unbalanced way ; a way that stands in sharp contradiction to the realities in our country .
Over the last fifty years , Austria has always been a responsible and reliable partner in Europe and the entire international community .
It will continue to live up to her traditional values and responsibilities , based on democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights , openness , tolerance , humanitarian solidarity , a sense of duty and reliability .
These principles are reiterated in the Preamble to the Government Program .
It was signed , on 3 February 2000 , in the presence of Federal President Thomas Klestil , by myself and the chairman of the Austrian Freedom Party , Jörg Haider - who remains Governor of Carinthia and did not join the Federal Government .
This document is binding on both of us as signatories , on our respective political parties , and on their democratically elected representatives .
It will guide the future work of the Coalition Government .
Austria is strongly committed to the principles of liberty , democracy , respect for human rights , and the rule of law that are common to all EU member states .
Significantly , two thirds of the Austrian electorate cast their votes in favor of membership in the European Union in 1994 .
This support was considerably higher than in any of the other fourteen member states when they were joining the European Union .
In Austria 's view , the Transatlantic Partnership , which has always been characterized by mutual respect and trust , will also have a special significance in ensuring future peace , stability , and prosperity .
Austria takes pride in its international solidarity with the victims of political repression , war , and expulsion .
We opened our doors in 1956 and 1968 during the crises in Hungary and Czechoslovakia , and again in the 1990s when more than 100 000 refugees from the Balkans found a new home in our country .
As a proportion of Austria = s population of about 8 million , the number of Balkan refugees alone would be equivalent to over 1 million refugees in Germany and over 3 million in the United States .
Thus , over the last decades , Austria - more than most other countries - has demonstrated her profound social and humanitarian responsibility .
Austria 's past calls for an intensely critical and sensitive approach to injustice , murder , and terror under the Nazi regime .
We have taken important steps to deal with this past , and the new Federal Government will continue on this path without hesitation .
Based on the findings of the interim report of the Austrian Historians ' Commission , we will seek prompt compensation for former forced laborers , and we expect the companies concerned also to recognize their responsibilities .
To expedite matters , I have appointed a special representative for the question of forced and slave labor under the Nazi regime .
Mrs. Maria Schaumayer , the former head of the Austrian central bank , will head a new office to handle the issue of compensating the victims .
Among my government = s other commitments , compensation of aging victims of the Holocaust , who live in difficult financial circumstances , will be among our highest priorities in the next few months .
The Austrian Government will also support open access to archives in federal agencies and advocate a similar policy for non-governmental entities .
We will encourage Austrian insurance companies to participate in the work of the International Commission on Holocaust Era Insurance Claims .
We will seek to improve the practical application of the Art Restitution Law of 1998 and encourage similar restitution steps among local and regional governmental bodies .
My Government is deeply committed to the protection of human rights and to combating racism and discrimination .
We have a highly developed national human rights legislation and practice , as well as a strong and independent judiciary .
Austria is party to practically all major international human rights treaties and has traditionally played an active part in their drafting .
We have not only ratified the European Human Rights Convention , we also made it a part of our own Constitution .
This means that anyone residing in Austria can file a complaint to the European Court for Human Rights , whose judgements are binding on the government .
Austria is also constitutionally bound by the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination .
As Federal Chancellor of the Republic of Austria I will do my utmost do ensure the strict implementation of the Preamble and the Government Program ( which can be found on the website of the Austrian Federal Government http : / / www.austria.gv.at. )
I myself and the other members of the Austrian Federal Government expect to be judged according to our performance rather than on the basis of prejudice .
