Twilight of a Pontiff
Once again Pope John Paul II has returned to hospital , gravely ill .
Even for non-Catholics like myself , this is an occasion to ponder what the world will lose when the Pope ’ s body finally succumbs to his ailments .
The picture that emerges is one of a mixture of colors .
For those of us who regard the collapse of communism in 1989 as a seminal event of twentieth-century history , Pope John Paul is a hero .
In Poland , he was the focus of all the activities of civil society .
While in other countries , most emphatically in Romania , but also in what was then Czechoslovakia and in Hungary , the alternative to communism was a vacuum or at best a few isolated organizations in civil society , Poland had an alternative source of legitimacy .
Before and after his election , the then Cardinal Karol Wojtyla of Krakow was its most effective representative .
Cardinal Wojtyla ’ s election as Pope therefore had a significance far beyond the confines of the Church .
Actually he himself did not like the identification of his church with civil society .
In a conversation he protested : “ No , the Church is not civil society , it is sacred society . ”
This points to another aspect of John Paul II ’ s papacy , more relevant to insiders than to outsiders .
In matters of doctrine and ethics , John Paul II represented the conservative view .
He was the counterpoint to Pope John XXIII , who , through the Second Vatican Council of the 1960 ’ s and in numerous other ways , tried to reconcile Catholics with the modern age .
Pope John Paul arrested this process and even tried to reverse it .
For progressive theologians like Hans Küng , he was and is therefore a force of anti-modernism , even counter-enlightenment .
At the same time , the Pope became the first great traveling Pontiff of modern times , almost a symbol of a globalized world .
This meant that his image if not his words reached out to millions who do not belong to his church .
There can be few people who will be recognized as widely all over the globe as John Paul II .
By that fact alone , he added a spiritual dimension to an age which is dominated by worldly concerns , such as wealth and show business .
Those of us who believe in a multidimensional culture will be grateful to him for his enormous efforts , thus for his “ catholicism ” in the original sense of the word , his all-embracing concerns .
On the other side of the balance sheet , and despite his global outreach , Pope John Paul II cannot be described as particularly ecumenical .
The beginnings of Christian ecumenicism under his predecessors did not advance much in his 25 years .
Paradoxically , he found it easier to reach out to non-Christian religions .
The Catholic-Jewish dialogue in particular was in good hands with him .
When a distinguished Jewish scholar thanked him for what he had done to cultivate Catholic-Jewish relations , he replied : “ That was not me , that was Providence , ” and then added with his inimitable smile : “ And me . ”
Has he been a man of peace ?
Yes , of course .
But his reign spans a time in which numerous regional conflicts turned violent .
There was little he could do in Kosovo or the Congo .
The years of John Paul II ’ s papacy have not actually been a time in which “ soft power ” could achieve a great deal anywhere , so that Stalin ’ s famous question , “ How many divisions has the Pope ? , ” remained topical .
This was all the more relevant to the extent that Pope John Paul II is not enamored with the United States .
There are indications that he shares the old central European prejudice of America as a materialist civilization that provides the wherewithal – but not the ideas – for what needs to be done .
The Pope ’ s legacy is , in other words , a story of great strengths and considerable weaknesses .
It would be incomplete , however , were one not to mention the warm , curious , friendly , and humorous human being underneath it all .
Pope John Paul II is in many ways an intellectual ; he may have been underrated in that regard .
However , he is also a simple man who connected without effort to others .
He bore his suffering since the assassination attempt of 1981 with dignity .
As a person , he never failed to impress his many visitors .
Even in his current reduced state due to his illness , Pope John Paul II symbolizes human potential .
