America ’ s Third-World Politics
CAMBRIDGE – With its presidential election over , the United States can finally take a breather from campaign politics , at least for a while .
But an uncomfortable question lingers : How is it possible for the world ’ s most powerful country and its oldest continuous democracy to exhibit a state of political discourse that is more reminiscent of a failed African state ?
Maybe that is too harsh an assessment of Africa ’ s nascent democracies .
If you think I exaggerate , you have not been paying close attention .
The pandering to extremist groups , the rejection of science , the outright lies and distortions , and the evasion of the real issues that characterized the most recent election cycle set a new low for democratic politics .
Without question , the worst offenders are America ’ s Republicans , whose leaders have somehow become enraptured by ideas that are beyond the pale in other advanced countries .
Of the party ’ s dozen presidential candidates , only two ( Mitt Romney and Jon Huntsman ) declined to reject scientific evidence concerning global warming and its human causes .
But , when pressed on it , Romney was sufficiently uncomfortable about his position that he wobbled on the issue .
The Darwinian theory of evolution has long been a dirty word among Republicans as well .
Rick Perry , the governor of Texas and an early frontrunner in the Republican primary , called it just a “ theory out there , ” while Romney himself has had to argue that it is consistent with creationism – the idea that an intelligent force designed the universe and brought it into being .
Likewise , if there is an archaic idea in economics , it is that the US should return to the Gold Standard .
Yet , this idea , too , has strong support within the Republican Party – led by Ron Paul , another contender for the party ’ s presidential nomination .
No one was surprised when the party ’ s platform gave a nod to the Gold Standard in its convention in August .
Most non-Americans would find it crazy that neither Romney nor Barack Obama supported stricter gun-control laws ( with Obama making an exception only for assault weapons such as AK-47s ) , in a country where it is sometimes easier to buy guns than it is to vote .
Most Europeans cannot understand how , in a civilized country , both candidates can favor the death penalty .
And I won ’ t even get into the abortion debate .
Candidate Romney was so cowed by his party ’ s obsession with low taxes that he never put forth a budget that added up .
It was left to his spinners to explain , as The Economist put it , that this was “ necessary rubbish , concocted to persuade the fanatics who vote in the Republican primaries . ”
Obama , for his part , catered to economic nationalists by attacking Romney as an “ outsourcing pioneer ” and calling him an “ outsourcer in chief ” – as if outsourcing were evil , could be stopped , or Obama himself had done much to discourage it .
So rampant were the equivocations , untruths , and outright lies from both camps that many media outlets and non-partisan groups maintained running lists of factual distortions .
One of the best known , FactCheck.org , an initiative of the Annenberg Public Policy Center at the University of Pennsylvania , confessed that this campaign had kept them exceptionally busy .
Some of the most egregious examples included Obama ’ s claims that Romney was planning to raise taxes by $ 2,000 on middle-income taxpayers and / or cut taxes by $ 5 trillion , and that Romney backed a law that would outlaw “ all abortions , even in cases of rape and incest . ”
Romney went even further , claiming that Obama planned to raise taxes by $ 4,000 on middle-income taxpayers ; that Obama planned “ to gut welfare reform by dropping work requirements ” ; and that Chrysler , bailed out by the Obama administration , was moving all of its Jeep production to China .
None of these claims was true . & nbsp ;
“ It ’ s been that sort of campaign , ” FactCheck.org ’ s analysts wrote , “ filled from beginning to end with deceptive attacks and counterattacks , and dubious claims . ” & nbsp ;
Meanwhile , over the course of three televised presidential debates and one vice-presidential debate , climate change , the signature issue of our time and the most serious problem confronting our planet , was not mentioned even once .
One can draw two possible conclusions from America ’ s election .
One is that the US will ultimately be undone by the poor quality of its democratic discourse , and that it is merely at the start of an inevitable decline .
The symptoms are there , even if the disease has not yet infected the entire body .
The other possibility is that what is said and done during an election makes little difference to a polity ’ s health .
Campaigns are always a time for cheap populism and kowtowing to single-issue fundamentalists .
Perhaps what really matters is what happens after a candidate takes office : the quality of the checks and balances within which he or she operates , the advice offered , the decisions taken , and , ultimately , the policies pursued .
But , if American elections are nothing other than entertainment , why is so much money spent on them , and why do so many people get so exercised over them ?
Can the answer be that the outcome would be even worse otherwise ?
To paraphrase Winston Churchill , elections are the worst way to select a political leader , save for all other methods that have been tried – and nowhere more so than in America .
