Winning the European Confidence Game
CHICAGO – If any solution to the European crisis proposed over the next few days is to restore confidence to the sovereign-bond markets , it will have to be both economically viable and politically palatable to rescuers and rescued alike .
This means paying attention not just to the plan ’ s technical details , but also to appearances .
There is growing consensus about any solution ’ s key elements .
First , Italy and Spain will have to come up with credible medium-term plans that will not just restore their fiscal health , but also improve their ability to grow their way out of trouble .
While any plan will involve pain for citizens , the markets must deem the pain politically tolerable , at least relative to the alternatives .
It is important that these plans be seen as domestically devised ( though voters will have no illusions about the external and market pressures that have forced their governments to act ) .
At the same time , an external agency such as the International Monetary Fund could render the plan more credible by evaluating it for consistency with the country ’ s goals and monitoring its implementation .
Second , some vehicle – the IMF or the European Financial Stability Facility , with either entity funded directly by countries or the European Central Bank – has to stand ready to fund borrowing by Italy , Spain , and any other potentially distressed countries over the next year or two .
But there is an important caveat , which has largely been ignored in public discussions : if this funding is senior to private debt ( as IMF funding typically is ) , it will be harder for these countries to regain access to markets .
After all , the more a country borrows in the short term from official sources , the further back in line it pushes private creditors .
That makes private lenders susceptible to larger haircuts if the country eventually defaults – and thus more hesitant to lend in the first place .
In other words , private markets need to be convinced both that there is a low probability of default ( hence the importance of credible plans ) , and that there is some additional loss-bearing capacity in the new funding , so that , if there is a default , outstanding or rolled-over private debt does not have to bear the full brunt .
This may seem unfair .
Why should the taxpayer accept a loss when they are bailing out the private sector by providing new funding ?
In an ideal world , distressed countries would default as soon as private markets stopped funding them , and they would impose the losses on private bondholders .
In the real world , however , if Italy and Spain are viewed as being solvent , or too big to fail , official funding should be structured so that it gives these countries their best chance to regain market confidence .
This does not mean that official funding should be junior to private debt in any restructuring , for that would require substantially more loss-bearing capacity from the official sector – capacity that is probably not available .
Indeed , if official funding were junior , it would be providing a larger cushion to private creditors – and thus bailing them out to an even greater extent .
The simplest solution is to treat official funding no differently from private debt – best achieved if official lenders buy sovereign bonds as they are issued ( possibly at a predetermined yield ) and agree to be treated on par with private creditors in a restructuring .
As the country regains market confidence , the official funding can be reduced , and eventually the bonds can be sold back to the markets .
The bottom line is that official funding must be accompanied by loss-bearing capacity .
If the funding is channeled through the IMF , and is to be treated on par with private debt , the Fund will need a guarantee from the EFSF or strong eurozone countries that it will be indemnified in any restructuring .
Of course , the IMF ’ s member states might be willing to accept some burden sharing if a sufficient buffer provided by the eurozone were eroded , but that cannot be taken for granted .
Once the first two elements of the plan are in place , there should be little need for the third – bond purchases by the ECB in the secondary market in order to narrow interest-rate spreads and provide further confidence .
Indeed , if the ECB intends to claim preferred-creditor status for any bonds that it buys , it is probably best that it buy very few .
Of course , the ECB will have to continue to provide support to banks until confidence about their holdings returns .
But there is one more element that is needed to assure markets that the solution is politically viable .
Citizens across Europe , whether in rescued countries or rescuing countries , will be paying for years to clean up a mess for which they were not responsible .
Not all banks voluntarily loaded up on distressed government bonds – some were pressured by supervisors , others by governments – but many have made unwise bets .
If they are seen as profiting unduly from the rescue , even as they return to their bad old ways of paying for non-performance , they will undermine political support for the rescue – and perhaps even for capitalism .
So a final element of the package ought to be a monitored pledge by eurozone banks that they will not unload bonds as the official sector steps in ; that they will raise capital over time instead of continuing to deleverage ( if this hurts bank equity holders , they should think of this as burden sharing ) ; and that they will be circumspect about banker bonuses until economies start growing strongly again .
Cries that this is not capitalism should be met with a firm retort : “ Nor are bailouts ! ”
