Whither Africa ’ s “ Frontier Markets ” ?
NEW YORK – Zimbabwe ’ s election appears , once again , to confirm a truism : Africa only seems to make international headlines when disasters strike – a drought , a coup , a war , a genocide , or , as in the case of Robert Mugabe , grossly incompetent government .
But , over the past several years , a number of sub-Saharan countries have attracted unprecedented inflows of foreign capital .
Recent global financial turmoil has only added to Africa ’ s allure , because its frontier markets are less vulnerable to international volatility than are most of the world ’ s more familiar emerging economies .
There are three main reasons why many sub-Saharan countries are performing well .
First , high commodity prices yield windfall profits for the region ’ s leading producers of raw materials .
Growing demand for energy , metals , and minerals – particularly in China – has driven unprecedented levels of foreign investment .
Even large pension funds are beginning to take notice .
Moreover , a large number of Africa ’ s poorest countries have benefited from exponential growth in ( primarily United States-based ) philanthropy .
But , while both of these positive trends are likely to continue , a third positive factor may not prove as durable .
Every year , Africans living outside the continent send roughly $ 30 billion to family and friends back home .
These remittances are vitally important for economic stability in several African countries .
An economic slowdown in the US and Europe could substantially slow this infusion of cash , because immigrants are often the first to lose their jobs when recession fears take hold .
At the same time , though Africa ’ s frontier economies are less vulnerable than other emerging markets to global financial turbulence , they are highly vulnerable to political turmoil closer to home .
The three countries that served as pillars of regional stability for the past several years – Nigeria , Kenya , and South Africa – are now too pre-occupied with political troubles of their own to provide the peacekeepers , reconstruction funds , and political pressure that often limit the damage from conflicts elsewhere in the region .
Most of Nigeria ’ s problems are well known .
Militants in the oil-rich Niger Delta region have at times shut down as much as 30 % of the country ’ s oil exports , a vital source of state revenue .
President Umaru Yar ’ Adua has taken concrete steps to tackle elite-level corruption in Nigeria , and appears to have made progress toward a comprehensive peace agreement with the Delta rebels .
But Yar ’ Adua might soon confront a big short-term problem .
The country ’ s National Election Tribunal , having overturned the outcomes of several provincial elections , may well annul the results of last year ’ s presidential race , forcing him to run for president all over again .
While Yar ’ Adua could use the goodwill that he has built up over the past year to win by an even larger margin , the 90-day election campaign would almost certainly trigger civil unrest , and Nigeria ’ s leadership would be too busy navigating domestic political rivalries to help stabilize conflicts elsewhere in Africa .
Kenya ’ s troubles run deeper .
Solid economic expansion and one of the world ’ s fastest-growing stock markets have not helped the country avert a deepening political crisis and mounting ethnic violence since disputed presidential election results in December .
President Mwai Kibaki , whom international observers accuse of rigging the vote , has hinted at a plan to share power in a unity government , but opposition leader Raila Odinga has heard these promises before .
Odinga worked hard to help elect Kibaki in 2002 , only to see Kibaki renege on a similar pledge .
Despite the alarming escalation in violence , fears of civil war in Kenya are probably exaggerated .
The country ’ s Orange opposition movement has recently won key posts in parliament and , for the moment , is heeding calls for calm from former United nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan and representatives of the African Union .
But no one should expect Kenya to play a stabilizing regional role again anytime soon .
The continent ’ s third pillar , South Africa , will spend 2008 mired in an escalating political feud between Thabo Mbeki , the lame-duck president , and Jacob Zuma , a former deputy who is the newly elected leader of the ruling African National Congress and the leading candidate to succeed Mbeki , his bitter rival , next year .
South Africa ’ s courts have become a political battleground , as Mbeki and his allies use corruption charges to try to cripple Zuma ’ s candidacy .
The resulting political firestorm may well force Zuma to rely on core support from key allies within the country ’ s trade union movement and Communist Party , challenging the political elite ’ s pro-market consensus and provoking debate over the future of South Africa ’ s economic policy .
No countries in sub-Saharan Africa will have the economic heft and political self-confidence to replace Nigeria , Kenya , and South Africa as pillars of stability anytime soon .
Regional blocs like the Economic Community of West African States ( ECOWAS ) , the Southern African Customs Union ( SACU ) , and the East African Community ( EAC ) will eventually assume larger roles in helping resolve the continent ’ s most intractable diplomatic and economic problems .
But that won ’ t happen this year .
There remain many good reasons for investors to take a chance on Africa ’ s frontier markets .
But it will not necessarily take a drought , a coup , a war , or a genocide to make them think twice .
