The Walls of August
MOSCOW – History ’ s milestones are rarely so neatly arrayed as they are this summer .
Fifty years ago this month , the Berlin Wall was born .
After some hesitation , Nikita Khrushchev , the Soviet Union ’ s leader , allowed his East German counterpart , Walter Ulbricht , to erect a barrier between East and West Berlin in order to ensure the survival of communism in the entire Soviet bloc .
By that point , East Germany had hemorrhaged three million people – including many of its most talented – as hundreds each day peacefully walked into the zones of Berlin that were controlled by the United States , the United Kingdom , and France .
And 20 years ago this month , hardliners in the Soviet government attempted to overthrow President Mikhail Gorbachev , who , two years after US President Ronald Reagan memorably called on him to “ tear down this wall , ” had done just that .
Somewhat miraculously , a reformer who wanted Russians to be part of the democratic West had come to power in the Kremlin .
Gorbachev ’ s hard-line Politburo adversaries , like those who had hemmed in Khrushchev at the time of the Berlin Wall ’ s construction , were determined to preserve the decrepit system that the Wall symbolized .
But , in August 1991 , ordinary Muscovites stood their ground .
They defied the coup makers , and in the end carried with them much of the Russian Army .
With their defiance , the coup was doomed .
Berliners never stood a similar chance in the face of Soviet power .
Khrushchev had assented to Ulbricht ’ s plea that only a physical barrier would maintain the viability of the East German state .
Khrushchev ’ s response was reminiscent of how he dealt with the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 , a time when he was just consolidating his rule and needed to keep Kremlin hardliners at bay .
But five years after the brutal suppression of the demands for freedom heard in Budapest , Khrushchev was not fully convinced of the need to divide Berlin .
He feared that his policy of improved relations with Western Europe would be destroyed in the process , and that President John F. Kennedy would view the Wall as the first provocative step in a confrontation that could lead to nuclear war .
Khrushchev had placed enormous hope in the Soviet Union ’ s ability to build more positive relations with Europe , particularly after the U-2 spy plane incident in 1960 ( when the American pilot Gary Francis Powers was shot down over Soviet territory ) had poisoned relations with the US .
While his summit with Kennedy in Vienna earlier in 1961 had done nothing to improve the situation , erecting the Wall on August 13 seemed to him a purely defensive act , not a show of force .
Khrushchev was considering his own political fortunes as well .
Ever since his 1956 Secret Speech denouncing Stalin ’ s cult of personality , his position within the Politburo had weakened ; his support among the Kremlin leadership was shallow , and hardliners sniped at him from every direction .
In the end , the decision to build the Wall was a desperate bid both to secure the continuation of communist rule in East Germany and to appease his detractors .
Brinkmanship of the sort that took place as the Wall went up is usually the product of a politician desperate to shore up his domestic position .
The irony for Khrushchev was that , though the hardliners wanted the Wall , they later included his indecisiveness about the Wall on the charge sheet used to force his removal in 1964 .
His decision preserved Soviet rule in East Germany for decades , but contributed to his own political demise .
When Gorbachev allowed the Wall to be breached and then demolished , he alienated the bulk of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union even more than Khrushchev had .
Indeed , Gorbachev once told me how Nicolae Ceauşescu , Romania ’ s dictator , called him to request that tanks be sent into Berlin to preserve the Wall .
But Gorbachev , though still a believer in communism , refused to maintain the Soviet empire at the barrel of a gun .
His was a brinkmanship very different from Khrushchev ’ s : he was daring the West to recognize and accept that the USSR had truly changed .
In a conversation with then US Secretary of State James Baker , Gorbachev took issue with the American side constantly referring to the “ Western values of freedom , ” insisting that “ these are human values . ”
By the time the West came to believe that Gorbachev and his reforms were genuine , resentment among his Kremlin colleagues was boiling over .
The coup leaders of August 1991 viewed Gorbachev ’ s ouster the same way Ulbricht had regarded his demand for the Wall – as the only means to preserve communist rule .
When the West tried to warn Gorbachev that a coup was coming , it was already too late .
But ordinary Russians ’ sudden , unexpected defense of their newfound freedoms , together with the putschists ’ sheer incompetence , defeated the effort to restore totalitarian rule .
Had the Wall not been built in 1961 , would communism have collapsed sooner ?
Had Gorbachev responded to Ceauşescu ’ s plea and sent troops to defend the Wall , would communism in Europe ever have collapsed ?
These are unanswerable questions .
And , given that Gorbachev refused to use force anywhere to preserve the Soviet ’ s East European empire , the idea that he would do so to preserve the Wall seems preposterous .
What does seem clear is that , in the end , no wall can hold back democracy – and , conversely , that if a country ’ s people don ’ t want democracy enough , no Berlin Wall is needed to keep it out .
The world has Vladimir Putin to thank for that lesson .
