How to End an Insurgency
TOKYO – When the Moro Islamic Liberation Front guerrilla movement took up arms in the Philippines in the 1960 ’ s , Ferdinand Marcos had yet to become the country 's president – let alone dictator .
Despite the country ’ s many political transformations in the last half-century , the MILF ’ s campaign to achieve independence for the Bangsamoro nation – whose territory , they claim , covers the islands of Mindanao , Palawan , Sulu , and Sabah – remained constant , until President Benigno Aquino III resolved to change it .
The MILF was not deterred by the popular overthrow of Marcos ’ s 20-year dictatorship in 1986 , following the assassination of the opposition leader Benigno Aquino , Jr .
Nor did the establishment of democracy – now deeply entrenched – inspire the group ’ s leaders to reconsider their approach .
The MILF remained engaged in a brutal campaign of beheadings , assassination , kidnappings , and indiscriminate butchery .
Then , last January , Aquino managed to achieve a landmark deal that finally ended Mindanao ’ s agony .
This is one of the most remarkable feats of peacemaking in Asia since World War II , and at least as worthy of international recognition as former Finnish President and 2008 Nobel Peace Prize laureate Marti Ahtissari ’ s role in brokering peace in Aceh , Indonesia , in 2005 .
In fact , given the myriad security and political risks that Aquino ran in concluding a peace deal with the MILF , he may be an even worthier Nobel laureate .
Aquino ’ s approach to the negotiations reflected his recognition that the MILF had twice used peace talks – once brokered by Libya ’ s Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi – as a cynical ploy to buy time to regroup and raise funds ( including from Al Qaeda ) .
With freshly restocked arsenals , they would relaunch their campaign to seize Mindanao by force .
Against this background , it is no surprise that , when Aquino relaunched stalled peace talks in 2012 , the Filipino people were highly skeptical .
But , over time , the effort gained credibility .
Though questions about the peace agreement ’ s durability remain , with full disarmament yet to take place , the political autonomy granted to the country ’ s Muslim areas seems to have persuaded most MILF fighters that the time has come to end the carnage .
For the people of Mindanao , this is a life-changing development .
In the few short months since the peace deal was reached , Filipino and foreign investment has been flowing into the island .
With nearly half of Mindanao ’ s population living below the poverty line , these funds could not be more critical .
But the benefits of Aquino ’ s leadership are not limited to Mindanao .
His entire presidency , which began in 2010 , has been characterized by the creativity and doggedness that made peace with the MILF possible .
Whereas other Filipino leaders – including Aquino ’ s mother , Corazon Aquino , who was elected president after Marcos ’ s overthrow – spoke out against corruption , Aquino has attacked it at its roots .
He has brought to justice not only small-time wrongdoers – or “ flies , ” as Chinese President Xi Jinping ’ s calls such people – but also “ tigers ” like Senator Juan Ponce Enrile , who helped overthrow Marcos and bring Corazon Aquino to power two decades ago .
As a result , the Philippines has dramatically improved its ranking in Transparency International ’ s annual corruption index , rising from a 134th-place tie with Nigeria in 2010 , to 94th place , alongside India , last year .
Aquino ’ s efforts to fight corruption and rebuild his country ’ s economic foundations has enabled the Philippines – at long last – to become Southeast Asia ’ s fastest-growing economy , with annual GDP growth of 7.2 % last year .
While growth is expected to slow slightly this year , to 6.5 % , the Philippines can now be counted among Asia ’ s “ tiger ” economies .
Of course , the country still has a long way to go .
Some ten million Filipinos – one-quarter of the workforce ­ – ­ are compelled to seek employment overseas , owing to inadequate opportunities at home .
If the Philippines is to attract enough investment to achieve living standards comparable to Malaysia and Thailand , Aquino must remain persistent in his efforts to open the economy and curtail corruption .
Fortunately , he seems determined to do so .
Aquino ’ s foreign policy has also been characterized by the same resoluteness .
Nowhere is this more apparent than in his willingness to stand up to China ’ s territorial claims in the South China Sea .
Indeed , the Philippines is challenging China ’ s claims in the International Court of Arbitration , using provisions from the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea .
Aquino ’ s stern criticism of China ’ s expansionist policies has certainly not endeared him to the Chinese .
But regional powers like the United States and Japan have supported his stance , with Japan promising to deliver enhanced equipment for the Philippine Coast Guard .
And the Filipino people undoubtedly appreciate his tenacity in protecting their interests .
Aquino ’ s success in bringing the decades-old MILF rebellion to a peaceful end highlights a courage and tenacity that will enable him to play a key role in reining in China ’ s regional ambitions .
Just as David ’ s ingenuity enabled him , against all odds , to defeat Goliath , Aquino ’ s bold and calculated leadership can succeed in bolstering stability and security throughout Asia by bringing China , perhaps against its will , into a rules-based regional order .
