Unmasking the Man with the Wooden Face
Ever since he became General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and President of the Peoples ’ Republic of China four years ago , Hu Jintao has remained infuriatingly wooden-faced and opaque .
Over the past year , however , the shroud of mystery has begun to drop .
Hu ’ s unbridled glorification of “ Mao Zedong Thought , ” coupled with his suppression of dissent in the media , has begun not only to reveal a true authoritarian , but also to belie the wishful thinking of liberals , both inside and outside China , who hoped that Hu would be a reform-minded leader .
It was the late patriarch Deng Xiaoping who in 1992 made the surprising demand that Hu , former Secretary of the Communist Youth League and protégé of ousted party chief Hu Yaobang , be inducted into the Chinese Communist Party ’ s ( CCP ) Politburo Standing Committee .
Deng , in effect , personally designated Hu as successor to President Jiang Zemin .
As Deng had crushed the protestors in Tiananmen Square in June of 1989 , Hu had proven himself to be “ firm and resolute ” in quelling anti-Beijing riots in Lhasa , Tibet , two months earlier .
Both understood the dangers of political reform .
Hu , a life-long Party functionary , was able to fool most observers during his first year in office .
He and Premier Wen Jiabao – often called a latter-day Zhou Enlai for his administrative abilities and willingness to play second fiddle – rolled out one impressive slogan after another : “ Put people first , ” “ Run the country according to law , ” “ Render the media closer to the people , ” and “ Make government transparent . ”
The leadership seemed to be moving away from the ancien regime of Jiang .
Hu pledged to replace Deng ’ s elitist ethos of “ letting one part of the population get rich first ” – a policy that has produced a staggering wealth gap – with a more egalitarian approach .
As part of his government ’ s efforts “ to construct a harmonious society , ” a tax on agricultural produce was scrapped last year , while the State Council vowed to boost annual investment in rural infrastructure .
But Hu ’ s administration invariably slams on the brakes whenever their “ put-people-first ” initiatives begin to threaten one-party rule .
Hu ’ s Politburo has consistently refused to let peasants set up non-official farmers ’ associations or trade unions .
At the same time , it has allowed farmers across China to fall victim to an epidemic of illegal land grabs by local governments and developers .
Not only has Hu ’ s administration failed to protect the rights of the poor and the oppressed , but police and government-hired thugs now frequently harass lawyers and other activists who lobby on behalf of the country ’ s dispossessed .
Chen Guangcheng , a blind lawyer – famous for exposing a forced abortion scandal in Shandong – was given a four-year jail term on the dubious charge of “ organizing a mob to disturb traffic . ”
Perhaps the most revealing aspect of Hu ’ s rule is his failure to reform the government ’ s outmoded institutions .
In a landmark speech on administrative restructuring in 1980 , Deng underscored the urgency of bringing about a “ separation of party and government . ”
Hu , by contrast , seems to find little fault with the status quo , under which the Party remains in charge of not only government , but also state enterprises .
It is also becoming increasingly clear that Hu will continue to rely on a variety of politically retrograde propaganda tactics .
He has revived the use of ideological campaigns , akin to those used during the Cultural Revolution , such as a requirement that Party members study The Collected Works of Jiang Zemin .
Indeed , Hu has sought to restore some of Mao ’ s luster .
In a speech marking the Great Helmsman ’ s 110th birthday in late 2003 , he declared Mao to be a “ great proletariat revolutionary strategist and theorist . ”
While Deng had castigated Mao ’ s “ leftist ” errors , Hu ’ s hagiographic address made no mention of his manifold blunders .
Moreover , Hu has fomented nationalism , not by taking understandable pride in China ’ s impressive economic growth , but by demonizing Japan .
He has become increasingly reliant on the facile notion that state-sponsored patriotism and nationalism can hold China ’ s disparate groups together .
Finally , Hu , Wen , and the rest of the top leadership have turned themselves into superb firefighters with an uncanny ability to , in Party parlance , “ nip the seeds of opposition before they sprout . ”
Apart from sharpening the “ tools of the proletarian dictatorship ” by strengthening the Peoples Liberation Army and the People ’ s Armed Police , they have created a labyrinthine “ advance warning ” system to monitor threats ranging from peasant riots , urban unrest , and bird flu to the influx of Western ideas through the Internet .
Hu is due to remain in power until 2012 .
Given the economy ’ s solid performance and the docility of China ’ s population , there seems little doubt that Hu ’ s twenty-first-century market dictatorship will preserve the Party ’ s mandate to continue ruling – for now .
But it is equally obvious that Hu , the sphinx-like apparatchik in whom Chinese and Western liberals alike had once invested hope , is unlikely to deliver the more open and humane China that they thought he had promised .
China under Hu has perhaps found its development model : a form of Leninist capitalism with no aspirations toward a more democratic form of governance .
