The Sunflower Revolutionary
LONDON – The grim news that Ai Weiwei , perhaps China ’ s most famous contemporary artist , has been arrested and jailed – his family and friends have not seen or heard from him since – makes me think anew about Ai ’ s 100 million hand-painted porcelain sunflower seeds , now being exhibited at London ’ s Tate Modern Gallery .
China ’ s people , Ai ’ s installation seems to imply , are like the millions of seeds spread across the Tate ’ s gargantuan entrance hall .
No one cares whether they are humiliated or crushed under foot ( as the seeds were allowed to be at the exhibition ’ s opening ) .
Unfortunately , Ai has become one of the seeds , his freedom crushed by the heel of an inhuman state .
The Chinese official newspaper Global Times denounces Ai as a “ maverick , ” and mavericks are not tolerated in China .
The only way for a Chinese individual to survive is to adopt the grey , anonymous way of the sunflower seed .
According to a short item published by the official Xinhua news agency , Ai has allegedly been involved in so-called “ economic crimes , ” which could mean practically anything that the Marxist / Maoist minds of the leadership care to dream up .
In fact , China ’ s government has yet to decide whether to prosecute Ai for economic crimes or for being “ maverick . ”
Either way , the outside world must not be allowed to have any idea as to what fate awaits Ai .
But the true reason for Ai ’ s arrest is obvious .
When the police stormed Ai ’ s workshop , they demanded that Ai ’ s wife , Lu Qing , tell them , “ What did Ai write on the Internet ? ”
In the Chinese government ’ s view , an artist who dares to speak for the “ sunflower seeds ” and cultivate an independent mind is a direct security threat .
He must be put under control , silenced .
Of course , the ruling Chinese Communist Party is prefabricating Ai ’ s prosecution .
It is as if three decades after China ’ s “ opening , ” nothing has changed in the Party ’ s way of thinking and ruling .
Ai graduated from the Beijing Film Academy in 1978 , but he learned and developed his artistic talents in the United States .
His Shanghai workshop used to be a salon for Chinese artists , including the film directors Chen Kaige and Jiang Wen .
But Ai never allowed himself to be hired as an official regime hack .
Instead , he remained an outspoken , independent man , ready to speak and take action whenever art and ideals confronted repression and cruelty .
With China ’ s regime now gripped by fear of an Arab-style revolution , the government has chosen repression as the only means to “ maintain stability . ”
On the day of Ai ’ s arrest , former Global Times journalist Wen Tao was grabbed off the street in broad daylight .
Before that , the writers Ran Yunfei , Teng Biao , Ye Du , Zhu Yufu , Tang Jingling , Gu Chuan , Li Hai , Ding Mao , Chen Wei , Jiang Tianyong , and Liu Zhengqing were separately detained or sentenced to jail .
Other young Beijing artists have been detained as well .
To be sure , the regime considers Ai ’ s arrest a preemptive measure to prevent the outbreak of public demonstrations .
But Ai never participated in the many Internet appeals for such protests .
And his arrest seems to be just the beginning .
The next targets will likely be independent writers like Ai Xiaoming , Dai Qing , Cui Weiping , and Han Han .
The regime will not stop the persecution until the only voices to be heard are its own “ official ” artists .
Ai ’ s arrest and disappearance , along with the severe prison sentence imposed on the Noble Peace Prize winner Liu Xiaobo , are driven by the same motivation : to dam the potential for political unrest and purge independent intellectuals .
This process is nothing new .
The writer Li Hong received a six-year prison sentence and died in a hospital under police supervision last year .
Another writer , Li Xianbin , was sentenced to 10 years .
According to the Writers in Prison Committee of the Independent Chinese PEN Center , more than 30 of the country ’ s writers are currently locked up .
China ’ s relentless economic rise is bringing with it a decadence of civilization .
The feast of new wealth is accompanied by a famine of morality .
So when global leaders behave like conniving hucksters to do business with this new China ’ s rulers , they betray the values and principles that are the basis of democracy .
Ai used to argue that the Chinese regime ’ s despotism is boosted by shameless liars .
He always understood that true art and politics can never march hand-in-hand .
They must eventually confront each other on the field of a free conscience .
The “ Arab awakening ” tells something else about those sunflower seeds at the Tate Modern : the seeds , once they come together , show their unity and power .
That is the other lesson that Ai wanted his audiences to understand , and it is why his spirit and message cannot be crushed : there are 1.3 billion seeds with him .
