Ukraine ’ s Watershed Election
Ukraine ’ s politics are not those of the steppe .
Our voters cannot stroll in one direction during one poll , and in the opposite direction the next time they vote , without worrying about falling over the edge .
Ukrainians are people of the watershed : we live on either one side or the other of a great divide .
A year ago , Ukrainians dared to risk the unfamiliar territory over the hill , and found democracy and the promise of a more open and honest economy .
But democracy is messy ; with some of our Orange Revolution ’ s promises postponed or disavowed by President Viktor Yushchenko , there is a chance that on March 26 , when Ukrainians vote for a new parliament , they may in their disappointment choose to return to the realm of corrupt and autocratic rule .
The alternatives – for my country , for Russia , and for Europe – are clear .
Of the three leading electoral coalitions that are challenging each other , the forces that supported the Orange Revolution seek a modern and democratic future for our country .
The other bloc offers the near-certainty of a return to a surly and squalid isolation ­ -- perhaps the beginning of the end of our hard-won independence .
Of course , our Orange forces are not perfect , and Viktor Yanukovych – who again opposes Ukraine ’ s democrats – is not Stalin reincarnated .
But the records of both alternatives suggest that Ukraine under those who backed the Orange Revolution will remain a member of the club of democracies and open economies , whereas under Yanukovich , Ukraine would turn its back on reform , and may re-embrace the grimmest aspects of our Soviet past .
Yanukovych ’ s “ Party of the Regions ” has been leading in opinion polls for months , and the world should remember that Yushchenko ’ s ultimate triumph over him in 2004 was by a whisker , not a landslide .
Moreover , Yushchenko used his year in power mostly to disappoint those whose votes he now needs .
The case against a Yanukovych counter-revolution is that it would be just that : a ruthless effort to undo Ukraine ’ s democratic and legal reforms .
Moreover , he would not be left to himself to govern , but would be a marionette of the oligarchs who bankroll his party , and perhaps of Russia , which yearns ­ – albeit more discretely than a year ago – for his triumph .
Yanukovych ’ s party contains the largest core of unreconstructed apparatchiks of any party .
Many of its candidates seek office not to work for Ukraine ’ s betterment , but to gain parliamentary immunity from prosecution .
Some say we should not worry , that democracy and the market are now too well established in Ukraine to be replaced ; that reform is irreversible ; and that the country ’ s ruling oligarchic clans , like those of Eastern Europe , will in time become law-abiding capitalists .
Alas , this view is based more on wishful-thinking than on reality .
A year after the Orange Revolution demonstrated ordinary Ukrainians ’ fidelity to liberty , Yanukovych still evinces no faith in democracy , and the “ single economic space ” with Russia that he backs will strengthen the abusive oligarchic system and rule out liberalization .
Yanukovych ’ s foreign policy might not be openly subservient to Russia , but it won ’ t also be a clearly pro-western one either .
A Yanukovych government promises the semi-neutrality of semi-paralysis .
Many who support Yanukovych do not necessarily wish to go back to the old days but are confused by the buffeting they have received in the past decade .
Yanukovych panders to xenophobes and anti-Semites , and his strongest appeal is to the core of angry diehards who detest the collapse of Soviet power .
He remains unrepentant about the obscene levels of corruption during his tenure as prime minister .
I do not claim that the Orange Revolution ’ s protagonists are paragons , and that the split between Yushchenko and me has not disheartened many of those who stood with us in the streets of Kyiv in the winter of 2004-2005 .
But no one can question that we brought more honest government , and the beginnings of a more open economy , to Ukraine .
We began the battle against entrenched corruption , imposed the rule of law on Ukraine ’ s robber barons , and encouraged the birth of a vital civil society .
Most Ukrainians feel more secure because of these changes .
This is why our people should know precisely what they are voting for this Sunday .
I have pledged that , under no circumstances will I form a coalition government with Viktor Yanukovych .
President Yushchenko should do the same .
Only by restoring our partnership can we hope to keep our Orange Revolution ’ s promises .
Criminal and civil codes will be enforced ; our courts will be allowed to find their feet and their freedom .
Above all , the new Rada ( parliament ) will settle down to the business of enacting laws and monitoring the government , not carving up the budget among corrupt clans .
We will fight for essential reforms to bring the country in line with European norms .
Relations with Vladimir Putin ’ s Russia will be repaired .
Elections are seldom make-or-break affairs .
This one is .
For the battle for Ukraine ’ s liberty and independence was not decided last winter .
A Yanukovych restoration would be a disaster for Ukraine , for Russia , and for Europe , because it would put Ukraine ’ s independence in question and tempt Russia with dreams of renewed empire .
Only a second victory over Yanukovych can secure a future of freedom and hope for Ukraine ’ s people .
