The Single Mother Makeover
NEW YORK – In the 1992 United States presidential election , George H. W. Bush ’ s campaign made a political splash by going after the television show Murphy Brown – one of the first times , but far from the last , that a fictitious character was introduced to score political points in America .
Murphy Brown , played by actress Candice Bergen , was a TV anomaly at that time : a sympathetically portrayed single mother .
So Bush ’ s vice president , Dan Quayle , attacked the show for normalizing rather than stigmatizing single motherhood .
Much hand-wringing followed , with single mothers ( never , at that time , single fathers ) cast as harbingers of doom for core American values .
The implication was that selfish me-first feminists ( if they were affluent white women ) or feckless social parasites ( if they were low-income women of color ) were putting their own interests above their children ’ s .
Daniel Patrick Moynihan ’ s widely reprinted study The Negro Family : The Case for National Action painted a picture of single motherhood as the primary instigator of inner-city and especially African-American criminality , illiteracy , and drug use .
How times have changed .
Just as single mothers were irrationally castigated then , so today an equally irrational hagiography has risen around them . ( Europe has more single mothers than the US , but , characteristically , has less need to moralize about them one way or the other ) .
In US pop culture , the single mother has evolved from selfish yuppie or drug-dazed slut into a woman who is more fun , slightly more heroic , and certainly less frumpy than her married counterpart .
Indeed , single mothers are the new maternal ideal – women whose maternal drive is so selfless and intense that they choose to raise children even under the burden of their solitary status .
Angelina Jolie ’ s photo spread with her toddler son , adopted from Cambodia , in Vanity Fair heralded this shift : the sexy young woman and her son in a luxurious hotel bedroom made single motherhood look fun and glamorous .
Suddenly Hollywood stars and starlets who were otherwise unattached began to sprout little offspring : Calista Flockhart , who played TV ’ s ultimate desperate childless single woman , adopted a son – and , like a fairy tale , later met and married Harrison Ford .
Kourtney Kardashian of the reality show The Kardashians had a baby as an “ unwed mother ” – a stigmatizing term that has gone out of fashion – and is depicted as bravely holding down the fort and staying up all night with feedings as the child ’ s irresponsible father parties .
The tale of Sarah Palin ’ s daughter , Bristol , has also been spun as a tale of an admirable single mother and a loser father . When they split up , the story line cast the heroic young mother against what was often depicted as the beer-drinking , immature dad .
Even Jennifer Aniston , whom Brad Pitt left because she did not want kids , now sighs in interviews , as she nears 42 , that she has stopped waiting for Prince Charming , and that she , too , could be ready to adopt and go it alone .
Likewise , advertisements for convenience food and insurance – which used to feature only intact nuclear families – have begun to showcase single mothers lovingly spooning out meatballs , or protectively buying a life-insurance policy .
The glorification of single mothers represents a collective exasperation on the part of women in America – and women who make decisions in the mainstream media .
The 1990 ’ s produced a demeaning narrative of women waiting in frustration as their “ biological clocks ” ticked , cursing themselves for putting career first at the expense of finding Mr. Right and having children .
In a post-sexual revolution world of marriage-shy men , women would supposedly do anything to secure the blessings of a wedded father for their children .
The message from the media was one of constant nagging and blame , such as the famous Newsweek cover that asserted ( wrongly ) that an older single woman had more likelihood of being in a terrorist attack than of finding a husband .
The whole narrative , as the writer Susan Faludi correctly perceived , was not about marriage at all ; it reflected a backlash against feminism .
At some point , women became powerful enough that they collectively rejected the high social value this narrative placed on a male offer of a ring and flipped the stereotype on its head .
It started to occur to women that they could be employed and have a family – and that it could even be pretty nice .
Glamorizing single motherhood is not realistic , but it allows female pop culture to express a revenge fantasy at all the potential husbands and fathers who walked away , or who were not the dream husband and father after all , or who wanted the sex but not the kids and the tuition bills .
When Bill O ’ Reilly of Fox News recently accused Aniston of making a movie about single motherhood – The Switch – that seems to say “ to a twelve or thirteen year old girl , ‘ You don ’ t need a man , ’ ” he is right .
These images do appeal to overworked , exasperated , baby-hungry women who may have spent years waiting for “ the offer , ” telling them that , in fact , you don ’ t need a man .
This trend hardly signifies the end of civilization as we know it ; all things being equal , most women would still prefer the simple fantasy of a supportive partner in childrearing .
But the new image of single mothers – and of single motherhood – does show that it is getting harder – if not almost impossible – to coerce women by trying to fix upon them the scarlet letter .
