Why Border Walls Fail
HONOLULU – Call this the Year of Border Walls .
In 2015 , Estonia , Hungary , Kenya , Saudi Arabia , and Tunisia all announced or began the construction of barriers on their frontiers .
We may live in an era of globalization , but much of the world is increasingly focused on limiting the free movement of people .
At the end of World War II , there were only five border walls around the world .
Today , according to Elisabeth Vallet of the University of Quebec at Montreal , there are 65 , three-quarters of them built in the past 20 years .
And in the United States , Republican presidential candidates are promising more .
The Republican frontrunner , Donald Trump , has repeatedly proposed building a wall along the entire border with Mexico .
And on a Sunday morning talk show , another Republican candidate , Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker , described building a wall on the US-Canada border as “ a legitimate issue for us to look at . ”
And yet existing border walls are neither cheap nor effective .
Israel ’ s wall in the West Bank cost more than $ 1 million per mile to construct .
According to US Customs and Border Protection , building and maintaining the existing 670 miles of border fencing on the US-Mexico border would cost $ 6.5 billion over the barrier ’ s expected 20-year life cycle .
At this price , fortifying the remaining 1,300 miles of the Mexico border would cost more than $ 12.6 billion .
Erecting a wall along the 5,525-mile border with Canada would cost almost $ 50 billion and would cut through an airport runway , an opera house , homes , and businesses that currently straddle the border .
Nor is there much evidence that border walls work as intended .
To be sure , prisons demonstrate that short , well-guarded walls can be extremely effective at preventing movement .
But even prison walls are only as effective as the guards who ensure that they are not breached , and guards can be susceptible to bribes .
The recent escape of the drug cartel leader Joaquin “ El Chapo ” Guzman from a Mexican prison highlights another vulnerability of border walls : tunnels .
Since 1990 , the US Border Patrol has found 150 tunnels beneath the US-Mexico border .
Those with money will always be able to cross borders using fake documents , bribes , or innovative infrastructure .
Indeed , fortified frontiers are most effective at stopping poor migrants and refugees .
And even then , rather than preventing migrants from entering , fortifications all too often funnel them toward more dangerous crossing points .
The result is a mounting toll of predictable deaths .
The International Organization for Migration estimates that from 2005 to 2014 , some 40,000 people died attempting to cross a border .
Unlike prison perimeters , borders can be thousands of miles long , which makes them difficult to monitor properly .
The US employs more than 20,000 Border Patrol agents ; but even if they were all on duty at the same time , each would need to guard a 1,700-foot section of the border .
Of course , equipment like cameras , motion sensors , drones , helicopters , and vehicles allow agents to watch long sections of the border .
But the necessity of monitoring border walls points to one of the fundamental truths about them : historically , most have proved to be pretty useless .
The most famous sections of the Great Wall of China were overrun within a few decades of their construction .
When Germany invaded France in WWII , it simply went around the Maginot Line .
The Berlin Wall fell within 30 years of its construction .
Indeed , border guards and their equipment can be equally effective without a physical barrier .
At best , walls and fences only slow people down , making them a poor investment from a security standpoint .
They are similarly ineffective from a military perspective .
Missiles and airplanes can fly over them and tanks can smash through them .
And yet , despite their high cost and low efficacy , walls remain popular among policymakers and politicians .
They provide imposingly tangible evidence that something is being done about migration .
High-tech surveillance and boots on the ground may be more effective at preventing people from crossing a border , but a wall can be used as a political prop .
If Trump ever builds his wall , he should build a really nice one , like the Great Wall of China .
Then one day it might become a popular tourist attraction – and finally serve a useful purpose .
