The Roots of China ’ s Rapid Recovery
BEIJING – China ’ s GDP is estimated to have grown 8.7 % year on year in 2009 – once again the highest rate in the world – with the fourth-quarter increase reaching 10.7 % , compared to 6.3 % in the fourth quarter of 2008 .
For much of the world , China ’ s ability to shrug off the global financial crisis and maintain a strong growth trajectory in 2010 and 2011 seems too easy .
But securing China ’ s growth has been anything but easy .
The strong , decisive , and deftly timed stimulus policies at the start of the financial crisis did , of course , play a major role in China ’ s quick rebound .
As early as October 2008 , when the crisis first hit , China ’ s government adopted a comprehensive policy package designed to prevent the economy from sliding further .
The fiscal deficit was equivalent to 3 % of GDP in 2009 , which generated 3 % GDP growth , while the deficit in 2008 was literally zero .
The country ’ s so-called “ moderate relax ” monetary policy also played its part by allowing bank lending to expand by almost 34 % in 2009 , with M2 money supply growing by 27 % .
Monetary growth may increase inflationary pressures and the risk of an asset bubble down the road , but it helped ensure that China ’ s economy did not fall into a vicious downturn when the financial crisis hit .
Other policy moves aimed at boosting demand in the housing and auto market also proved effective .
But China ’ s crisis management is only part of the story .
It does not explain why other countries that took even stronger measures failed to generate a similarly rapid recovery , or why China ’ s government seems to have more room than others for policy maneuver .
China ’ s budget was actually in surplus and its government debt-to-GDP ratio was only 21 % before the crisis ( now it is about 24 % ) , much lower than any other major economy .
That gave Chinese policymakers freedom to spend money to confront the crisis .
Moreover , the level of non-performing loans in Chinese banks was quite low when Lehman Brothers collapsed , which allowed Chinese policymakers to let it increase in order to battle the crisis .
Moreover , the Chinese economy was in good shape when the global crisis hit .
Cautious macroeconomic management during China ’ s boom , including early self-adjustment , put China in a favorable position .
China ’ s economy had been booming since 2004 , but officials did not step aside and “ let the market decide . ”
Instead , they adopted counter-cyclical measures aimed at preventing the economy from overheating .
The government increasingly tightened its policies as the economy continued to surge ahead due to asset bubbles , high local-government investment spending , and buoyant demand in global markets for Chinese goods .
Overheating in the housing market was brought to an end in late September 2007 , nipping a nascent nationwide bubble , and a stock-market bubble was punctured the following month .
Moreover , numerous local investment projects were stopped , while measures to slow the growth of net exports – including a 20 % revaluation of the renminbi and a significant cut in tariff rebates for exports – brought down annual export growth from around 30 % to a more reasonable 17 % in late 2007 .
As a result , by the fourth quarter of 2007 – one year before the global financial crisis hit – China ’ s economy started to cool .
The quarterly growth rate decelerated from 13 % in the fourth quarter of 2008 to 9 % in the third quarter of 2009 .
In short , it is because China began its adjustment one year before the global crisis that its economy emerged earlier than other countries .
The lesson is that booms have to be managed adeptly , and that financiers have to be supervised in their pursuit of ever-higher returns .
That is true for developed economies no less than for a developing economy like China .
Of course , China ’ s economy has structural and institutional problems – what developing country does not ?
China ’ s macroeconomic policies are probably still too “ administrative . ”
When many of the most important actors in an economy are insensitive to market price signals , as they are in China , economic policy will need to be administrative in order to deal effectively with those players .
But one benefit of this administrative bias over the past 30 years is that , at least most of the time , China has been cautious about overheating – and determined to step in whenever necessary to cool the economy , despite the protests of “ smart ” market participants .
To be sure , the authorities have sometimes been overly cautious .
But for an economy in its early stage of development , and for the first generation of companies with young “ animal spirits , ” excessive caution seems better than the alternative .
In fact , when a country ’ s economic growth is continuously above 9 % , policymakers probably cannot be too cautious .
No doubt , government macroeconomic management that is too strong may delay necessary market-oriented reforms .
But the financial crisis has shown that a twenty-first-century market economy requires government participation to function .
For a developing economy like China , it is better to have a government that plays an active role in avoiding the ups and downs that the Western economies experienced in their early days – and are still experiencing today .
