Turkey ’ s New Mission
TEL AVIV – Ever since Turkey ’ s establishment as a republic , the country has oscillated between the Western-oriented heritage of its founder , Kemal Ataturk , and its eastern , Ottoman legacy .
Never resolved , modern Turkey ’ s deep identity complex is now shaking its strategic alliances and recasting its regional and global role .
Indeed , Turkey ’ s changing perception of itself has shaped its so-far frustrated drive to serve as a peace broker between Israel and its Arab enemies , Syria and Hamas .
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan ’ s missionary zeal to replace Egypt as the essential regional mediator , and his violent tirades against Israel ’ s behavior in Gaza , looks to many people like an attempt to recover Turkey ’ s Ottoman-era role as the guarantor of regional peace and security .
Its credentials for this role in the Middle East are by no means negligible .
Turkey is a true regional superpower , with one of the largest armies in the world .
At the same time , it is the only Muslim country that , while no less worried than Israel about Iran ’ s nuclear ambitions , can maintain excellent economic and political relations with Iran , regardless of American displeasure .
Of course , Syria is Iran ’ s ally , too , but no country in the region has the leverage with it that Turkey possesses .
And Turkey ’ s diplomatic reach in the region is also reflected in its recent signing of a friendship treaty with Saudi Arabia , while maintaining excellent relations with Pakistan and Iraq .
Europe ’ s persistence in snubbing Turkey ’ s attempts to join the European Union , the rise of violent anti-Western popular sentiment in the wake of the Iraq war , and strained relations with the US – owing in part to the forthcoming Armenian Genocide Act – are major factors in Turkey ’ s change of direction .
The civilizing efforts that Ataturk ’ s revolution directed inward and in favor of disengagement from the Arab and Muslim worlds are now being revisited .
The Turkey of Erdogan ’ s dominant Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) appears to be seeking a new mission civilisatrice , with the Middle East and the former Soviet republics as its alternative horizons .
The uneasy challenge for Turkey is to secure its newfound regional role without betraying Ataturk ’ s democratic legacy .
Turkish democracy and secular values have been greatly enhanced by the country ’ s dialogue with Europe and its American ties .
Turkey can be a model for Middle Eastern countries if , while promoting its regional strategic and economic interests , it resists the authoritarian temptation and continues to show that Islam and democracy are fully compatible .
For Israel , the long overdue message is that its future in the Middle East does not lie in strategic alliances with the region ’ s non-Arab powers , but in reconciling itself with the Arab world .
In the 1960 ’ s , David Ben-Gurion ’ s fatalistic pessimism about the possibility of ever reaching a peace settlement with the Arab countries led him to forge an “ Alliance of the Periphery ” with the non-Arab countries in the outer circle of the Middle East – Iran , Ethiopia , and Turkey ( he also dreamed of having Lebanon ’ s Maronite community as part of that alliance ) .
All of these countries did not have any particular dispute with Israel , and all , to varying degrees , had tense relations with their Arab neighbors .
The myth of Israel ’ s military power , resourcefulness in economic and agricultural matters , and an exaggerated perception of its unique capacity to lobby and influence American policy combined to make the Israeli connection especially attractive to these countries .
The “ Alliance of the Periphery ” was a creative attempt to escape the consequences of the Arab-Israeli conflict .
It reflected the yearning of the Jewish state to unleash its creative energies in economic and social matters , as it created space for an independent , imaginative foreign policy that was not linked to , or conditioned by , the paralyzing constraints of the Arab-Israeli conflict .
But the security that this scheme was supposed to produce could never really be achieved ; the centrality of the Arab-Israeli conflict could not be attenuated .
The Arabs ’ capacity to maintain their pressure on Israel and to keep world opinion focused on the Palestinians ’ plight made Israel ’ s quest for evading the consequences of the conflict , either through periodic wars or by forging alternative regional alliances , a futile exercise .
The Islamic revolution in Iran , the changes in Ethiopia following the end of Haile Selassie ’ s rule , the collapse of Maronite Lebanon , and Hezbollah ’ s takeover of that country left Turkey as the last remaining member of Israel ’ s Alliance of the Periphery .
Turkey ’ s powerful military establishment may want to maintain close relations with Israel , but the widely popular change in Turkey ’ s foreign policy priorities , and the serious identity dilemmas facing the nation , send an unequivocal message that the alliance can no longer serve as an alternative to peace with the Arab world .
From now on , it can only be complementary to such a peace .
