Yale ’ s Safe Sex Criminals
NEW YORK – In October 2010 , the current brothers of George W. Bush ’ s former fraternity at Yale , Delta Kappa Epsilon , marched through the first-year quad chanting , “ No means yes !
Yes means anal ! ” They held up signs reading , “ We love Yale Sluts . ”
Sixteen graduate and undergraduate students , male and female , felt that the university ’ s administration then did little to push back against such encroachments on female students ’ rights to a fair and non-threatening learning environment .
In March , they filed a federal lawsuit against Yale , alleging that its “ failure to address incidents of sexual harassment and sexual assault has created a ‘ hostile environment . ’ ”
The lawsuit did not stop with the DKE incident .
First-year women were ranked on their sex appeal , the complaint noted , and , most seriously , Yale failed to respond adequately to reports of sexual assault or attempted assault and stalking .
According to Alexandra Brodsky , a Yale junior and one of the 16 complainants , the students are “ really frustrated and disappointed that Yale again and again fails to respond to both public and private acts of sexual harassment and assaults , which … perpetuates an environment in which these … acts are okay . ”
The students ’ complaint coincides with a federal investigation by the Department of Education ’ s Office for Civil Rights , which announced that it would review Yale ’ s policies for dealing with sexual harassment and sexual assault .
This is no small matter : Yale and other American universities receive millions of federal dollars annually – money that would be jeopardized if the university was found to tolerate an unequal learning environment .
In 2004 , I wrote an article for New York magazine about my own experience of having been sexually encroached upon as a third-year undergraduate at Yale by an esteemed professor ( the crime of “ sexual harassment ” had not yet been codified ) .
I wrote , too , about Yale ’ s cover-up of many situations like mine .
So the students ’ lawsuit was not surprising to me .
Indeed , in the course of trying to report to the university in 2004 what had happened to me in 1983 , I found the same pattern of stonewalling victims and defending perpetrators .
Worse still , I discovered that the university and its lawyers used the sexual harassment “ grievance procedure ” as a screen to protect the institution , its harassers , and even its rapists , rather than as a means to investigate incidents of abuse .
This situation had persisted for two decades .
As I conducted my reporting , I heard woman after woman allege that the same professor or the same fraternity had engaged in multiple instances of assault or harassment .
Victim after victim would plead , heartbreakingly , “ Help me . ”
But I could do nothing , because the women chose to remain anonymous , and because the university treated each case as top secret .
Alleged perpetrators were free to teach in a new university – where more young women ( and in some cases , young men ) would become their prey .
Compounding the lack of transparency , Yale maintains its own campus police force , to which sex-crime victims are encouraged to report their complaints if they insist upon formal documentation .
But victims often do not understand that this actually tends to contain potentially embarrassing scandals , by preventing real – that is , accountable – law enforcement from getting involved .
Indeed , there have been disclosed to me reports of at least three alleged sex assaults by faculty or academic staff in the past decade – two alleged incidents reported by two different women involving the same man .
I know that one undergraduate has more recently pursued legal action against a staff member , who , she said , drugged her with Rohypnol , the “ date rape ” drug , and assaulted her .
I know these accounts , but I can ’ t report them , even at this critical moment in the long-overdue formal investigation , because of confidentiality protocols .
Each of these women feels alone .
Like virtually every private university in the United States , Yale has relied on “ privacy ” to keep these incidents under wraps , so that incoming women ( and men ) have no idea who among the faculty or students is dangerous ; which fraternity is a site of repeated harassment or worse ; and when to keep the door open on a student-teacher meeting .
Like the Catholic Church , private universities like Yale can use victims ’ shame and isolation to disenfranchise them and to protect the perpetrators .
But I believe that the victims themselves have a responsibility .
The convention of taking sex-crime testimony from alleged victims behind closed doors , under conditions of anonymity or confidentiality , only serves institutions like universities or the military that are intent on covering up criminal behavior .
Some feminists have attacked me for this position , but the numbers bear me out : thirty years ago , 30 % of reported rapes in the US and the United Kingdom resulted in prosecutions ; today , after three decades of confidential sex-crime reporting , the number is 12 % in the US and 6 % in the UK .
This is largely because confidentiality in sex-crime reporting prevents the media from shining a light on the crime , inhibits institutional memory of repeated assailants , and prevents scrutiny of whether a court , college , or police precinct is doing better or worse at handling such cases .
As a result , serious crimes can be swept under the rug – at Yale and at every other private US university I have ever visited ( public universities are less free to conceal crime data ) – in the guise of “ protecting the victims . ”
Yale alumnae are reportedly now contacting these 16 students with their own stories of sexual assault and harassment , spanning two decades .
But if they had come forward publicly years ago , it is likely that Yale could not have continued for so long to protect the sex criminals in its midst .
The students are right : a sexually abusive environment does make it harder for students to study and learn .
But victims – whether current students or alumnae – would be well advised to take a deep breath , come forward , and tell their stories out loud .
Only then would Yale and other institutions be forced to reckon publicly with a problem that has persisted for generations .
