The Struggle for Mastery in Iran
TEHERAN : The trial of thirteen Iranian Jews on espionage charges is but the latest sign of a conservative backlash against Iran 's reform movement , headed by President Mohammed Khatami .
Conservatives want not only to silence the reformers , but to provoke confrontation .
Closure of pro-reform newspapers , and the arrests of reform-minded journalists seem deliberate attempts to goad the reformers , who won a majority of seats in last February 's first round of parliamentary elections .
For if the reformers are incited into demonstrating and street chaos ensues , the security forces will have a handy excuse for a crackdown .
In the state of emergency likely to follow , installation of a new parliament might be delayed .
Recognizing this , reform leaders urge restraint on their supporters .
They are confident about eventual triumph , because the majority of youth and women support reform .
Two thirds of Iran 's 65 million people are under 25 years old .
But young people in Iran , as everywhere , are not known for patience .
Here lies the threat of unrest .
Tension is rife because , although the economy is a shambles , no one is doing anything about it .
Those campaigning for reform are mostly interested in the social and political changes called for by President Khatami under the rubric of ' civil society ' and the ' rule of law . '
The President himself seems not very interested in economics .
He should be .
Unemployment is high , especially among young Iranians .
Of the 1.9 million youngsters in higher education who are expected to enter the labour force over the next five years , 15.2 % have no hope of employment .
The total workforce will reach 17.7 million by the end of the current five-year plan , with 2.8 million or 15.8 % unemployed .
More than 50 % of university graduates cannot find jobs , and now look abroad for work .
Those who cannot go abroad form the base of the large number of educated young unemployed - a classic ingredient in causing public disorder .
Growth is the only viable solution to all this , but it is nowhere to be seen amidst state controls and rampant corruption .
This year 's real GDP is expected to grow a mere 1.5 % .
Even for those in work , incomes are low - especially , in relative terms , for professionals .
All Iranian factions blame today 's economic crisis on the ruinous 1980-88 war with Iraq as well as on continued US sanctions .
But the real cause is the inertia of state control .
The Iranian economy is 80 % state-owned ( as provided in the revolutionary constitution - article 44 ) and prices of basic goods are controlled .
Massive subsidies are needed to finance the raw material inputs of state companies , and these consume the bulk of the government 's oil revenues ( 10 % of GDP ) .
Subsidies combined with a bloated civil service ( there are over 2 million state employees ) generate chronic budget deficits , estimated at 5 % of GDP in 1998-99 .
Worse , the deficit is financed by printing money , fanning inflation , which reached 24 % in 1998-99 and is rising .
Inflation and unemployment will remain high until the government acquires the will and authority to carry through on structural reforms in the teeth of opposition from both the conservative / revolutionary establishment and the vested economic interests spawned by the revolution .
Labour market liberalization is the most necessary reform .
Existing labour laws ( introduced after 1979 ) make it costly for employers to hire workers , who benefit from compulsory bonuses and generous severance payments .
Another key target should be the bonyads ( charitable foundations ) .
Exempt from taxation , Bonyads and their regime-appointed directors are very wealthy , with vast powers over major industries .
Another source of fiscal and economic distortion comes from the semi-official merchants , or bazaaris , whose businesses account for 10 % of GDP , and who enjoy , together with various bureaucrats , special privileges such as access to hard currencies at special rates .
Such distortions need to be replaced by investment , both from repatriated flight capital and foreign sources .
Both should come , lured by the country 's rich natural resources .
But investment is impossible without privatization , to which the regime has an ideological allergy .
Rapprochement with the outside world would help .
Here , America is the key .
But the hints of d ‚ tente with America that emerged since Khatami 's inauguration could be undermined by domestic perceptions either of US intransigence ( e.g. over sanctions ) or that well-intended US engagement is interference in Iran 's internal affairs .
Seemingly balked on political reform , President Khatami should focus on economic renewal which , when it comes , might revive his political agenda too .
