When France Says No
Not long ago , an American political analyst compared France ’ s loss of influence in Europe following its “ No ” vote in the 2005 referendum on the EU constitutional treaty with France ’ s surrender in 1940 .
A provocative analogy , but is it apt ?
The collapse in 1940 revealed the fragility of France ’ s democracy and its loss of confidence in the country ’ s capacity to face outside threats .
In rejecting the European constitution , France expressed its fear of , among other things , globalization .
A better analogy for the No vote was the rejection in 1954 of the treaty to establish a European Defense Community ( EDC ) .
In both cases , a major historical mistake was made .
France had to a large extent initiated both treaties , had managed to get them accepted by its European partners , but in the end vetoed its own undertakings .
Why , in both 1954 and 2005 , did the French – in one case the National Assembly , in the other the electorate – reject proposals that France itself had conceived ?
Both projects sought to construct a genuinely supranational Europe .
The EDC would have created a European army , in which even German troops would have been included .
The proposed defense treaty was also to be buttressed by plans for a European political community whose main features were to be defined by a constitutional commission made up of members of national parliaments .
In effect , this commission would have been the precursor to the 2003-2004 Convention for the Future of Europe , which , presided over by former French President Valéry Giscard d ’ Estaing drafted the constitutional treaty .
The political community of the 1950 ’ s that France had persuaded its five European partners to accept was supposed to absorb both the European Coal and Steel Community and the EDC .
It was to have both diplomatic and military powers , as well as a legislative assembly much like today ’ s European Parliament – just as the 2005 EU constitutional plan would have extended the European Parliament ’ s powers and created a European minister of foreign affairs .
But now , as back then , fear and doubt won the day .
Political parties and others who mobilized opposition to the EDC feared a remilitarized Germany and a threat to France ’ s sovereignty .
Today , those in France who opposed the EU constitution succeeded in stigmatizing “ Europe ” as the threat .
They trumpeted France ’ s invasion by “ Polish plumbers , ” calling into question Europe ’ s two principal achievements : the introduction of a single market , which has undeniably boosted the French economy , and EU enlargement , which has done so much to foster democratic transition in new member states .
But the failure of the referendum in France carries more serious consequences than the EDC ’ s rejection .
Back in the 1950 ’ s , the founding nations ’ foreign ministers promptly turned to their Belgian colleague , Paul-Henri Spaak , for fresh proposals .
After intensive discussion among the six , and especially between France and Germany , the Treaty of Rome was drawn up and signed within two years of the EDC debacle .
By contrast , two years after the French and Dutch No votes , there is no sign of a Plan B , despite the claims of the French politicians who helped mobilize the No vote . Europe ’ s Franco-German locomotive has broken down and ratification has stopped , even though member states that had yet to ratify the treaty could have completed the process of ratification .
France ’ s loss of influence in Europe is no longer at stake today , because the notion of influence presupposes that the overriding preoccupation of EU member states is to advance their own national interests .
If Europe were only about gaining the upper hand , it would generate perpetual conflict .
The reality is that Europe does manage to move ahead , but step by step through mutual compromise .
The real question has more to do with France ’ s credibility and its capacity to remain a driving force in Europe .
A journalist recently expressed the view that France ’ s special role in Europe was due to its “ centrality , ” meaning that the French are , in equal measure , both open to the world and attached to their nation . They also participate successfully in a market economy while seeking to preserve an egalitarian social model .
The No vote sullied this image of a balanced France .
Indeed , the French themselves are among the first to lament their bleak situation , inventing a new concept – “ la déclinologie ” – to describe this loss of self – confidence .
Moreover , the No vote has given a new legitimacy to euro-skepticism in other member states .
To be sure , the rise of populism in Europe was not caused by the French ; nationalism is deeply rooted in Europe ’ s history and has many causes .
But France ’ s referendum result fueled other European governments ’ fears that any new proposal they might put forward to re-launch the EU constitution would fail in the face of domestic and Europe-wide opposition .
But reducing European aspirations to the goals of Realpolitik is no answer to today ’ s crisis .
Europeans need to recognize that strength lies in unity , and that Europe ’ s integration cannot be guaranteed without a common constitutional framework that promotes a common identity .
Until we think in terms of European sovereignty , rather than fret over risks to national sovereignty , the present crisis cannot be overcome .
