Will Programmers Rule ?
NEW DELHI – Marc Andreessen made his first fortune writing the code that became Netscape Navigator , the Internet browser .
He is now a venture capitalist who evangelizes about the growing importance of software in business today .
Indeed , he proclaims that software is taking over the world – that it will be the primary source of added value – and offers the following prediction : the global economy will one day be divided between people who tell computers what to do and people who are told by computers what to do .
Andreessen ’ s aim is to shock his listeners – not just for effect , but to get them to do something about it .
To stop the world from being divided between a few alpha programmers and many drones , he wants the potential drones to stop taking easy liberal arts courses in college .
Instead , he wants them to focus on courses in science , technology , engineering , and math ( STEM ) , where the good jobs will be .
But will this solve the problem that he poses ?
Perhaps not .
Two attributes of software creation allow a few talented programmers to corner the market and take all the associated profits .
First , software with a slight edge tends to get a significantly greater share of the available market ; and , second , the available market is global , because it costs so little to make an extra copy and send it anywhere in the world .
As a result , those who are creative and competent enough to write that slightly better search engine will capture the global market .
In this winner-take-all environment , only a small number of those who have taken programming courses will reap a majority of the rents .
Completing the right preparatory courses is no guarantee of receiving a share of the software jackpot .
Differences in luck and talent among those equally prepared will ensure that the quality of software firms ’ products lies on a bell curve , with only a few Googles and Facebooks and many more bored , moderately paid computer technicians helping the average confused person deal with malware .
Put differently , in a winner-take-all world , raising the average level of skills or education does nothing to alter the skewed distribution of income .
So , will anything prevent inequality from widening ?
The obvious answer is yes .
But how society responds will mean the difference between a prosperous world and a world torn apart by slow growth and resentment .
Property rights are ultimately sanctioned by society , and , to the extent that they seem to be unfair , society has an incentive to change them .
But will society see the software billionaire as having acquired her wealth unfairly , or will it see that wealth as a fair reward for cleverness ?
The more that everyone has access to the same educational opportunities , the more society will tend to accept some receiving disproportionate rewards . After all , they themselves have a chance to be winners .
Interestingly , software may itself reduce the cost of expanding educational access – witness the massive open online courses ( MOOCs ) offered by companies like Coursera .
But equal access is probably an unlikely ideal .
The other extreme is very unequal access , made more unequal because the wealthy have the time to help their kids with homework and the money to arrange for tuitions , while the poor leave their children watching TV while they work a second job .
Will the resentful workers who must follow a computer ’ s instructions – say , in assembling an order in Amazon ’ s fulfillment centers – vote to tax the programmers who put them there until the software creators lose the incentive to innovate , leaving society poorer ?
Or will the rich programmers all migrate to Monaco or Switzerland , taking the brains and rents with them , as society falls apart into barricaded and mutually resentful enclaves and ghettoes ?
In reality , many intermediate possibilities exist .
One is that cultural norms may develop that encourage billionaires to share their wealth , even if they are spared taxation .
For example , the Giving Pledge is a commitment by some of the world ’ s richest people , Warren Buffett and Bill Gates among them , to devote the majority of their wealth to philanthropy .
Economic competition may also play a role – if billions are to be made by innovators , more of the most talented get into innovation , so that , even in a winner-take-all world , the winner captures the market for a fleeting moment before someone else takes it away from him .
The billions to be made today may only be millions tomorrow .
And values also adjust .
While a quartz watch keeps time more accurately than the most finely crafted handmade mechanical Swiss watch , the value of a quartz watch has plummeted , while Swiss watches ’ value has climbed into the stratosphere .
Even though they are virtually indistinguishable in appearance , people seem to cherish the knowledge that someone has lovingly crafted their watch .
So it may well be that the demand for discussing , say , medieval French church music in small classes at a university will grow even as the demand for MOOCs grows .
Not everyone should heed Andreessen ’ s exhortation to quit liberal arts programs !
That is not to say that his basic concerns are unwarranted .
Better access for all to fundamental needs like quality education is necessary to make the winner-take-all character of markets more tolerable .
But societies may also have to change .
