Who Will Eclipse America ?
WASHINGTON , DC – According to Voltaire , the Roman Empire fell “ because all things fall . ”
It is hard to argue with this as a general statement about decline : nothing lasts forever .
But it is also not very useful .
In thinking , for example , about American predominance in the world today , it would be nice to know when it will decline , and whether the United States can do anything to postpone the inevitable .
Contemporary commenters despaired of the Roman Empire for several hundred years before it finally collapsed .
Could America find its way to a similar extension ?
In terms of providing an essential structure for discussion of this problem , Arvind Subramanian ’ s new book , Eclipse : Living in the Shadow of China ’ s Economic Dominance , is a major contribution .
( Full disclosure : Subramanian and I are colleagues at the Peterson Institute for International Economics , and we have worked together on other issues . )
In particular , Subramanian develops an index of economic dominance that should become a focus of conversation anywhere that people want to think about changes in world economic leadership .
There is no need to know any economics in order to be fascinated by this book : it is about power , pure and simple .
The basic facts are incontrovertible .
The United Kingdom was the world ’ s dominant economic power from the rise of industrialization in the early nineteenth century .
But it lost its predominance and was gradually eclipsed by the US , which , at least since 1945 , has been the undisputed leader among market-based economies .
The US surpassed the UK in terms of industrial production as early as the end of the nineteenth century , but that was not enough to tip the balance .
Economic predominance shifted only when the UK ran large current-account deficits during World Wars I and II – the country had to borrow heavily in order to finance its war effort , and imports were significantly higher than exports .
Much of the world ’ s gold reserves ended up in the hands of the US .
This helped undermine the role of the British pound internationally and catapulted the US dollar to the fore – particularly after the Bretton Woods conference in 1944 , at which it was agreed that countries would hold their reserves in dollars as well as gold .
More recently , however , it has been the Americans ’ turn consistently to run large current-account deficits , buying more from the rest of the world than they earn by selling goods and services abroad .
On this dimension , the US seems destined to repeat the mistake of the British .
At the same time , emerging-market countries ’ per capita income has risen – as has their international role .
In particular , China has followed a strategy in the past decade or so that entails running large current-account surpluses and building up foreign-exchange reserves , which are now reported to be in excess of $ 3 trillion .
Indeed , Subramanian ’ s most provocative argument is that China has already surpassed the US in terms of economic dominance – but we have not yet woken up to this new reality .
The story is fascinating and well told ; but there is still a great deal worth arguing .
For example , did the British decline because the US could not be stopped , or because of problems within the British Empire and at home ?
A few years ago , some regarded Japan as having overtaken the US .
Europe also was supposedly vying for global economic dominance .
Now any such claims would seem preposterous .
In both cases , the credit system got out of control , with too much lending to the private sector in 1980 ’ s Japan and excessive government borrowing during the 2000 ’ s in the eurozone .
Similarly , it remains unclear that the Chinese development path will remain smooth .
Fixed investment in China is close to 50 % of GDP – which must be a world record .
Credit to state firms and to households continues to grow rapidly .
Isn ’ t this a version of exactly what derailed Japanese growth ?
On the key issue of being able to issue a “ reserve currency ” that investors and governments want to hold , Subramanian is correct that China has many of the prerequisites in place .
But it still lacks some key elements , including fully-fledged property rights .
If you worry about getting your money out of a country when times turn tough , China is not an attractive place to hold your reserves .
External challenges do sometimes bring down states .
But , more frequently , the big problems are internal – the regime cannot deliver growth , its legitimacy fades , and people start to head for the exits ( or at least get their money out ) .
If the US is eclipsed any time soon , this will more likely be due to its loss of social cohesion and its dysfunctional politics .
China might well step in to fill that vacuum , but that is quite different from being able to elbow America aside .
