The Spring of the Zombies
New York – As spring comes to America , optimists are seeing “ green sprouts ” of recovery from the financial crisis and recession .
The world is far different from what it was last spring , when the Bush administration was once again claiming to see “ light at the end of the tunnel . ”
The metaphors and the administrations have changed , but not , it seems , the optimism .
The good news is that we may be at the end of a free fall .
The rate of economic decline has slowed .
The bottom may be near – perhaps by the end of the year .
But that does not mean that the global economy is set for a robust recovery any time soon .
Hitting bottom is no reason to abandon the strong measures that have been taken to revive the global economy .
This downturn is complex : an economic crisis combined with a financial crisis .
Before its onset , America ’ s debt-ridden consumers were the engine of global growth .
That model has broken down , and will not be replaced soon .
For , even if America ’ s banks were healthy , household wealth has been devastated , and Americans were borrowing and consuming on the assumption that house prices would rise forever .
The collapse of credit made matters worse ; and firms , facing high borrowing costs and declining markets , responded quickly , cutting back inventories .
Orders dropped abruptly – well out of proportion to the decline in GDP – and those countries that depended on investment goods and durables ( expenditures that could be postponed ) were particularly hard hit .
We are likely to see a recovery in some of these areas from the bottoms reached at the end of 2008 and the beginning of this year .
But examine the fundamentals : in America , real estate prices continue to fall , millions of homes are underwater , with the value of mortgages exceeding the market price , and unemployment is increasing , with hundreds of thousands reaching the end of their 39 weeks of unemployment insurance .
States are being forced to lay off workers as tax revenues plummet .
The banking system has just been tested to see if it is adequately capitalized – a “ stress ” test that involved no stress – and some couldn ’ t pass muster .
But , rather than welcoming the opportunity to recapitalize , perhaps with government help , the banks seem to prefer a Japanese-style response : we will muddle through .
Repeating the Savings ampamp ; Loan debacle of the 1980 ’ s. the banks are using bad accounting ( they were allowed , for example , to keep impaired assets on their books without writing them down , on the fiction that they might be held to maturity and somehow turn healthy ) .
Worse still , they are being allowed to borrow cheaply from the United States Federal Reserve , on the basis of poor collateral , and simultaneously to take risky positions .
Some of the banks did report earnings in the first quarter of this year , mostly based on accounting legerdemain and trading profits ( read : speculation ) .
But thiswon ’ t get the economy going again quickly .
And , if the bets don ’ t pay off , the cost to the American taxpayer will be even larger .
The American government , too , is betting on muddling through : the Fed ’ s measures and government guarantees mean that banks have access to low-cost funds , and lending rates are high .
If nothing nasty happens – losses on mortgages , commercial real estate , business loans , and credit cards – the banks might just be able to make it through without another crisis .
In a few years time , the banks will be recapitalized , and the economy will return to normal .
This is the rosy scenario .
But experiences around the world suggest that this is a risky outlook .
Even & nbsp ; were banks healthy , the deleveraging process and the associated loss of wealth means that , more likely than not , the economy will be weak .
And a weak economy means , more likely than not , more bank losses .
The problems are not limited to the US .
Other countries ( like Spain ) have their own real estate crises .
Eastern Europe has its problems , which are likely to impact Western Europe ’ s highly leveraged banks .
In a globalized world , problems in one part of the system quickly reverberate elsewhere .
In earlier crises , as in East Asia a decade ago , recovery was quick , because the affected countries could export their way to renewed prosperity .
But this is a synchronous global downturn .
America and Europe can ’ t export their way out of their doldrums .
Fixing the financial system is necessary , but not sufficient , for recovery .
America ’ s strategy for fixing its financial system is costly and unfair , for it is rewarding the people who caused the economic mess .
But there is an alternative that essentially means playing by the rules of a normal market economy : a debt-for-equity swap .
With such a swap , confidence could be restored to the banking system , and lending could be reignited with little or no cost to the taxpayer .
It ’ s neither particularly complicated nor novel .
Bondholders obviously don ’ t like it – they would rather get a gift from the government .
But there are far better uses of the public ’ s money , including another round of stimulus .
Every downturn comes to an end .
The question is how long and deep this downturn will be .
In spite of some spring sprouts , we should prepare for another dark winter : it ’ s time for Plan B in bank restructuring and another dose of Keynesian medicine .
