Zhu Rongji Reexamined
As China 's new leadership team emerges , the world 's attention has focused on President Jiang Zemin 's successor .
But this is misguided , for perhaps the most significant moment in China 's recent history of boom and transformation was the 1998 appointment of Zhu Rongji ( pronounced " Joo Rong-jee " ) as premier of the State Council , a position once held by Deng Xiaoping .
Given the obvious importance of the post in recent years , the choice of Mr. Zhu 's replacement may be of even more significance than President Jiang 's departure from center stage .
Even before he became premier , Mr. Zhu , as the president of China 's central bank , was known as the architect of China 's 8 % annual economic growth in the 1990s and the mastermind of its successful fight against inflation .
Mr. Zhu has been China 's Jack Welch , the tough-minded , longtime CEO of the American conglomerate General Electric--a man celebrated for his candor , his global sophistication , and his insistence on performance .
Indeed , Mr. Zhu was renowned for punishing those who fell short of his expectations .
As mayor of Shanghai , he once disciplined his tourist bureau officials by making them scrub the city 's public toilets themselves .
A few months after his appointment as premier , Mr. Zhu delivered his " three promises " speech , in which he pledged to make three bold moves to secure a more vibrant , self-sustaining economy .
First , he would overhaul the 300,000 state-run national corporations that still conducted an overwhelming amount of China 's business and accounted for the bulk of its economic activity .
More than 70 % of such companies were unprofitable and were propped up by government subsidy .
Just as Mr. Welch promised to " fix , close , or sell " nonperforming divisions of General Electric when he took over the company , Mr. Zhu threatened to fire chief executives of Chinese firms that lost money for more than two consecutive years , and then either to shut them down or sell them .
This forced national corporations to be privatized and go public or to be overseen by provincial governments , a change that proved to be a major impetus for a sudden decentralization of China 's governance structure--another key legacy of Mr. Zhu 's tenure .
Second , Mr. Zhu said he would wipe out the many bad debts of China 's banks and " international trust companies . "
Many of these had contributed to a softening in China 's economy by routinely lending money to insolvent corporations .
At the time , there were 245 such trust companies , which had such a poor record of repayment that overseas investors were beginning to shun China entirely .
Reforming them would take 10 years , he said .
Third , Mr. Zhu said he would streamline the central government and take on one of China 's most pernicious problems : high-level corruption in government agencies .
He would propose measures including , for example , cutting links between government and organized crime , and making it more difficult for bureaucrats to accept bribes .
Politicians often make bold promises but rarely keep them .
On July 1 , 2001 , at the celebration of the 80th anniversary of the Chinese Communist Party , Mr. Zhu assessed his progress .
His appraisal of his record in office is notably accurate , and stands as a convincing testament to the effectiveness of his leadership .
Mr. Zhu told the assembled Communist leadership that he had fulfilled the first promise : many of China 's public corporations had become profitable private entities or had been shut down .
Those that were still operating were given stringent profitability targets , were allowed to choose the people they hired , and were encouraged to raise money on private stock exchanges , which effectively propelled them into the private sector as " red chip " corporations .
As for the second promise , more than 50 heads of financial institutions had at that point been fired ( more followed ) , and reforms had changed the investment climate dramatically .
Instead of fleeing the country , capital was flowing in more rapidly than ever before .
Mr. Zhu 's record concerning his third promise was more mixed .
While the size of the central government fell dramatically , with employment at the State Council halved from 34,000 to 17,000 , corruption continued to fester .
Despite Mr. Zhu 's efforts , opposition from vested interests throughout the government--particularly at the highest levels--impeded reform .
Nonetheless , Zhu Rongji 's reforms created the kind of level playing field and rule of law on which a vibrant capitalist system depends .
That is a political legacy second to none in modern Chinese history .
