Twenty-First Century Populism
In Venezuela , Bolivia , and Ecuador a new left is said to being born , which their presidents call “ twenty-first century socialism . ”
But , despite the supposed novelty of their vision , their actions seem only to be replicating the self-destructive policies that have brought such agony to Cuba .
Unlike the old leftist movements , which relied on armed struggle , Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez , Bolivian President Evo Morales , and Ecuadorian President Rafael Correa came to power through the ballot box .
Once in power , they have appealed to the masses and called for constitutional reforms to enlarge their power .
In Venezuela , Chávez has strengthened his political position through a Constituent Assembly that changed the constitution .
Bolivia ’ s Morales also has managed to impose a similar Assembly , though with uncertain results , and Correa is wielding the threat of constitutional change against “ the traditional parties , the native oligarchies , and the empire ” – the common enemies of all three presidents .
The Constituent Assembly approach has , so far , proven to be very effective in helping these new caudillos to consolidate their power .
Because it is a process that calls for total reform , it helps them avoid debates about specific changes .
Instead , social change is mingled with institutional reform in ways that may seem incomprehensible to voters .
For example , Chávez ’ s and Morales ’ Constituent Assemblies are attractive not only to all of Venezuela ’ s or Bolivia ’ s radical groups who are seeking to re-found their Republics and reinvent history , but also to those who want to create a forum for democratic deliberation .
As they deliberate , however , more and more power is concentrated in the new caudillos .
The experiences of Venezuela and Bolivia suggest that the process only frustrates both radical and democratic forces .
The radicals soon discover that changing norms is not enough to change reality , while the democrats find that heightened social mobilization makes dialogue impossible .
Moreover , most find that when the Assembly gets to deal with specific proposals , which is rare , the proposals are disagreeable .
In the end , the establishment of a Constituent Assembly merely weakens all other institutions .
Since its focus is the “ law of laws , ” the Assembly implicitly questions the status of all public norms and bodies , thus eroding the political system .
When this happens , the presidency is strengthened , enabling the incumbent ’ s transformation into a caudillo .
As is always the case , those who promote the concentration of power find justification for their acts in the revolutionary need to change structures , liberate the nation , and overcome poverty .
But when this concentrated power actually begins to take action , all the old confusions of the left come back to life , as is now the case in Venezuela and Bolivia .
The most flagrant confusion is that which conflates state and nation .
As a result , transferring resources to the state is seen as putting them into the hands of the nation .
Misled by this confusion , Venezuelans and Bolivians enthusiastically support the rebirth of state companies , without realizing that this only wastes resources that could have been spent better and more efficiently elsewhere , since few state companies ever succeed in ridding themselves of bureaucratic inefficiency or corruption .
Another confusion , and perhaps a more dangerous one , similarly conflates “ the people ” with the so-called “ masses ” going out into the streets .
The logic of this type of mobilization is that resources are directed to the group that shouts the loudest and is able to trigger social conflict .
This means that attention is diverted from the weakest and those most in need to those who already are well enough off to be organized .
Indeed , often it is the state itself , now controlled by a powerful president , that mobilizes chosen groups , aided by the concentration of enormous resources in the government ’ s hands which has arisen due to greater state intervention in the economy .
The fight to control oil and gas revenues is paramount in this regard .
More than 90 % of Venezuela ’ s export earnings come from the oil and gas sectors , which provide about half of the government ’ s income .
In Ecuador and Bolivia , income from oil and gas is more modest , but in both cases hydrocarbon exports account for the largest share of total exports , and provide about one-third of government revenue .
This concentration of revenues radically changes the relationship between society and the state .
In all three countries , the government ’ s financial situation does not depend on the economic fate of companies or workers . On the contrary , companies and workers depend on public services and the subsidies that the government provides with revenues derived from oil and gas .
When social organizations are limited and weak , as in Venezuela , this concentration of resources means that concentrated political power can perpetuate itself by reducing huge parts of the economy to dependent clients .
When social organizations are strong , conflict arises to control public resources .
In both cases , independent institutions begin to be perceived as enemies , which the caudillos and their client corporate groups seek to destroy .
Latin American populism has always nurtured itself on this dynamic .
Looking beyond the rhetoric of the new left in Venezuela , Bolivia , and Ecuador , it is already clear that today ’ s “ twenty-first century socialism ” is no different from its twentieth-century antecedents .
The main lesson seems to be that natural abundance may support democracy and development only when they are not in the hands of bureaucrats or caudillos .
