Education is a Security Issue
LONDON – In November , I spoke at the United Nations Security Council for the first time in 13 years . It struck me how different the mood is now .
In September 2000 , the world seemed very different .
We were trying to articulate the new security order in the decade after the fall of the Berlin Wall .
Of course there were challenges .
But the atmosphere was light , positive even , as we discussed eradicating poverty in the developing world .
This time , the mood was dark .
And the first days of 2014 have made it darker still . Scroll down any day ’ s news summary and you find stories of terrorism and violence perpetrated in the cause of a false view of religion .
Some of it is committed by non-state actors , and some of it by state actors ; but all of it is committed in the context of division and conflict defined by differences of religious faith .
This is the new struggle of the twenty-first century . We will not win it unless we fight its root causes as well as its ghastly consequences .
Today , in an arc that stretches from the Far East through the Middle East to the streets of cities in Europe and the United States , we face a scourge that has taken innocent lives , scarred communities , and destabilized countries .
It is a threat that is constantly evolving , growing , and mutating to counter our fight against it .
The extremists propagating this violence have networks of outreach to young people and know the power of education , whether formal or informal .
Extremists are filling young minds with the belief that anyone who disagrees is an enemy – and not just their enemy , but God ’ s enemy .
The security debate has understandably often focused on the consequences .
After an attack , states consider immediate security measures .
Terrorists are hunted down .
Then we get back to our daily lives , until the next time it happens .
But lasting change depends on dealing with the root causes of extremism .
Of course politics plays its part .
And the extremists are good at jumping on the back of political grievances .
But the soil in which they plant the seeds of hate is fertilized with ignorance .
That is why we need to start thinking of education as a security issue .
The extremists justify killing in the name of God .
This is an obscene perversion of proper religious faith .
And it is a menace , both for the harm that it does directly and for the damaging division and sectarianism that it nurtures indirectly . Every killing is a human tragedy .
But it also causes a chain reaction of bitterness and hatred .
There is real fear in the communities plagued by such extremism , fear that paralyzes normal life and pushes people away from each other .
Globalization is intensifying and multiplying this extremism .
Not limited by borders , it can spring up anywhere . We are more connected than at any point in human history , and more and more people come into contact with those who are different from them .
So the need to respect a neighbor who is not like you is much greater ; but the scope to identify him or her as an enemy is also greater .
And this is not only about Islamic extremism .
There are extremist acts perpetrated against Muslims because of their religion , and today there are fanatical Christians , Jews , Hindus , and Buddhists who disfigure the true nature of their faith .
That is why education in the twenty-first century is a security issue for all of us .
The challenge is to show young people who are vulnerable to appeals from terrorists that there is a better path to having their voice heard , a more meaningful way to engage with the world .
The good news is that we know how to do this .
I use my Faith Foundation only as one example .
Our schools program promotes cross-cultural dialogue among students aged 12-17 around the world .
Reaching students in more than 20 countries , our program connects students via a secure Web site , where they interact from their classrooms under the guidance of trained teachers .
Through facilitated videoconferences , students discuss global issues from a variety of faith and belief perspectives .
They gain the dialogue skills required to prevent conflict by breaking down religious and cultural stereotypes .
For schools in the poorest areas , we use special arrangements , because they cannot access the Internet themselves .
To be sure , we are only a drop in the ocean .
But we now have experience in more than a thousand schools ; over 50,000 students have been taught , and we are working in countries as diverse as Pakistan , India , the US , Jordan , Egypt , Canada , Italy , the Philippines , and Indonesia .
I have been privileged to witness these students becoming at ease with the cultures , faiths , and beliefs that inspire so many people around the world .
There are many other fantastic examples of this type of work .
But they lack the resources , weight , and recognition that they need .
We need to mobilize to defeat extremism .
And we need to act globally .
All governments must take seriously their responsibility to educate young people to accept and respect people of different faiths and cultures .
There is no issue that is more pressing .
There is a real danger that religious conflict replaces the ideologically based struggles of the last century in an equally devastating form .
It is up to all of us to show people that we have a better idea than the extremists have – to learn from each other and live with each other .
