Abenomics ’ Women Problem
TOKYO – When Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe addressed the United Nations General Assembly last week , he emphasized his determination to build a society in which women shine .
Indeed , creating opportunities for women in the workforce is an essential pillar of the government ’ s reform program , so-called “ Abenomics . ”
Abe is clearly on the right track .
According to an analysis by researchers at Goldman Sachs , closing the gender gap could boost GDP by 9 % in the United States and nearly 13 % in Japan .
During his stay in New York , Abe also discussed “ womenomics ” with Hillary Clinton , who had made empowering women in the economy a key policy goal during her tenure as US Secretary of State .
Abe , strange to say , is the first Japanese leader to grasp that the underutilization of women ’ s skills has been holding back Japan ’ s economy .
Japan ranked 105th out of 136 countries in the World Economic Forum ’ s “ Global Gender Gap Report 2013 , ” down from 101st place in 2012 .
The problem begins in Abe ’ s own domain – politics .
In his cabinet reshuffle earlier this month , five female ministers were appointed , but in the face of strong opposition from male MPs .
More important , the appointments amounted to painting over the cracks : Only 39 of the 480 members of the Japanese Diet ’ s lower house , or 7.9 % , are women .
The Inter-Parliamentary Union ranks Japan 158th out of 189 countries in terms of its ratio of female MPs .
Things are just as bad at lower levels of government , where women account for a mere 13.1 % of representatives in local parliaments , more than 40 % of which have no female members at all .
As the leader of the Liberal Democratic Party , Abe should instruct local party branches to choose more female candidates to run in next April ’ s local elections .
But , at least so far , Abe seems to lack the will to do so ( though he may choose to work with local party bosses behind the scenes to bring in more women ) .
It is also worrying that some of the women Abe has selected for his cabinet and for key party posts are arch-conservatives who advocate that women stay at home and take care of children .
Given this , one cannot help feeling uncertain about the credibility of his womenomics initiatives .
That is especially true when one considers the lack of women in corporate management positions .
Everyone at the meeting of the Keidanren , the Federation of Economic Organizations , to welcome US Ambassador Caroline Kennedy were men in dark suits .
In 2003 , Norway revised its corporation law to state that companies that failed to place women in 40 % of management positions could face delisting .
If the same law were applied to Japan today , every company would be delisted .
Women currently hold an estimated 9 % of senior management positions in Japan , compared to 40 % in the Philippines , 24 % in France , and 22 % in the United States .
One reason that Japan ’ s consumer electronics manufacturers are no longer world-beaters is that they have not fully used their female employees in managerial positions , despite their varied experiences .
The exceptions are instructive .
When Akira Matsumoto became CEO of the Japanese snack manufacturer Calbee , he began appointing both female executives and foreigners to the company ’ s leadership .
Revenues and earnings have increased , and net sales have grown threefold .
Though there is no proof that the former caused the latter , Matsumoto ’ s commitment to lead in this area suggests that corporate dynamism may well increase with a more prominent role for women .
Likewise , Daiwa Securities CEO Shigeharu Suzuki has appointed women as executive officers to improve sales capabilities , with promising results .
Although the employment rate of women in Japan reached 69.5 % in 2013 , more than 60 % of women leave the workplace prematurely , mostly owing to childbirth .
This pattern results from institutional impediments to achieving a viable work-family balance – impediments that embody the harsh view of male superiors and colleagues toward working mothers .
Changing this view is not easy , because the Confucian belief that women belong in the home remains embedded in Japanese and some other Asian societies .
Moreover , most of the people participating in forums or workshops focused on womenomics are women ; too often , these events simply turn into platforms for women to complain among themselves .
Abe ’ s womenomics will not work unless and until Japanese men change their thinking .
If Abenomics is now stalling , as many fear , the reason may be found in a lack of capacity to implement the policies put forward , particularly with respect to women .
Indeed , the key to Abenomics ’ success or failure may turn out to be whether the Japanese people are convinced that women are essential to their country ’ s economic revival , and are willing to support an earnest effort to establish institutions that support working women .
