A UN Consensus
“ When you say everything is a priority , then you are saying you don ’ t really have any priorities . ” Those were the words of US ambassador to the United Nations John Bolton as he attempted my challenge to establish concrete priorities for the world .
Political recognition of the importance of priorities is a crucial development .
Politicians avoid creating prioritized ‘ to do ’ lists that could upset groups whose interests do not come first .
It is simpler to declare that every challenge is a ‘ top priority ’ .
The UN spends billions of dollars promoting human rights , protecting the environment , fighting disease and reducing poverty .
The organization ’ s budget is vast but – like all budgets – limited .
Yet , choices about battling humanity ’ s biggest challenges are rarely founded in a principled framework of prioritization .
Decisions are mired in a constant battle for resources between competing interest groups , countries and organizations .
UN Deputy Secretary-General Mark Malloch Brown has pointed out that there is distrust between representatives of populous developing nations and those from wealthier states – a stand-off he calls “ numbers versus pocketbooks ” .
This backdrop makes this week ’ s achievement all the more remarkable .
I gathered UN ambassadors from the US , China , India , Pakistan , Tanzania , Zambia , Russia , Egypt , Thailand and Vietnam in a project called Copenhagen Consensus .
I asked them to set priorities for the world .
The ambassadors – who together represent about half of the world ’ s population – listened to climate change experts tell them that global warming is a vital issue and that the Kyoto Protocol could be used to tackle it .
They heard from health experts who said that communicable diseases were rampant and that mosquito nets would be a great way to combat malaria .
Other experts told them that two-and-a-half billion people lack access to sanitation but investment in relatively simple projects could drastically reduce that number .
All important problems .
Each should be tackled .
But with limited resources , we need to commit to solving some problems before others .
It makes sense to first invest in the areas that achieve the greatest benefits .
The essential question put to the ambassadors was : if you had an extra $ 50 billion , how should it be spent to achieve the most ‘ good ’ possible ? ’
The ambassadors considered the expert evidence and debated the pro and cons of each option before putting together a prioritized ‘ to do ’ list of solutions to the world ’ s greatest challenges ( See List ) .
They concluded that the world ’ s top solutions are better health , cleaner water , more education and less hunger .
The burden of disease ruins lives and entire communities .
Nine out of ten deaths from communicable diseases in the developing world are avoidable .
The world could fight back with general health services in at-need areas along with more focused efforts to combat HIV and malaria .
The ambassadors found that providing clean drinking water and sanitation to the billion people lacking such amenities was crucial .
They also concluded that without a constant focus on education , other gains could not be sustained .
They decided that dealing with malnutrition is also a crucial priority .
Eight hundred million people are chronically undernourished while three and a half billion lack micronutrients .
But choosing the issues at the top of a priority list is the easy part .
Asking politicians to choose what shouldn ’ t come first was the real test .
The ambassadors showed courage .
They concluded that although migration , corruption and conflicts are vital , these should not come first on the global priority list .
The evidence led them to believe that proposed solutions to financial instability and global warming – while both important topics – are not the right investments to start with .
The UN ambassadors ’ first attempt at a deliberate prioritization shows that this approach could be used on a much bigger scale .
It could help to put the organization back on track and assist it to focus on doing the best things first .
As John Bolton pointed out , the UN has 9,000 mandates , which means 9,000 top priorities , which essentially means
Thailand ’ s ambassador pointed out that using the Copenhagen Consensus prioritization framework could help the UN to ensure better , more effective utilization of scarce resources in tackling top issues .
Zambia ’ s ambassador believed that “ all member countries of the UN would benefit from going through a similar process , becoming more aware of the need to prioritize . ” Perhaps it is now time to convene all of the UN member countries and ask them the hard but vital question : given that we can ’ t do it all , what should we do first ?
List of priorities , outcome document from Copenhagen Consensus by UN ambassadors , June 16-17 2006 at Georgetown University :
challenge
opportunity
1
Communicable Diseases
Scaled-up basic health services
2
Sanitation and Water
Community-managed water supply and sanitation
3
Education
Physical expansion
4
Malnutrition and Hunger
Improving infant and child nutrition
5
Malnutrition and Hunger
Investment in technology in developing country agriculture
6
Communicable Diseases
Control of HIV / AIDS
7
Communicable Diseases
Control of malaria
8
Malnutrition and Hunger
Reducing micro nutrient deficiencies
9
Subsidies and Trade Barriers
Optimistic Doha : 50 % liberalization
10
Education
Improve quality / Systemic reforms
11
Sanitation and Water
Small-scale water technology for livelihoods
12
Education
Expand demand for schooling
13
Malnutrition and Hunger
Reducing Low Birth Weight for high risk pregnancies
14
Education
Reductions in the cost of schooling to increase demand
15
Sanitation and Water
Research to increase water productivity in food production
16
Migration
Migration for development
17
Corruption
Procurement reform
18
Conflicts
Aid post-conflict to reduce the risk of repeat conflict
19
Sanitation and Water
Re-using waste water for agriculture
20
Migration
Guest worker policies
21
Sanitation and Water
Sustainable food and fish production in wetlands
22
Corruption
Grassroots monitoring and service delivery
23
Corruption
Technical assistance to develop monitoring and transparency initiatives
24
Migration
Active immigration policies
25
Subsidies and Trade Barriers
Pessimistic Doha : 25 % liberalization
26
Corruption
Reduction in the state-imposed costs of business / government relations
27
Climate Change
The Kyoto Protocol
28
Conflicts
Aid as conflict prevention
29
Corruption
Reform of revenue collection
30
Financial Instability
International solution to the currency-mismatch problem
31
Conflicts
Transparency in natural resource rents as conflict prevention
32
Conflicts
Military spending post-conflict to reduce the risk of repeat conflict
33
Financial Instability
Re-regulate domestic financial markets
34
Conflicts
Shortening conflicts : Natural resource tracking
35
Financial Instability
Reimpose capital controls
36
Financial Instability
Adopt a common currency
37
Subsidies and Trade Barriers
Full reform : 100 % liberalization
38
Climate Change
Optimal carbon tax
39
Climate Change
Value-at-risk carbon tax
40
Climate Change
A carbon tax starting at $ 2 and ending at $ 20
