The Three Mis-Represents
It is two years since the Chinese Communist Party ( CCP ) unveiled its new ideological credo , called the " Three Represents . "
What good fortune it is that China 's most sacred , encompassing , and powerful doctrine built around the triumvirate of " the interests of the majority of the people " " advanced culture , " and " advanced productive forces " found one political party to be its representative !
Good fortune , that is , for the CCP , not for China and its people .
The " Three Represents " has several official versions , each including the words " always , " " China , " and " represent . "
Their meaning is clear .
On the other hand , " majority of the people , " " advanced culture , " and " advanced productive forces , " as well as some other phrases that dominate the doctrine , are vague , perhaps deliberately so .
Common sense suggests that the " majority of the people , " whom the CCP is supposed to " represent , " should include workers .
But the CCP long ago abandoned the workers .
How many lost their jobs last month ?
How many were forced to take early retirement ?
How many mining accidents were there ?
How many workers ' protests ?
Who jailed their organizers ?
The " Representative of the Three Represents " refuse to say .
Workers who protest and strike are " rioting . " Whoever reports such events is " anti-revolutionary . "
The same is true of the Party 's relationship with the peasants , who provided Mao Zedong with the soldiers and supplies he needed in battles that lasted decades .
Peasants followed Mao because the CCP promised them land .
But Mao decided to take back the land from the peasants even before it was given to them .
" The serious problem is the education of the peasants , " he said .
So he taught them that all land belongs to the state .
The " representatives " of the peasants are the new landlords .
In a China without democracy , student sentiment is a key political barometer .
Unlike workers or peasants , students include people from all levels of society , so whatever mobilizes them represents society 's focus at that time .
From April 15th to June 4th , 1989 , students demonstrating in Tiananmen Square , and their supporters , conducted the saddest opinion poll in Chinese history , expressing a common will to end totalitarianism , build democracy , and eliminate corruption .
Those who defend the Party 's bloody crackdown of those students have no right to call themselves the representatives of the majority of the people .
Their claim to be " always representing the progressive direction of advanced culture " is yet another grand and empty declaration .
Chinese culture stretches three thousand years into the past and perhaps thousands of years into the future .
Is it to be " always represented " by a lone political party ?
I do not know what " the progressive direction of advanced culture " is , but advanced culture played no part in the CCP-inspired " Wipe Out Poisonous Weeds Campaign , " the " Anti-Rightist Movement , " or the " Eliminate Demons and Evil Heresy Campaign . "
Such obscurantism only creates a culture of stultifying uniformity .
Like a blade of grass beneath a stone , culture knows how and in which direction to seek light .
It does not need to be " represented . "
Of the three " represents , " the clearest meaning is to be found in the CCP 's vow to " always represent the demands of advanced productive forces . "
This means representing the interests of the da-kuan , those who suddenly became rich , usually through government connections .
The phrase has no deeper meaning .
The union of power and money in today 's China originates from the steady inflation of bureaucracy .
Before the Great Leap Forward , townships could barely afford a few full-time cadres .
Today , each township has hundreds .
Their basic salary is paid by the central government , but bonuses and extra benefits depend on contributions from the " advanced productive forces " at the county and township level .
Whatever the rich ask of the CCP - land leases , low interest loans , violation of labor laws , environmental standards , contracts , and intellectual property - can be considered " the demands of advanced productive forces . "
Even under less corrupt conditions , representing " the most advanced productive forces " is a flawed idea .
Imagine that the Olympic Committee represented only the interests of gold medal winners , or that the Education Ministry represented only post-doctoral programs but ignored elementary schools .
While the high-tech sector at the top of the economic pyramid is important , the traditional sectors at the bottom still form the foundation .
What will become of several hundred million rural peasants and jobless workers in sunset industries ?
Who will address inequality and divergent social interests ?
An increasingly pluralistic society is being forced into a procrustean structure that allows only one voice , one need , and one kind of interest : the voice , needs , and interests of the party .
But the theory of the Three Represents is nevertheless necessary , because a new situation has emerged .
When the CCP came to power in 1948 , it could claim to embody socialism , Marxism , and the proletariat 's historical mission .
Fifty years later , socialism 's advantages , Marxism 's truth , and the proletarian character of the Party have all been unanswerably challenged .
So the Three Represents is an effort to salvage one-party rule .
You may doubt socialism , but you cannot doubt " advanced productive forces . "
You may not believe in Marxism , but you must believe in " advanced culture . "
The CCP no longer represents workers and peasants , but it can represent the " majority of the people , " including " red " capitalists .
Indeed , whether CCP members who have become " revolutionarily " wealthy remain " red " is determined solely by their acceptance of one-party rule .
Welcoming " red capitalists " therefore does not imply democratization .
Such people are more likely to seek to strengthen their privileges than promote pluralism and the rule of law .
Totalitarianism , not political reform , is their livelihood .
It is this , above all else , that the theory of the Three Represents comprehends .
