The Myth of Khaki Democracy
NEW YORK – Egypt and Thailand have little in common , except for one thing . In both countries , at different times , educated people who pride themselves on being democrats have ended up applauding military coups against elected governments .
They had resisted oppressive military regimes for many years .
But , in Thailand in 2006 , as in Egypt last month , they were happy to see their political leaders ousted by force .
This perversity is not without reason .
The elected leaders in both countries , Thaksin Shinawatra in Thailand and Mohamed Morsi in Egypt , were good examples of illiberal democrats : they tended to view their electoral success as a mandate to manipulate constitutional norms and behave like autocrats .
They are not alone in this respect .
In fact , they are probably typical of leaders in countries with little or no history of democratic government .
Turkey ’ s prime minister , Recep Tayyip Erdoğan , is in the same camp .
And if the leaders of Algeria ’ s Islamic Salvation Front ( FIS ) had been allowed to take power in 1991 , after their early success in a democratic election , they would almost certainly have been illiberal rulers .
( Instead , they were crushed by a military coup , before a second round of elections could take place , triggering a brutal eight-year civil war in which an estimated 200,000 people died . )
The aftermath of the 2006 coup in Thailand was not nearly so bloody .
But the bitterness lingers among Shinawatra ’ s supporters – even now , when his sister , Yingluck , is Prime Minister .
Street violence is a constant threat .
Only the frail and ailing 85-year-old King Bhumibol Adulyadej still functions as a symbol of national cohesion .
Without him , fighting between the rural poor and the urban elites could quickly erupt again .
This does not bode well for Thai democracy .
Another military intervention is the last thing the country needs .
In Egypt , things look far worse at the moment .
The leader of the military coup , General Abdul-Fattah al-Sisi , has promised to confront Morsi ’ s Muslim Brotherhood with maximum force .
In two separate incidents in July , security forces opened fire on supporters of the Brotherhood as they peacefully protested against Morsi ’ s ouster and arrest , killing almost 200 people .
Secret-police units that were active under former President Hosni Mubarak ( and known for their frequent use of torture ) are being reconstituted for the first time since the 2011 revolution .
None of this is either democratic or liberal .
And yet many Egyptians , including some human-rights activists , have endorsed it .
One man , who was savagely stomped by a member of the armed forces in Tahrir Square in 2011 , now claims that the Egyptian people should “ stand together ” with the military , and that all Muslim Brotherhood leaders should be arrested .
A prominent democracy activist , Esraa Abdel Fattah , has denounced Morsi ’ s party as a gang of foreign-backed terrorists .
The army leadership is saying the same thing : Special measures , maximum force , and revived security units are all necessary to “ fight terrorism . ”
Some foreign commentators have been as deluded as Egyptians who back the coup .
A well-known Dutch novelist voiced a rather typical response , saying that he didn ’ t care much what happened to Morsi ’ s supporters , for they were all “ Islamo-fascists ” anyway .
And foreign governments , including that of the United States , are averting their eyes .
President Barack Obama ’ s administration refuses to describe what happened as a “ coup . ”
US Secretary of State John Kerry even claimed that the military was “ restoring democracy . ”
There is no doubt that Morsi ’ s government was inexperienced , often incompetent , and showed little interest in listening to views other than those of its supporters , which were often far from liberal .
But Morsi ’ s people are not foreign-backed terrorists . Nor was Morsi an Egyptian version of Iran ’ s Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini .
The election that brought Morsi to power gave a political voice for the first time to millions of people , many of them poor , uneducated , and religious .
They may not have been very good democrats , or even particularly tolerant of different views .
Many of them had opinions – for example , on the role of women , on sex , and on the place of Islam in public life – that secular liberals find abhorrent .
But silencing these people by force , and calling them foreign-backed terrorists , can have only one result : more violence .
If the outcomes of democratic elections are not respected , people will seek other means to make themselves heard .
Morsi ’ s autocratic inclinations may have damaged democracy ; taking him out in a coup deals it a mortal blow .
How to bridge the gap in developing countries between secular , more or less Westernized urban elites and the rural poor is an old question .
One solution is to enforce secular modernization by oppressing the poor and their religious organizations .
Egypt has already endured the harsh rule of secular police states , of both the right and the left .
The other solution is to give democracy a chance .
This is not possible without allowing some form of religious expression in public life .
No democracy in the Middle East that fails to take account of Islam will work .
But , without the freedom to express other views and beliefs , democracy will remain illiberal .
This is hard for Islamist parties to accept .
Many Islamists may in fact prefer an illiberal to a liberal democracy .
But liberals who truly favor democracy must accept that Islamists are entitled to play a political role , too .
The alternative is to revert to illiberal autocracy .
Applauding the military coup against Morsi makes this the more likely outcome .
