The Despotic Temptation
MADRID – US President Franklin D. Roosevelt , when asked about American support for the notorious Nicaraguan despot Anastasio Somoza , purportedly replied , “ He may be a son of a bitch , but he ’ s our son of a bitch . ”
Whether or not the quip is apocryphal , it sums up a longstanding Western approach to much of the world – and one that underpinned US foreign policy throughout the Cold War .
But lately an even more troubling sentiment seems to have emerged , with Western leaders willing to settle not for “ our son of a bitch , ” but for just about any son of a bitch who can impose stability , whatever the cost .
It is an alluring but dangerous mindset .
Experience should have pushed Western leaders in the opposite direction .
After all , as time passed , the ostensibly pragmatic clientelism of the Cold War proved far from ideal .
Indeed , in many cases – the Shah of Iran , Cambodia ’ s Lon Nol , Chile ’ s Augusto Pinochet , and the Democratic Republic of the Congo ’ s Mobutu Sese Seko , to name a few – it led to long-term insecurity and disorder .
But these are desperate times .
Unable to contain the violence , suffering , and chaos engulfing the Middle East and North Africa – the consequences of which are increasingly being felt in Europe – Western leaders are falling back into the Cold War trap .
All they want is for someone – and now virtually anyone – to enforce order .
This desperation is perhaps most apparent in Syria .
After years of insisting that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad was the problem , a growing number of Western policymakers and strategists are now suggesting that he may actually be part of the solution – or at least the transition .
Last month , German Chancellor Angela Merkel noted the necessity of including Assad in talks about Syria ’ s future .
Likewise , both US Secretary of State John Kerry and British Prime Minister David Cameron now concede a role for Assad in a hypothetical transition .
Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy went so far as to say that the world had to “ count on ” Assad in the fight against the Islamic State .
Whether driven by realism or resignation , this shift reflects a distinct desire for stability – a desire that is reinforced , especially in Europe , by the presence of another governance black hole in Libya .
The same desire has already driven the West to support Abdel Fattah al-Sisi ’ s regime in Egypt – despite its dubious origins and continuing repression – with only the slightest of pressure for reform .
When confronted with anarchy , this eagerness to secure stability by whatever means necessary is understandable .
But it is a slippery slope .
And , in fact , it is based on a false dichotomy between autocracy and instability .
Of course , autocratic figures like Russian President Vladimir Putin have a strong interest in promoting this dichotomy .
As the Bulgarian political analyst Ivan Krastev recently noted , Putin – a long-time ally of Assad – is doing his best to promote the idea that Western efforts to promote good governance lead only to volatility . “ Rather than bringing about reforms , ” Putin declared in a recent address to the UN General Assembly , “ aggressive foreign interference has resulted in … violence , poverty , and social disaster . ”
A strong Assad-led government , the logic goes , would have the opposite effect – a point that Russia is now trying to prove on the ground in Syria .
However compelling this idea might be , and however weary the West feels , the reality , demonstrated starkly during the Cold War and its bloody aftermath , is that tyranny is never genuinely stable – certainly not in the long run .
The desire for human dignity and respect – the cornerstones of good governance – cannot be quelled , especially at a time when people have unprecedented access to information through the Internet and mobile technologies .
So good governance is the key to long-term stability .
But , like stability , good governance cannot be imposed from the outside ; rather , it must develop organically , supported by sturdy roots within a society .
This does not mean that there is nothing Western governments can do .
On the contrary , by helping to cultivate a strong civil society at the local and national levels , external forces can play an important role in creating a strong foundation for good governance in crisis-stricken countries .
The Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet – the group of civil-society organizations that was awarded this year ’ s Nobel Peace Prize for its “ decisive contribution ” to democracy after the country ’ s 2011 revolution – has shown just how effective a strong civil society can be in supporting stability .
To make a real difference in stabilizing today ’ s most tumultuous regions , the international community should hold Tunisia up as a model ( and remain committed to ensuring that it continues on the path toward stable democracy ) , rather than falling prey to Putin ’ s cautionary fables about Syria and Libya .
Unfortunately , Western leaders have repeatedly shown that they lack the patience and dedication needed to engage consistently and humbly with communities in crisis-stricken countries or to provide the reliable , incremental , and prolonged governance assistance needed to prevent state collapse .
With their short attention spans and heightened sense of their own importance , they prefer the option of simply installing a despot to deal with it .
