Towards a Liberal Dictatorship ?
MOSCOW : Russia 's presidential elections next month now look like a coronation .
The speed of Vladimir Putin 's seemingly irresistible rise astounds everyone .
What is the secret of his phenomenal political success ?
The answer , at its most general , appears simple : Putin took the two warring clans of Boris Berezovsky and Anatoly Chubais – which together control much of Russia 's wealth and public space – and united them behind him .
The upshot of this marriage of convenience has brought an obscure former KGB officer , a strongman whose activities gave rise to rumors of illegal enrichment and shady real estate deals , reportedly hushed and covered up in Yeltsin 's Russia , to the summit of power .
What Putin brings to this menage is control over the security ministries – as always in Russia , an important key to power and one of the main pillars of Putin 's political edifice .
Putin is wary about relinquishing this asset , so he vested its supervision in the loyal hands of Sergei Shoigu , who is in many ways a Putin clone , for he used the ruins of the old Soviet civil defense system to construct in a short space of time a secretive empire of his own .
The second element in Putin 's edifice of political power – contributed by his clan allies – is a hidden control of Russia 's media .
Political scientist Sergei Markov has labeled today 's Russia a " manipulative democracy " – a system in which the state pulls the strings behind a facade of democratic institutions .
During December 's Duma elections , for example , the government – in violation of existing electoral laws – used its influence to give both covert and overt support to the " party of power , " Unity ( Yedinstvo ) .
Russia 's leaders ' willingness to ignore the law when it is not to their liking revives bad memories here , as government domination of the media shuts off the public from influence over the state , which is becomes ever more unaccountable .
The third element of Putin 's order is the connection to the new Russian oligarchy , also delivered by his mentors .
When it comes to the economy , Putin is a clean slate upon which his entourage – the clans of Berezovsky and Chubais – will write .
But the price of this may be even greater than the crash of August 1998 which resulted from policies pursued by the very same people .
What the aftermath of that crisis showed was that even an underdeveloped democracy , such as Russia , is enough to turn an economically incompetent government out of power .
To continue with the privatization of the natural monopolies that will give a criminal and corrupt elite another chance to fill their pockets , may require extinguishing even the vestiges of democracy that existed under Yeltsin , thus pushing Russia on the way to a “ liberal dictatorship . ”
Finally , the fourth pillar of Putin 's edifice is his control over the Duma .
This control is ostensibly democratic – the " Kremlin bloc " of parties holds a majority of votes .
But it was achieved by a cynical alliance with the Communists which gives them a new standing in the political establishment and restores their ability to participate in the power game .
The alliance was possible precisely because the Communists , who may not understand political reform or economics , do understand the naked use -- and abuse -- of power .
The combination of finance , media , police , and corrupt politicians may be enough to nip any opposition to Putin in the bud .
Not only is the Duma now likely to be a puppet parliament , as was the Supreme Soviet ; it may “ democratically ” stamp out hints of real democracy in Russia .
The challenge for Putin is to make sure that his relations with the West do not sour .
His war in Chechnya , while popular at home , is responsible for much bad press recently , even if the American administration 's response is tepid .
But the real test of whether Putin persuades America that he fits the West 's long-term interests is not Chechnya ; it is the fight against corruption , as personified by Berezovsky .
President Clinton has said that battling corruption is now Russia 's priority ; and the Swiss prosecutor 's office has expressed its readiness to make all materials in the " Berezovsky case " available to Russia .
Should Putin turn against Berezovsky , even if superficially , and force him off the political stage , Putin could look good , and even receive IMF assistance in May this year .
Moreover , this may very well be in Putin 's own interest .
Removing Berezovsky just before presidential elections would be a good publicity stunt , and a way of silencing the " unwanted witnesses " of Yeltsin 's entourage .
If anti-corruption investigations target Berezovsky alone , others will keep their mouths shut .
If Berezovsky 's punishment is more apparent than real , Berezovsky too will say nothing .
Removing Berezovsky would also allow Putin to establish direct control over Berezovsky 's media empire – another boost to his personal power .
What 's good for Putin may not be good for Russia .
Putin 's war in Chechnya enables him to keep public opinion mobilized and to accuse the opposition of lacking patriotism , even of treason .
But for the second time in ten years Russia is burying its potential for economic development in Chechnya 's mountains and cities .
There is by now little room for maneuver in the economy : the positive effect of devaluation has worn off , world oil prices are falling again ( and with them the state 's prime source of revenue ) , the debt crisis lingers .
The temptation to soften these blows by printing money as elections roll around will only worsen the financial situation .
In the end , mounting economic failure may make Putin follow the pathetic course pioneered by Yeltsin : trying to wash his hands of a failing economy , dismissing governments as the country lurches from crisis to crisis , hoping all the while to remain remote enough to survive .
For Russia , the result will be a further brain drain and ever greater degradation .
