What Money Can Buy
CHICAGO – In an interesting recent book , What Money Can ’ t Buy : The Moral Limits of the Market , the Harvard philosopher Michael Sandel points to the range of things that money can buy in modern societies and gently tries to stoke our outrage at the market ’ s growing dominance .
Is he right that we should be alarmed ?
While Sandel worries about the corrupting nature of some monetized transactions ( do kids really develop a love of reading if they are bribed to read books ? ) , he is also concerned about unequal access to money , which makes trades using money inherently unequal .
More generally , he fears that the expansion of anonymous monetary exchange erodes social cohesion , and argues for reducing money ’ s role in society .
Sandel ’ s concerns are not entirely new , but his examples are worth reflecting upon .
In the United States , some companies pay the unemployed to stand in line for free public tickets to congressional hearings .
They then sell the tickets to lobbyists and corporate lawyers who have a business interest in the hearing but are too busy to stand in line .
Clearly , public hearings are an important element of participatory democracy .
All citizens should have equal access .
So selling access seems to be a perversion of democratic principles .
The fundamental problem , though , is scarcity .
We cannot accommodate everyone in the room who might have an interest in a particularly important hearing .
So we have to “ sell ” entry .
We can either allow people to use their time ( standing in line ) to bid for seats , or we can auction seats for money .
The former seems fairer , because all citizens seemingly start with equal endowments of time .
But is a single mother with a high-pressure job and three young children as equally endowed with spare time as a student on summer vacation ?
And is society better off if she , the chief legal counsel for a large corporation , spends much of her time standing in line ?
Whether it is better to sell entry tickets for time or for money thus depends on what we hope to achieve .
If we want to increase society ’ s productive efficiency , people ’ s willingness to pay with money is a reasonable indicator of how much they will gain if they have access to the hearing .
Auctioning seats for money makes sense – the lawyer contributes more to society by preparing briefs than by standing in line .
On the other hand , if it is important that young , impressionable citizens see how their democracy works , and that we build social solidarity by making corporate executives stand in line with jobless teenagers , it makes sense to force people to bid with their time and to make entry tickets non-transferable .
But if we think that both objectives – efficiency and solidarity – should play some role , perhaps we should turn a blind eye to hiring the unemployed to stand in line in lieu of busy lawyers , so long as they do not corner all of the seats .
What about the sale of human organs , another example Sandel worries about ?
Something seems wrong when a lung or a kidney is sold for money .
Yet we celebrate the kindness of a stranger who donates a kidney to a young child .
So , clearly , it is not the transfer of the organ that outrages us – we do not think that the donor is misinformed about the value of a kidney or is being fooled into parting with it .
Nor , I think , do we have concerns about the scruples of the person selling the organ – after all , they are parting irreversibly with something that is dear to them for a price that few of us would accept .
I think part of our discomfort has to do with the circumstances in which the transaction takes place .
What kind of society do we live in if people have to sell their organs to survive ?
But , while a ban on organ sales may make us feel better , does it really make society better off ?
Possibly , if it makes society work harder to ensure that people are never driven to the circumstances that would make them contemplate selling a vital organ .
But possibly not , if it allows society to ignore the underlying problem , either moving the trade underground , or forcing people in such circumstances to resort to worse remedies .
Then again , part of our unease probably has to do with what we perceive as an unequal exchange .
The seller is giving up part of her body in an irreversible transaction .
The buyer is giving up only money – perhaps earned on a lucky stock trade or at an overpaid job .
If that money had been earned by selling a portion of a lung , or represented savings painfully accumulated during years of backbreaking work , we might consider the exchange more equal .
Of course , the central virtue of money is precisely its anonymity .
I need know nothing about the dollar bill I receive to be able to use it .
But , because money ’ s anonymity obscures its provenance , it may be socially less acceptable as a medium of payment for some objects .
In both examples – congressional tickets and organ sales – Sandel suggests reducing money ’ s role .
But money has many virtues in facilitating transactions – hence its ubiquitous use .
So , perhaps the more important message is that society ’ s tolerance for monetization is proportional to the legitimacy accorded to the distribution of money .
The more people believe that it is the hardworking and the deserving who have money , the more they are willing to tolerate transactions for money ( though some transactions remain beyond the pale ) .
But if people believe that the moneyed are primarily those who are well connected or crooked , their tolerance for monetary transactions falls .
Rather than focusing on prohibiting monetary transactions , perhaps a more important lesson imparted by Sandel ’ s examples is that we should work continuously to improve the perceived legitimacy of money ’ s distribution .
