China is Not Collapsing
LONDON – One question has dominated the International Monetary Fund ’ s annual meeting this year in Peru : Will China ’ s economic downturn trigger a new financial crisis just as the world is putting the last one to bed ?
But the assumption underlying that question – that China is now the global economy ’ s weakest link – is highly suspect .
China certainly experienced a turbulent summer , owing to three factors : economic weakness , financial panic , and the policy response to these problems .
While none on its own would have threatened the world economy , the danger stemmed from a self-reinforcing interaction among them : weak economic data leads to financial turmoil , which induces policy blunders that in turn fuel more financial panic , economic weakness , and policy mistakes .
Such self-reinforcing financial feedback is much more powerful in transmitting global economic contagion than ordinary commercial or trade exposures , as the world learned in 2008-2009 .
The question now is whether the vicious circle that began in China over the summer will continue .
A sensible answer must distinguish between financial perceptions and economic reality .
China ’ s growth slowdown is not in itself surprising or alarming .
As the IMF noted , China ’ s growth rate has been declining steadily for five years – from 10.6 % in 2010 to a projected rate of 6.8 % this year and 6.3 % in 2016 .
This deceleration was inevitable as China advanced from extreme poverty and technological backwardness to become a middle-income economy powered by external trade and consumer spending .
It was also desirable , because rapid growth was hitting environmental limits .
Even as the pace of growth slows , China is contributing more to the world economy than ever before , because its GDP today is $ 10.3 trillion , up from just $ 2.3 trillion in 2005 .
Simple arithmetic shows that $ 10.3 trillion growing at 6 % or 7 % produces much bigger numbers than 10 % growth starting from a base that is almost five times smaller .
This base effect also means that China will continue to absorb more natural resources than ever before , despite its diminishing growth prospects .
Yet China is causing high anxiety , especially in emerging countries , largely because financial markets have convinced themselves that its economy is not only slowing , but falling off a cliff .
Many Western analysts , especially in financial institutions , treat China ’ s official GDP growth of around 7 % as a political fabrication – and the IMF ’ s latest confirmation of its 6.8 % estimate is unlikely to convince them .
They point to steel , coal , and construction statistics , which really are collapsing in several Chinese regions , and to exports , which are growing much less than in the past .
But why do the skeptics accept the truth of dismal government figures for construction and steel output – down 15 % and 4 % , respectively , in the year to August – and then dismiss official data showing 10.8 % retail-sales growth ?
One reason can be found in the financier George Soros ’ s concept of “ reflexivity . ”
Soros has argued for years that financial markets can create inaccurate expectations and then change reality to accord with them .
This is the opposite of the process described in textbooks and built into economic models , which always assume that financial expectations adapt to reality , not the other way round .
In a classic example of reflexivity , when China ’ s stock-market boom turned into July ’ s bust , the government responded with a $ 200 billion attempt to support prices , closely followed by a small devaluation of the previously stable renminbi .
Financial analysts almost universally ridiculed these policies and castigated Chinese leaders for abandoning their earlier pretenses of market-oriented reforms .
The government ’ s apparent desperation was seen as evidence that China was in far greater trouble than previously revealed .
This belief quickly shaped reality , as market analysts blurred the distinction between a growth slowdown and economic collapse .
In mid-September , for example , when the private-sector Purchasing Managers ’ Index ( PMI ) came out at 47.0 , the result was generally reported along these lines : “ The index has now indicated contraction in the [ manufacturing ] sector for seven consecutive months . ”
In fact , Chinese manufacturing was growing by 5-7 % throughout that period .
The supposed evidence was wrong because 50 is the PMI ’ s dividing line not between growth and recession , but between accelerating and slowing growth .
Indeed , for 19 out of the PMI ’ s 36 months of existence , the value has been below 50 , while Chinese manufacturing growth has averaged 7.5 % .
Exaggerations of this kind have undermined confidence in Chinese policy at a particularly dangerous time .
China is now navigating a complex economic transition that involves three sometimes-conflicting objectives : creating a market-based consumer economy ; reforming the financial system ; and ensuring an orderly slowdown that avoids the economic collapse often accompanying industrial restructuring and financial liberalization .
Managing this trifecta successfully will require skillful juggling of priorities – and that will become much more difficult if Chinese policymakers lose international investors ’ trust or , more important , that of China ’ s own citizens and businesses .
Vicious circles of economic instability , devaluation , and capital flight have brought down seemingly unbreakable regimes throughout history .
This probably explains the whiff of panic that followed China ’ s tiny , but totally unexpected , devaluation of the renminbi .
The renminbi , however , has recently stabilized , and capital flight has dwindled , as evidenced by the better-than-expected reserve figures released by the People ’ s Bank of China on October 7 .
This suggests that the government ’ s policy of shifting gradually to a market-based exchange rate may have been better executed than generally believed ; even the measures to support the stock market now look less futile than they did in July .
In short , Chinese economic management seems less incompetent than it did a few months ago .
Indeed , China can probably avoid the financial meltdown widely feared in the summer .
If so , other emerging economies tied to perceptions about China ’ s economic health should also stabilize .
The world has learned since 2008 how dangerously financial expectations can interact with policy blunders , turning modest economic problems into major catastrophes , first in the US and then in the eurozone .
It would be ironic if China ’ s Communist leaders turned out to have a better understanding of capitalism ’ s reflexive interactions among finance , the real economy , and government than Western devotees of free markets .
