Austerity and the Modern Banker
WASHINGTON , DC – Santa Claus came early this year for four former executives of Washington Mutual ( WaMu ) , a large US bank that failed in fall 2008 .
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC ) had brought a lawsuit against the four , actions that included taking huge financial risks while “ knowing that the real estate market was in a ‘ bubble . ’ ” The FDIC sought to recover $ 900 million , but the executives have just settled for $ 64 million , almost all of which will be paid by their insurers ; their out-of-pockets costs are estimated at just $ 400,000 .
To be sure , the executives lost their jobs and now must drop claims for additional compensation .
But , according to the FDIC , the four still earned more than $ 95 million from January 2005 through September 2008 .
So they are walking away with a great deal of cash .
This is what happens when financial executives are compensated for “ return on equity ” unadjusted for risk .
The executives get the upside when things go well ; when the downside risks materialize , they lose nothing ( or close to it ) .
At the same time , their actions – and similar actions by other bankers – are directly responsible for both the run-up in housing prices and the damaging collapse that followed .
That collapse has impacted non-bankers in many negative ways , including through the loss of more than eight million jobs .
It is also leading to austerity – taxes are increasing and government spending is falling at the local and state level around the country .
A difficult fiscal conversation still lies ahead at the federal level , but cuts and contractions of various types seem likely .
Some people argue that Americans need to tighten their belts .
That ’ s an interesting discussion , particularly at a time with unemployment is still above 8 % ( with recent declines largely the result of many jobless workers ’ decision to stop looking and drop out of the labor force altogether ) .
Precipitate austerity is hardly likely to help the economy find its way back to higher employment levels .
But what about government support for the big banks ?
Is this contracting in the light of our current fiscal pressures ?
Unfortunately , it is not ; much government support remains , implicitly through allowing banks to be “ too big to fail , ” and explicitly through various kinds of backing provided by the Federal Reserve .
The rationale – or perhaps we should call it ideology – behind supporting big banks is that they are needed for the economy to recover .
But this position looks increasingly doubtful when the banks are sitting on piles of cash while creditworthy consumers and businesses are reluctant to borrow .
The same situation exists in Europe today , where the reality is even starker .
Banks are receiving ever-larger bailouts , while countries that borrowed are cutting social programs and face rising social tensions and political instability as a result .
Countries like Greece , Italy , and arguably Portugal over-borrowed , and now their citizens face severe consequences .
But the bankers face no consequences whatsoever for over-lending .
To be sure , some major European financial institutions may now face difficulties , and – who knows – perhaps some of their executives will end up being fired .
But does anyone think that the people who ran European banks into the ground will leave their positions with anything less than considerable wealth ?
There is no real austerity – now or possibly in the future – for leading bank executives .
The protesters of “ Occupy Albany ” issued a powerful consensus statement recently , which reads in part :
“ The interests of those who purchase influence are rewarded at the expense of the People , from whom the government ’ s just power is derived .
We believe that this failure in our system is at the core of many interconnected issues we face as a society , and its resolution is key to a just future .
We therefore demand true democracy , decoupled from the corrosive influence of concentrated economic power , and we call all who share in this common goal to stand with us and take action toward this end . ”
Big banks represent the ultimate in concentrated economic power in today ’ s economies .
They are able to resist all meaningful reform that could really change their compensation schemes .
Their executives want to get all the upside while facing none of the true downside .
But capitalism without the prospect of failure is not any kind of market economy .
We are running a large-scale , nontransparent , and dangerous government subsidy scheme for the benefit primarily of a very few , extremely wealthy people .
Jon Huntsman , a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination , is addressing this directly – insisting that we should force the largest banks to break up and to become safer .
No other candidate for the presidency is seriously confronting this issue head-on : just saying “ we ’ ll let them fail ” is no kind of answer when the failure of megabanks would cause so much damage .
We should learn from both the WaMu and the Occupy movement .
In both cases , the lesson is the same : concentrated financial power is a gift that keeps on giving – but not to you .
