Whose World Bank ?
NEW YORK – US President Barack Obama ’ s nomination of Jim Yong Kim for the presidency of the World Bank has been well received – and rightly so , especially given some of the other names that were bandied about .
In Kim , a public-health professor who is now President of Dartmouth College and previously led the World Health Organization ’ s HIV / AIDS department , the United States has put forward a good candidate .
But the candidate ’ s nationality , and the nominating country – whether small and poor or large and rich – should play no role in determining who gets the job .
The World Bank ’ s 11 executive directors from emerging and developing countries have put forward two excellent candidates , Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala of Nigeria and Jose Antonio Ocampo of Colombia .
I have worked closely with both of them .
Both are first-rate , have served as ministers with multiple portfolios , have performed admirably in top positions in multilateral organizations , and have the diplomatic skills and professional competence to do an outstanding job .
They understand finance and economics , the bread and butter of the World Bank , and have a network of connections to leverage the Bank ’ s effectiveness .
Okonjo-Iweala brings an insider ’ s knowledge of the institution .
Ocampo , like Kim , brings the advantages and disadvantages of being an outsider ; but Ocampo , a distinguished professor at Columbia University , is thoroughly acquainted with the World Bank .
He previously served not only as minister of economics and finance , but also of agriculture – a critically important qualification , given that the vast majority of the developing countries ’ poor depend on farming .
He also brings impressive environmental credentials , addressing another of the Bank 's central concerns .
Both Okonjo-Iweala and Ocampo understand the role of international financial institutions in providing global public goods .
Throughout their careers , their hearts and minds have been devoted to development , and to fulfilling the World Bank ’ s mission of eliminating poverty .
They have set a high bar for any American candidate .
Much is at stake .
Almost two billion people remain in poverty in the developing world , and , while the World Bank cannot solve the problem on its own , it plays a leading role .
Despite its name , the Bank is primarily an international development institution .
Kim ’ s specialty , public health , is critical , and the Bank has long supported innovative initiatives in this field . But health is only a small part of the Bank ’ s “ portfolio , ” and it typically works in this area with partners who bring to the table expertise in medicine .
Rumors suggest that the US is likely to insist on maintaining the perverse selection process in which it gets to pick the World Bank ’ s president , simply because , in this election year , Obama ’ s opponents would trumpet loss of control over the choice as a sign of weakness .
And it is more important for the US to retain that control than it is for emerging and developing countries to obtain it .
Indeed , the more powerful of the emerging markets know how to live within the current system , and they may use it to their advantage .
They will , in effect , obtain an IOU , to be cashed in for something that is more important .
The Realpolitik of the moment makes fighting over the presidency unlikely ;
America may well prevail . But at what cost ?
Should America continue to insist on controlling the selection process , it is the Bank itself that would suffer .
For years , the Bank ’ s effectiveness was compromised because it was seen , in part , as a tool of Western governments and their countries ’ financial and corporate sectors .
Ironically , even America ’ s long-term interests would be best served by a commitment – not just in words , but also in deeds – to a merit-based system and good governance .
One supposed achievement of the G-20 was an agreement to reform the governance of the international financial institutions – most importantly , how their leaders are selected .
Since expertise on development by and large lies within the emerging and developing countries – after all , they live development – it seems natural that the World Bank ’ s head would come from one of those countries .
To maintain a cabal among developed countries , whereby the US appoints the World Bank president and Europe picks the International Monetary Fund ’ s head , seems particularly anachronistic and perplexing today , when the Bank and the Fund are turning to emerging-market countries as a source of funds .
While the US , the international community , and the Bank itself repeatedly emphasize the importance of good governance , a selection procedure that de facto leaves the appointment to the US president makes a mockery of it .
Okonjo-Iweala put the matter forcefully in an interview with the Financial Times : what is at stake is a matter of hypocrisy .
The integrity of the advanced industrial countries , which have a majority of the votes at the World Bank , is being put to the test .
