Too Big to Jail
WASHINGTON , DC – Among the fundamental principles of any functioning justice system is the following : Don ’ t lie to a judge or falsify documents submitted to a court , or you will go to jail .
Breaking an oath to tell the truth is perjury , and lying in official documents is both perjury and fraud .
These are serious criminal offenses , but apparently not if you are at the heart of America ’ s financial system .
On the contrary , key individuals there appear to be well compensated for their crimes .
As Dennis Kelleher of Better Markets has argued , the recent so-called “ robo-signing ” settlement – in which five large banks “ settled ” their legal liability for carrying out fraudulent foreclosures on mortgages – is a complete sell-out to the financial industry .
First , there was no serious criminal prosecution – meaning that no one will be charged with a felony , and no one will go to jail .
In terms of affecting executives ’ incentives , this is the only thing that matters .
Even the terminology used to frame the discussion is wrong .
Kelleher , an attorney with extensive experience in private practice and the public sector , tells it like it is : “ ‘ robo-signing ’ is massive , systematic , fraudulent , criminal conduct . ”
Alternatively , as he points out , we could just call it “ lying , cheating , and stealing . ”
Second , the civil penalties in this settlement – a form of fine – are minuscule relative to the size of the companies involved .
As Shahien Nasiripour , one of the best reporters on this issue , dryly put it : “ None of the five lenders have said they expect to incur a material charge due to the settlement . ”
In other words , from a corporate perspective , the penalty is a trifling affair .
Third , such fines are , in any case , paid by the companies ’ shareholders , not by their executives or board members ( all of whom carry insurance ) .
In the rare cases in which fines have been levied on individuals , either their insurance policies picked up most of the bill , or the penalties were trivial relative to the cash compensation that they received while committing their crimes – or both .
As if all of this weren ’ t bad enough , the banks reportedly will be able to use government money to write down the value of mortgages , which amounts to subsidizing them to pay their own meaningless fines .
The Obama administration and its allies have worked hard to sell its roughly $ 20 billion settlement with the banks as one that will have a meaningful impact on the housing market .
But nothing could be further from the truth .
As Kelleher points out , the United States has “ more than 10 million homes under water ” ( the outstanding mortgage exceeds the house ’ s value ) .
“ Twenty billion dollars doesn ’ t make a dent in that : one million homes at $ 20,000 loan forgiveness is it . ”
In fact , the Obama administration ’ s settlement with the mortgage lenders is consistent with its track record on all of its policies related to the financial sector , which has been abysmal .
But it is also puzzling .
Why would the administration continue to bend over backwards to be lenient towards top bankers under these circumstances ?
I honestly do not believe that the administration ’ s stance reflects any form of corruption – payments made to individuals or even to political campaigns .
And , in this case , it does not even appear to reflect the lobbying power of big financial players .
That power certainly explains why the Dodd-Frank financial reforms enacted in 2010 were not stronger , and why there is now so much opposition to effective implementation of that legislation ( for example , there is currently a huge fight around the “ Volcker rule , ” which would limit proprietary trading by megabanks ) .
But mortgage lenders ’ criminal activities are another matter .
Indeed , at stake in the mortgage settlement are fundamental and systemic breaches of the rule of law – perjury and fraud on an economy-wide scale .
The Justice Department has , without question , all of the power that it needs to prosecute these alleged crimes fully .
And yet America ’ s top law-enforcement officials have consistently – and now completely – backed off .
The main motivation behind the administration ’ s indulgence of serious criminality evidently is fear of the consequences of taking tough action on individual bankers .
And maybe officials are right to be afraid , given the massive size of the banks in question relative to the economy .
In fact , those banks are bigger now than they were before the crisis , and , as James Kwak and I documented at length in our book 13 Bankers , they are much larger than they were 20 years ago .
Top bankers want to make a lot of money .
They also want to stay out of prison .
Political leaders can huff and puff as much as they want , but , without a credible threat of poverty and time behind bars , bankers have no reason to comply with the law .
For them , it ’ s all about the trade – and you can be the sucker in public policy as easily as you can be the sucker in an individual loan agreement .
The message to bank executives today is simple : build your bank to be as big as possible – and then keep growing .
If you manage to become big enough , you and your employees are not just too big to fail , but also too big to jail .
The Obama administration has just made everyone else the sucker .
