Resurrecting Glass-Steagall
WASHINGTON , DC – A major shift in American politics has taken place . All three of the remaining mainstream Democratic presidential candidates now agree that the existing state of the financial sector is not satisfactory and that more change is needed .
President Barack Obama has long regarded the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial-reform legislation as bringing about sufficient change .
Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton , Senator Bernie Sanders , and former Governor Martin O ’ Malley want to do even more .
The three leading Democratic candidates disagree , however , on whether there should be legislation to re-erect a wall between the rather dull business of ordinary commercial banking and other kinds of finance ( such as issuing and trading securities , commonly known as investment banking ) .
This issue is sometimes referred to as “ reinstating Glass-Steagall , ” a reference to the Depression-era legislation – the Banking Act of 1933 – that separated commercial and investment banking .
This is a slight misnomer : the most credible bipartisan proposal on the table takes a much-modernized approach to distinguishing and making more transparent different kinds of finance activities .
Sanders and O ’ Malley are in favor of this general idea ; Clinton is not ( yet ) .
There are three main arguments against a modern version of Glass-Steagall .
None is convincing .
First , some prominent former officials argue that not all of the financial firms that got into trouble in 2008 were integrated commercial-investment banking operations .
For example , Lehman Brothers was a standalone investment bank , and AIG was an insurance company .
This argument is , at best , irrelevant .
What happened “ last time ” is rarely a good guide to fighting wars or anticipating future financial crises .
The world moves on , in terms of technology and risks .
We must adjust our thinking accordingly .
At worst , the argument is just plain wrong .
Some of the greatest threats in 2008 were posed by banks – such as Citigroup – built on the premise that integrating commercial and investment banking would bring stability and better service .
Sandy Weill , the primary architect of the modern Citigroup , regrets that construction – and regrets lobbying for the repeal of Glass-Steagall .
( As James Kwak and I argued in our book 13 Bankers , what really mattered was the decades-long bipartisan process of deregulation , for which the end of Glass-Steagall was a prominent symbol . )
Second , leading representatives of big banks argue that much has changed since 2008 – and that big banks have become significantly safer .
Unfortunately , this is a great exaggeration .
Ensuring a financial system ’ s stability is a multifaceted endeavor – complex enough to keep many diligent people fully employed .
But it also comes down to this : how much loss-absorbing shareholder equity is on the balance sheets of the largest financial firms ?
In the run-up to the 2008 crisis , the largest US banks had around 4 % equity relative to their assets .
This was not enough to withstand the storm .
( Here I ’ m using tangible equity relative to tangible assets , as recommended by Tom Hoenig , Vice Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation , and a beacon of clarity on these issues . )
Now , under the most generous possible calculation , the surviving megabanks have on average about 5 % equity relative to total assets – that is , they are 95 % financed with debt .
Is this the major and profound change that will prove sufficient as we head through the credit cycle ?
No , it is not .
Finally , some observers – although relatively few at this point – argue that the biggest banks have greatly improved their control and compliance systems , and that the mismanagement of risk on a systemically significant scale is no longer possible .
This view is simply implausible .
Consider all the instances of money laundering and sanctions busting ( with evidence against Credit Agricole last week , Deutsche Bank this week , and almost every major international bank in the past few years ) .
This is the equivalent of near misses in aviation .
If the US had the equivalent of the National Transportation Safety Board for finance , we would receive detailed public reports on what exactly is – still , after all these years – going wrong .
Sadly , what we actually get is plea bargains in which all relevant details are kept secret .
The regulators and law-enforcement officials are letting us down – and jeopardizing the safety of the financial system – on a regular basis .
The best argument for a modern Glass-Steagall act is the simplest .
We should want a lot more loss-absorbing shareholder equity .
And , to reinforce this , we should want to make the largest banks simpler and more transparent , with “ strong structural firewalls ” as Dennis Kelleher , of Better Markets , puts it .
Of course , in that context , we should ensure that various activities by “ shadow banks ” ( structures that operate with bank-like features , as Lehman Brothers did ) are properly regulated .
Building support for legislation to simplify the biggest banks would greatly strengthen the hand of those regulators who want to require more shareholder equity and better regulation for the shadows .
