A Global Platform for Global Issues
DAVOS – As the world enters 2013 , talk of participation in a “ global community ” is running high .
But we continue to see signs – and , more important , behavior – that run counter to such claims .
There are many reasons for this , but chief among them is the velocity , interconnectivity , and complexity of global , national , and even individual change .
Unprecedented shifts and growing imbalances – between consumption and production , savings and investment , economy and ecology , social inclusion and marginalization , and equality and disparity – persist and incubate within a complex global system in which there is no “ risk-off ” switch .
For more than 40 years , world leaders have gathered annually in Davos to discuss and advance the most critical issues on the global agenda .
This year , the list of problems to be discussed is a long one that includes the unresolved debt problems in the United States and Europe , the troubling global economic outlook , the turmoil in the Middle East and North Africa , and the bulge in youth unemployment .
Clearly , the need for global cooperation has never been greater , and governments , business , or civil society cannot meet our challenges alone .
Surveying these issues , it seems that the world remains in crisis mode , with many expressing little hope that the situation – particularly the economy – will improve .
But we forget how much the state of the world has improved .
When the World Economic Forum was established in 1971 , the global population was roughly four billion , of which 50 % lived in poverty .
Today , roughly seven billion people inhabit the world , and the number living in unacceptable conditions is the same .
Average global life expectancy has increased by ten years – from 60 to 70 – since 1970 . Likewise , consider the number of authoritarian regimes that collapsed and democracies born in the last 40 years .
And the global economy still grew by 4 % over the last three years , despite experiencing the deepest global recession since 1945 .
We still have far to go , but we must not forget about the real progress that has been made in relative terms .
To stem today ’ s spiral of pessimism and avoid the burnout of crisis management , we must look at the future in a much more positive , constructive , and dynamic manner , gaining the resilience to adapt to changing contexts , withstand sudden shocks , and recover from them while still pursuing critical goals .
Combining a dynamic , “ upbeat ” approach – bold vision and even bolder action – with the necessary measures to strengthen risk resilience is critical for a successful future .
Thus , the theme of this year ’ s Annual Meeting in Davos is “ Resilient Dynamism . ”
Overall , I would like the Annual Meeting to achieve two additional objectives this year .
First , the economic crisis has created a more defensive , more self-centered , and – at the level of states – more protectionist attitude .
Grand unifying visions are missing , and the pressure for separation , not union , continues to increase .
This has stalled progress on many of the issues – including reducing carbon emissions , establishing global financial regulatory measures , and concluding the Doha Round of global trade talks , to name a few – that require global attention .
Embracing the Forum ’ s motto – “ Entrepreneurship in the global public interest ” – the Davos discussions are governed by a genuine spirit of global citizenship .
This means examining solutions that are in the global community ’ s interest ( while also complementing national and local interests ) , particularly with future generations in mind .
The Forum has always promoted the notion of corporate social responsibility – or , expressed differently , of business leaders being accountable not only to their employees and shareholders , but also to their communities and society at large .
So , my second objective for Davos this year is for all leaders to recognize that along with their economic responsibilities come moral as well as social obligations .
Corporate social responsibility is measured in terms of businesses improving conditions for their employees , shareholders , communities , and environment .
But moral responsibility goes further , reflecting the need for corporations to address fundamental ethical issues such as inclusion , dignity , and equality .
It is my hope that the Annual Meeting will serve as a catalyst and integrator for initiatives that advance key issues on the global agenda .
As Einstein cautioned , “ The world as we have created it is a process of our thinking .
It cannot be changed without changing our thinking . ”
We must each take responsibility within our own sphere of action – making it more dynamic and resilient to risk – acting as true global trustees , underpinned by moral accountability for humanity .
