The Washington Protests
CAMBRIDGE : We are entering the third round of street protests against globalization .
The City of London and Seattle were the first to be besieged .
Now demonstrators are massing in Washington against the IMF and World Bank .
Thousands will protest for human rights issues , women rights issues , gay rights issues , workers rights issues , ecological rights issues , anti-war issues , Tibetan rights , and a myriad of other concerns .
A brief look at the demonstrators ' website a16.org gives a full taste of the menu of gripes on offer , including even an anarchists ' domain .
What is extraordinary here are not the protests per se , but the sheer ability to gather and mobilize so many diverse groups into one giant anti-everything-that-is-wrong-in-the-world howl .
But should we take these screams seriously ?
Is there a message ?
Are these protests representative of a widespread rejection of the way the world economy is working ?
Or does all this sound and fury signify nothing more than a well-organized mobilization of the dispossessed who cannot win support via the democratic process ?
The demonstrations in Washington are certain to gain worldwide attention as the best show in town .
But we should not be dissuaded from a sound economic approach to managing the world economy .
The most important reason for ignoring these shouts is that , behind the scenes but not really hidden , the chief force organizing the demonstrations is America 's organized labor , a movement with terrible problems with free trade ( Nafta , trade with China , the WTO ) , anything , indeed , that looks like a global free market .
When union bosses play internationalist , don 't believe them for a minute .
They only want to raise labor standards abroad so that workers in poor countries become overpriced and lose their jobs .
Policy makers in poor countries have long understood that their chief enemies are the " fair trade " advocates in the US , unions , and environmentalists .
But it is the IMF and World Bank who are the focus of the demonstrators rage .
The protestors are singularly inarticulate but four big " No 's " do emerge :
-- No to IMF programs that hurt workers and the poor .
How to avoid it ?
Their answer is bankruptcy arrangements and haircuts for creditors , bigger social programs , capital controls .
But many poor countries have recently recovered from the impact such lunatic ideas , what a tragedy if that were to shoved back into poverty by returning to those tried-and-failed policies ;
-- No to pollution .
The demonstrators indulge in an idyllic world of windmills throughout the emerging world where happy farmers and their donkeys bond with an ever-renewing nature .
A wonderful image if it were not for gross poverty that results ;
-- No to debt .
The demonstrators want to free the poorest nations from unbearable and crushing debts .
Yes , lets cancel those debts but lets get in exchange better governance rather than a no-ties write off that only worsens the credit rating of poor countries , locking them out from investment and improved economies .
Of course , conditionality is just what the demonstrators have the biggest problems with .
They seek a world where countries are governed by their own needs and priorities , little recognizing that misgovernment is the rule in many poor countries ( just look at Robert Mugabe = s Zimbabwe ) and conditionality is about getting a minimum of stability and progress ;
-- No to secretive global institutions .
The demonstrators wonder why the IMF does not hold town meetings ; why the World Bank does not reach out to all the world 's NGOs and at least listen
Why all this rage in a booming America ?
The answer is that , even with jobs and credit now plentiful , workers retain the memory of the preceding 20 years of lay-offs , deregulation , and restructuring .
They may now have a job and new jobs are easy to find .
But they believe that good and secure jobs are gone , and that greedy multinational corporations are responsible , primarily the bosses who behind closed doors made reckless decisions about people 's lives and became unbelievably rich from doing so .
The New Economy may be wonderful for economic performance , but it imposes adjustment , pace of change and strain on many people which appear to be out of proportion to their ability to cope .
For too many people , the New Economy seems to be good only for young people , for winners .
The Seattle and Washington demonstrations make another point : If CNN turned the world into a global village , the Internet goes 6 steps further .
The ability to organize via the Web is mind boggling .
The Internet provides a future for activists and a scope for mobilization that is only starting to become apparent .
Around the world , we will be getting direct , in-your-face democracy in a way that we have never seen before .
The Web is making large traditional political parties as obsolete as bank branches or bookstores .
Virtual politics , whatever that will be , is around the corner .
