The Shadow of Depression
BERKELEY – Four times in the past century , a large chunk of the industrial world has fallen into deep and long depressions characterized by persistent high unemployment : the United States in the 1930 ’ s , industrialized Western Europe in the 1930 ’ s , Western Europe again in the 1980 ’ s , and Japan in the 1990 ’ s .
Two of these downturns – Western Europe in the 1980 ’ s and Japan in the 1990 ’ s – cast a long and dark shadow on future economic performance .
In both cases , if either Europe or Japan returned – or , indeed , ever returns – to something like the pre-downturn trend of economic growth , it took ( or will take ) decades .
In a third case , Europe at the end of the 1930 ’ s , we do not know what would have happened had Europe not become a battlefield following Nazi Germany ’ s invasion of Poland .
In only one instance was the long-run growth trend left undisturbed : US production and employment after World War II were not significantly affected by the macroeconomic impact of the Great Depression .
That is certainly how things looked , with high levels of structural unemployment and a below-trend capital stock , at the end of the 1930 ’ s , before mobilization and the European and Pacific wars began in earnest .
In the US , we can already see signs that the downturn that started in 2008 is casting its shadow on the future .
Reputable forecasters – both private and public – have been revising down their estimates of America ’ s potential long-run GDP .
For example , labor-force participation , which usually stops falling and starts rising after the business-cycle trough , has been steadily declining over the past two and a half years .
At least some monetary policymakers believe that recent reductions in the US unemployment rate , which have largely resulted from falling labor-force participation , are just as valid a reason for shifting to more austere policies as reductions in unemployment that reflect increases in employment .
And much the same processes and responses are at work – with even greater strength – in Europe .
Most important , however , has been what looks , from today ’ s perspective , like a permanent collapse in the risk-bearing capacity of the private marketplace , and a permanent and large increase in the perceived riskiness of financial assets worldwide – and of the businesses whose cash flows underpin them .
Given aging populations in industrial countries , large commitments from governments to social-insurance systems , and no clear plans for balancing government budgets in the long run , we would expect to see inflation and risk premiums – perhaps not substantial , but clearly visible – priced into even the largest and richest economies ’ treasury debt .
Sometime over the next generation , the price levels of the US , Japan , and Germany might rise substantially after some government short-sightedly attempts to finance some of its social-welfare spending by printing money .
The price levels are unlikely to go down .
Yet the desire to hold assets that avoid the medium-term risks associated with the business cycle has overwhelmed this long-run fundamental risk factor .
But the risk that the world ’ s investors currently are trying to avoid by rushing into US , Japanese , and German sovereign debt is not a “ fundamental ” risk .
There are no psychological preferences , natural-resource constraints , or technological factors that make investing in private enterprises riskier than it was five years ago .
Rather , the risk stems from governments ’ refusal , when push comes to shove , to match aggregate demand to aggregate supply in order to prevent mass unemployment .
Managing aggregate demand is governments ’ job .
While Say ’ s law – the view that supply creates its own demand – is false in theory , it is true enough in practice that entrepreneurs and enterprises can and do depend on it .
If the government falls down on the job , John Maynard Keynes wrote 76 years ago , and “ demand is deficient … the individual enterpriser ... is operating with the odds loaded against him .
The game of hazard which he plays is furnished with many zeros , ” which represent “ the increment [ by which ] the world ’ s wealth has fallen short of ... savings , ” owing to “ the losses of those whose courage and initiative have not been supplemented by exceptional skill or unusual good fortune .
But if effective demand is adequate , average skill and average good fortune will be enough . ”
For 62 years , from 1945-2007 , with some sharp but temporary and regionalized interruptions , entrepreneurs and enterprisers could bet that the demand would be there if they created the supply .
This played a significant role in setting the stage for the two fastest generations of global economic growth the world has ever seen .
Now the stage has been emptied .
