The Tea Party ’ s Modest Proposal
WASHINGTON , DC – America ’ s Tea Party has a simple fiscal message : the United States is broke .
This is factually incorrect – US government securities remain one of the safest investments in the world – but the claim serves the purpose of dramatizing the federal budget and creating a great deal of hysteria around America ’ s current debt levels .
This then produces the fervent belief that government spending must be cut radically , and now .
There are legitimate fiscal issues that demand serious discussion , including how to control growth in health-care spending and how best to structure tax reform .
But the Tea Party faction of the Republican Party cares more about small government than anything else : its members insist , above all , that federal tax revenue never be permitted to exceed 18 % of GDP .
Their historical antecedent is America ’ s anti-revenue Whiskey Rebellion in 1794 , not the original anti-British , pro-representation Boston Tea Party in 1773 .
Most importantly , their tactics have proven massively destructive of wealth in the US .
Since the prolonged showdown over the budget began earlier this year , the stock market has lost about 20 % of its value ( roughly $ 10 trillion ) .
In effect , the Tea Party is working hard to reduce publicly funded social benefits – including pensions and Medicare – even as its methods dramatically reduce the value of private wealth now and in the future .
Part of the Tea Party ’ s founding myth , of course , is that smaller government will lead to faster growth and greater prosperity for all .
Never mind that the eye-popping growth projections in Representative Paul Ryan ’ s budget plan , for example , are utterly implausible ; these projections matter politically , because , without them , the full sting of Ryan ’ s proposed Medicare cuts would be readily apparent .
Standard & amp ;
Poor ’ s has received some justified criticism for the analysis behind its recent decision to downgrade US government debt ; after all , there was little economic news that could explain the move ’ s timing .
But S & amp ; P ’ s assessment of the political situation is on target : by creating a dysfunctional paralysis at the heart of government , the Tea Party has shown that it is willing to impose dramatic costs on the broader economy and to ensure significantly slower growth .
Confrontation and brinkmanship have become the new watchwords of American politics , even when the US government ’ s legal ability to pay its debts is on the line , owing to the Tea Party ’ s ideological rigidity .
And the tone of political debate , not surprisingly , has become much nastier .
By signing a pledge not to raise taxes , Tea Party representatives have credibly committed themselves not to acquiesce in any middle-of-the-road compromise .
If they break this pledge , presumably they will face defeat in the next round of Republican Party primaries .
So , while a budget deal would technically be easy to achieve , it looks politically impossible in the near term .
Indeed , while Congress and the Republican Party have become less popular during 2011 , support for the Tea Party has remained remarkably constant , at around 30 % of the population .
Its tactics thus appear politically sustainable , at least through the 2012 elections .
Perhaps the most damaging outcome of these tactics is to take countercyclical fiscal policy off the table completely .
Regardless of what happens to the global economy in the weeks and months ahead , it is inconceivable that any kind of meaningful fiscal stimulus would get through the House of Representatives .
It remains to be seen whether the US Federal Reserve will also feel constrained by the political mood on Capitol Hill .
Clearly , influential Tea Party supporters would strongly resist any attempt now by Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke to find unorthodox ways to run a more expansionary monetary policy .
And , as for protecting the financial system against disaster , the current majority on the House Financial Services Committee is clear – they favor use of the bankruptcy system when megabanks get into serious trouble .
If the eurozone crisis continues to spiral out of control , the US should expect to see Lehman or near-Lehman-type collapses among exposed financial institutions .
The irony of the Tea Party revolt , of course , is that it undermines the private sector more than it reins in “ big government . ”
The S & amp ; P downgrade resulted in a “ flight to quality , ” meaning that investors bought US government debt – thus increasing its price and lowering the rate that the federal government pays to borrow .
It was the value of the stock market that fell sharply – which makes sense , given that counter-cyclical policy is now severely constrained .
The government part of the credit system has been strengthened , relatively speaking , by developments over the past few months .
It is the private sector – where investment and entrepreneurial activity are needed to generate growth and employment – that has taken a beating .
Unless and until America ’ s private sector recovers , investment and job creation will continue to stagnate .
But today ’ s atmosphere of fear and aggressive budget tactics are combining to undermine private-sector confidence and spending power .
As Jonathan Swift put it in 1727 , “ Party is the madness of many , for the gain of the few . ”
