America the Unequal
PARK CITY , UTAH – The last documentary film that used dry charts and statistics to make an abstract argument about a global issue and nonetheless became a pop-culture hit was Al Gore ’ s An Inconvenient Truth .
But the hit of this year ’ s Sundance Film Festival was a low-key affair called Inequality for All , in which Robert Reich , a labor secretary in the Clinton administration , explains how rising income inequality and the demise of the middle class is causing so many Americans to suffer .
With President Barack Obama recently taking up some of these themes in his second inaugural address , it is worthwhile to examine the message of Inequality for All more closely .
The film ’ s charts are not boring , but actual showstoppers : Reich makes the point that the mid-1940 ’ s to the mid-1970 ’ s were decades of relative income equality , which corresponded with overall affluence .
( The last time that income inequality in the United States was as deep as it is now was immediately before the 1929 stock-market crash . )
But the last 20 years have witnessed a spike in the difference between the top earners and the middle class : the “ 1 % ” really are living in a stratospheric bubble .
As the journalist Chrystia Freeland has recently argued , a meta-class of global “ plutocrats ” is emerging – people who have little in common with the rest of us .
Inequality for All makes the case that the wealthiest 1 % simply cannot consume enough , no matter how hard they try , to generate the revenue that an affluent middle class could .
The secret to a strong economy is to invest in education , strengthen household incomes with a decent minimum wage and strong unions , and raise skill levels , thereby generating sustained consumer demand .
This , Reich argues , is the “ virtuous cycle ” that we see in strong economies such as Germany , in which workers are highly skilled and educated , unions are protected , and the middle class has leisure and money to spend .
Reich also persuasively describes the “ vicious circle ” – with falling wages undermining consumer demand and leading , in turn , to shrinking output – that has made the US economy fragile and boosted social instability .
He analyzes a middle class that is skating on the thinnest of ice , with employment coming at the price of lower wages and benefits .
Moreover , millions of middle-class American homes are “ underwater ” ( the mortgage is more than the home ’ s underlying value ) .
The film interviews one of the rich , a charming millionaire who owns a pillow company and points out that he and his fellow rich guys and their families simply cannot spend enough to offset the lost demand of a strong middle class .
In fact , the richest save rather than spend their dollars , and send them around the globe in transnational hedge funds rather than using them to create more jobs at home .
So , the “ trickle-down ” story that the middle and working class are told every election cycle in America – that cutting wealthy people ’ s taxes means more job creation in America – is simply not true .
Those wealthy people ’ s untaxed dollars stay in hedge funds and out of the revenue stream .
The cost to social programs , infrastructure , and public schools intensifies stress on the middle class , who end up poorly educated , work long hours in dual-career ill-paid jobs , lack leisure time and money to spend , and so on .
Are we stuck with this vicious circle , which advocates of laissez-faire globalization have told us for 15 years is an inevitable consequence of the “ invisible hand ” ?
Or could Reich ’ s retro prescriptions , which he has affirmed for decades , be taken up again ?
Could they bring back the affluent years of the early Clinton era , when it seemed as if domestic policies could actually influence and even benefit the US economy ?
“ I ’ d like to see what we did so successfully in the first three decades after World War II , when prosperity was widely shared . ” That means large investments in public education , including higher education ; substantial investments in infrastructure , funded by a highly progressive tax whose top marginal effective rate never fell below 50 % ; and strong labor unions .
“ Anyone who thinks these policies are no longer feasible in a global economy , ” Reich told me , “ hasn ’ t looked at modern Germany , which features all of them , and where the median wage is higher than ours . ”
It sounded great – but it also seemed to contradict the conventional wisdom , according to which cut-rate labor in Pakistan or Mexico is the inescapable death knell for $ 25-an-hour union jobs , with benefits , in Detroit .
“ How do you keep US labor unions strong if Mexico , for example , undercuts US hourly wages , ” I asked .
Reich replied in more detail : “ Strengthen labor unions in industries sheltered from global competition – workers in retail chains , hotel chains , restaurant chains ; childcare and elder-care ; hospital workers ; and so on .
Attract manufacturing and manufacturing engineering back to the US by improving the skills and productivity of US workers ( as Germany has done for German workers ) .
And encourage trading partners to improve their own wages and labor standards ( for example , by requiring in all trade treaties that a country ’ s minimum wage be half its median wage ) . ”
Is this agenda feasible in America today ?
To be sure , one would have to mend the broken political system first .
But , looking at the affluent German middle class from the US , where a quarter of jobs pay wages that place workers at or below the poverty line , Reich ’ s recommendations seem worth fighting for .
