The Right Intervention in Ukraine
STOCKHOLM – The ongoing Greek drama may have transfixed Europe and the world , but the great crisis in Europe ’ s east has not gone away .
Ukraine remains under partial occupation by Russian-backed separatists , with intermittent fighting still taking place , despite the Minsk II ceasefire agreement .
The on-and-off fighting in Ukraine ’ s Donbas region since the Minsk deal was signed in February has made one thing clear .
If Russia is serious about seeking a solution to the conflict , it should be prepared to endorse the deployment of an international peacekeeping mission and force .
Such a mission could begin the process of rehabilitating the region , allow those displaced by the violence to return , and facilitate the reintegration of the Donbas into Ukraine with appropriate safeguards and devolved powers .
A useful model for this approach is at hand .
Two decades ago , the international community was entering the final phase of efforts to secure peace in Bosnia .
But there were also lingering conflicts in Croatia , notably in the Eastern Slavonia region , adjacent to Serbia .
Croatian military offensives , first in early May 1995 , and a second in early August , had taken back three of four United Nations-protected sectors from separatist Serb control .
But the most important area , Sector East in Eastern Slavonia , remained under firm Serb control .
And , much like Russian President Vladimir Putin on the Ukraine issue today , Serbia ’ s then-president , Slobodan Milošević , insisted that the issue could be resolved only by direct talks between the Serb separatists and the Croat government in Zagreb .
The reality , of course , was that the Serb separatists were entirely dependent on the political , military , and economic support of Milošević ’ s Serbia .
And , in the end , Milošević agreed to the deployment of a UN mission and force , which was tasked with ensuring the region ’ s demilitarization and return to Croat sovereignty , after implementing the necessary safeguards for the Serbs living there .
Today , the UNTAES ( United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia , Baranja , and Western Sirmium ) mission is virtually forgotten – not because it failed , but because it succeeded .
To be sure , not every issue in Eastern Slavonia was sorted out then or in the years since ; but there is no longer a conflict , and Croatia and Serbia now enjoy constructive bilateral relations .
This could be a model for the separatist-controlled areas of Donbas if the political will is there to make such an arrangement work .
But is the Kremlin serious about recognizing Ukraine ’ s sovereignty in the Donbas and resuming normal relations with the West ?
At the moment , I strongly doubt it .
It is worth bearing in mind that Russia has driven every step toward escalation in this conflict – including the establishment of the separatist enclaves .
Indeed , the Kremlin appears to be waiting for Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko ’ s government to fail and the West to split on the issue and stop taking an interest in its resolution .
At that point , perhaps , Putin will be ready to move against Ukraine to secure his own desired long-term outcome .
But if Ukraine ’ s government and the West remain united , the Kremlin might see that its enclaves in Donbas represent a threat mainly to Russia itself .
After all , the grim reality is that the separatist enclaves are in economic free-fall , with their societies becoming increasingly criminalized .
Donbas risks becoming a tar baby for which no one wants to take responsibility .
As this becomes apparent , Russia ’ s leaders could start to envisage a UNTAES-type solution for the region .
Absent any other arrangement , the Kremlin will have to do just that .
Former US Secretary of State Colin Powell ’ s doctrine – if you break it , you own it – applies to Putin ’ s intervention in Ukraine as much as to George W. Bush ’ s misadventure in Iraq .
There certainly are very difficult issues that must be sorted out before a peacekeeping mission could go into Donbas , notably the composition and formal mandate of whatever force is deployed .
But , again , if the will is there , these questions should not be intractable .
Such a mission could then ensure the real implementation of the political provisions of the Minsk II agreement .
Genuinely free and fair local elections , with the participation of all displaced people and refugees , will never be possible without a substantial international presence .
Today , this idea is sure to be dead on arrival .
So was UNTAES in the early discussions on Eastern Slavonia .
The Milošević regime then sounded exactly like the Kremlin now .
But tomorrow really is another day , and it is certainly not too early to start exploring options that promise not just to manage the conflict , but to resolve it .
Such an intervention might work – but only if and when both sides genuinely want a solution .
We are not there yet .
But if both Ukraine and the West stand firm and act to block further Russian efforts at destabilization , that day might come .
