Who Lost Thailand ?
TOKYO – Thailand , Southeast Asia ’ s most developed and sophisticated economy , is teetering on the edge of the political abyss .
Yet most of the rest of Asia appears to be averting its eyes from the country ’ s ongoing and increasingly anarchic unrest .
That indifference is not only foolish ; it is dangerous .
Asia ’ s democracies now risk confronting the same harsh question that the United States faced when Mao Zedong marched into Beijing , and again when Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini ousted the Shah in Iran .
Who , they will have to ask , lost Thailand ?
Much of the world is wondering how such a successful economy could allow its politics to spin out of control .
What accounts for the armies of protesters – distinguished , gang-like , by the color of their shirts – whose mutual antipathy often borders on nihilistic rage ?
The roots of the current unrest extend back more than a decade , to former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra ’ s first electoral victory in 2001 .
Thaksin ’ s triumph did not represent the normal alternation in power that one finds in a democracy .
Instead , his victory heralded the political rise of the country ’ s poor , long-silenced rural majority .
Bangkok ’ s entrenched elite recoiled in alarm .
But , instead of learning to compete with Thaksin for the votes of Thailand ’ s rural poor , the country ’ s urban elite ( including the powerful military ) sought to delegitimize his rule .
When he was re-elected by an even larger majority , his government was overthrown , his political party was banned by the Supreme Court , and he was forced to flee the country after corruption charges against him led to a criminal conviction .
Yet Thaksin ’ s supporters did not abandon him .
When Thailand ’ s military returned to their barracks , many Thai citizens voted for Thaksin at one remove , with his sister – Yingluck Shinawatra , a long-time executive at Thaksin ’ s communications firm – becoming Prime Minister , supported by a powerful parliamentary majority .
For much of her term in office , Yingluck garnered praise for her pragmatism , and for seeking to ameliorate the antagonism of her opponents .
But that praise and success appears to have bred a form of hubris .
She proposed an amnesty law that would have not only pardoned opposition leaders , including Abhisit Vejjajiva , her predecessor as prime minister ( who faces murder charges ) , but allowed her brother to return to the country .
And , in defiance of a Supreme Court ruling , she sought a constitutional amendment that would make the Senate , whose members are appointed , an elected body .
The opposition , sensing that its moment had arrived , launched a wave of street protests .
Yingluck , in an effort to defuse the situation , called for a parliamentary election in February .
But the opposition has rejected this and says that it will boycott the vote .
It fears – rightly , most people suspect – that the Thaksin camp will be returned to power in any free and fair vote .
So , in essence , what is happening in Thailand is an attempted nullification of democracy by the opposition and the country ’ s entrenched elite .
Unable to compete successfully with Thaksin for votes , they now want to dilute Thai democracy in order to prevent the electorate from ever again choosing a government that goes against their will .
If Thailand were an insignificant country with little geostrategic weight , its problems might not matter as much as they do to the rest of Asia .
But Thailand is Southeast Asia ’ s lynchpin economy .
It is a key partner for Myanmar ( Burma ) as it makes its own political and economic transition , and it is a hub for trade with neighboring Cambodia , Laos , and Vietnam .
But the biggest reason that Thailand matters for Asia ’ s democracies is fierce competition for influence between a rising China and the democratic world .
Until now , Thailand has been a firm member of the democratic camp .
Its military is mostly trained by the United States ; indeed , it was the key staging point for the US during the Vietnam War .
Likewise , Japan and India have long regarded Thailand as a democratic bulwark in a neighborhood where some regimes – Cambodia and Laos – are firmly under China ’ s hegemonic sway .
Indeed , its government has proved to be a strong supporter of Myanmar ’ s president , Thein Sein , as he seeks to free his country from China ’ s tight embrace .
By standing aside as Thailand ’ s opposition and traditional elite seek to undermine the country ’ s democracy in the name of a permanent right to rule , Asia ’ s democracies risk driving some elements of the Thaksin camp into the arms of China , which would happily accept the role of patron to so potent a political force .
But this need not happen .
Thailand ’ s military has long and respectful ties not only with the US military , but with officers in Japan as well .
Thailand ’ s opposition politicians , many of whom were educated at top Western universities , may also be open to quiet advice that they are pushing things too far , not only putting Thailand ’ s stability at risk , but also jeopardizing regional security .
Just as , a decade ago , the West objected to the efforts of Turkey ’ s entrenched secular elite to rob Recep Tayyip Erdoğan ’ s mildly Islamist AKP party of its democratic victory , it needs to speak clearly today in defense of Thai democracy .
The opposition ’ s claim that it is acting in the interests of the world ’ s democracies needs to be rebutted .
Thaksin may be no saint , and some constitutional reform will be needed if political reconciliation is to come about .
But Thaksin ’ s governments , like that of his sister , have kept China at one remove from influence .
That is the key strategic interest that is now at stake .
Should Yingluck be ousted in a coup , or should the country ’ s democracy be hollowed out to preclude her return to power , the Shinawatras may be left with no choice but to seek support from Thailand ’ s giant neighbor to the north .
If that happens , we will all know who lost Thailand .
