Why Turkey \ u0027s Army Will Stay Home
Just when the smoke from Turkey ’ s domestic political conflicts of the past year had begun to clear , another deadly attack by Kurdish separatists on Turkish soldiers has the government threatening military attacks inside northern Iraq .
That prospect raises risks for Turkey , Iraq , and the United States .
But there are reasons to doubt that the situation is as dangerous as recent headlines suggest .
Turkey accuses Iraqi Kurds of harboring between 3,000 and 3,500 of Turkey ’ s most active Kurdish militants – the PKK separatist guerillas who are blamed for the deaths of 80 Turkish soldiers so far this year .
The trouble reached the boiling point on October 7 , when Kurdish fighters killed 13 Turkish soldiers near Turkey ’ s border with Iraq .
The Turkish public has demanded action , and Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan ’ s government has responded .
On October 17 , despite pleas for patience and restraint from Iraq and the US , Turkish lawmakers voted 507-19 to authorize Erdogan to order cross-border military strikes into Iraq at any time over the next year .
Erdogan has sent Iraqi Kurds a forceful message .
But , for several reasons , the Turkish military is likely to limit its operations to small-scale incursions and air strikes on specific targets rather than launch an all-out war .
First , the Turkish military has no interest in embracing the risks that come with involvement in Iraq ’ s sectarian strife .
A full-scale invasion might well provoke Iraq ’ s own Kurdish guerrillas into a prolonged and bloody battle with Turkish forces that can only undermine support for Erdogan ’ s government at home and abroad .
Second , Turkey ’ s government hopes to keep the country ’ s bid to join the European Union moving forward .
An invasion of Iraq would bring that process to a grinding halt .
EU Foreign Policy chief Javier Solana has made plain that Europe strongly opposes any large-scale Turkish military operation in Iraq .
Third , Turkey is well aware that an all-out attack inside Iraq is exactly what Turkey ’ s Kurdish separatists want .
What better way to damage Turkey than to pull its military into conflict with Iraq , the US , and the EU ?
Erdogan has no intention of being drawn into that trap .
With all that in mind , this latest move by Turkey ’ s parliament should be seen more as an ultimatum to Iraq ’ s Kurdish Regional Government to expel the Turkish Kurds and an attempt to persuade the US to use its considerable influence there .
That ’ s hardball politics , not a declaration of war .
The parliamentary authorization itself is carefully worded to underline Turkey ’ s limited aims .
It stresses that Turkey ’ s military has no intention of occupying Iraqi territory or threatening Iraqi Kurds or their oil infrastructure .
An attack would certainly make Iraq ’ s Kurdish provinces less appealing for foreign investors . But Turkey has no reason to attack the assets of foreign oil companies .
Iraq ’ s central government is aware of the risks , as well , and is likely to exercise maximum restraint .
A limited Turkish strike into northern Iraq would probably elicit little reaction beyond public condemnation and rhetorical assertions of Iraqi sovereignty .
Threats to Iraq ’ s oil infrastructure around the northern Iraqi city of Kirkuk and other territory under the Kurdish Regional Government ’ s control are minimal .
Turkey ’ s government knows that any move to shut down the 600-mile pipeline from Kirkuk to Turkey ’ s Mediterranean port at Ceyhan would have little near-term impact , since most of Iraq ’ s oil exports flow from the south , hundreds of miles from the country ’ s border with Turkey .
Furthermore , the Turkish military can increase the pressure on Iraqi Kurds with far less drastic measures .
It can close the two countries ’ principal border crossing , an important route for food , fuel , and other goods headed for Iraqi Kurds .
It could also cut exports of electricity to northern Iraq .
Still , even small-scale military operations would generate risk .
If the PKK is able to launch a major attack on troops or civilians inside Turkey , the public outcry might leave Erdogan with little choice but to up the ante .
The issue is complicated further by Turkey ’ s refusal to negotiate directly with the Kurdish Regional Government in northern Iraq .
Such talks , Turkey fears , would offer tacit acknowledgement that Iraqi Kurds have won a degree of autonomy from Baghdad .
That ’ s a bridge too far for Turkey ’ s nationalists and its military .
There are risks for Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al Maliki as well , because Turkish military strikes on Iraq ’ s northern provinces could undermine the Kurdish support on which his government increasingly depends .
Both Sunni Arabs and Kurds already resent al Maliki ’ s mild reaction to Iran ’ s recent shelling of Iraqi territory – an attempt to strike at Iranian Kurdish militants fleeing across its border with Iraq .
There are also risks for the US .
Most supplies headed for US troops in Iraq and Afghanistan move through the Incirlik airbase in Turkey .
With the threat that the US House of Representatives will approve a resolution that accuses Turks of genocide against ethic Armenians nine decades ago , this is a particularly inopportune moment for the two countries to be at odds over Iraq .
But , worst-case scenarios aside , a Turkish invasion of northern Iraq can only serve the interests of Turkey ’ s Kurdish separatists .
That ’ s why cooler heads are likely to prevail .
Limited cross-border operations are increasingly likely . A war between Turkey and Iraqi Kurds is not .
