Still Too Big to Fail
WASHINGTON , DC – Nearly seven years after the global financial crisis erupted , and more than five years after the passage of the Dodd-Frank financial-reform legislation in the United States , the cause of the crisis – the existence of banks that are “ too big to fail ” – has yet to be uprooted .
As long as that remains the case , another disaster is only a matter of time .
The term “ too big to fail ” dates back several decades , but it entered wide usage in the aftermath of the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 .
As problems spread throughout the financial system , the US authorities decided that some banks and other financial companies were so large relative to the economy that they were “ systemically important ” and could not be allowed to go bankrupt .
Lehman failed , but AIG , Goldman Sachs , Morgan Stanley , Citigroup , Bank of America , and others were all rescued through various forms of massive – and unprecedented – government support .
The official line at the time was “ never again , ” which made sense in political and economic terms .
These large financial firms were provided a scale of assistance that was not generally available to the nonfinancial corporate sector – and certainly not to families who found that the value of their assets ( their homes ) was below the value of their liabilities ( their mortgages ) .
If large , complex financial institutions continue to have an implicit government guarantee , many people – on both the right and the left – would agree that this is both unfair to other parts of the private sector and an inducement for big banks to engage again in excessive risk-taking .
In the jargon of economics , this is “ moral hazard . ”
But no special training is needed to know that it is unwise and dangerous when bank executives get the upside ( huge bonuses ) when things go well and everyone else bears the downside risks ( bailouts and recession ) .
At the heart of the Dodd-Frank law is a two-pronged approach to the too-big-to-fail problem .
The first section of the legislation , Title I , stipulates that all firms must be able to go bankrupt without causing large-scale damage to the broader financial system or the real economy .
Regulators are instructed , in no uncertain terms , to make sure that all large financial firms are structured in such a way that bankruptcy , using the standard rules and procedures of the court system , can happen without repeating the catastrophic post-Lehman cascade .
In Title II of Dodd-Frank , Congress created a back-up authority through which the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC ) can take over and manage a failing financial firm and impose appropriate losses on shareholders and some creditors without creating widespread systemic damage or a global panic .
The good news is that , over the past half-decade , the FDIC has made some progress formulating the design of a workable Title II .
The bad news is that there has been almost no progress in terms of ensuring that large financial firms actually can go bankrupt .
In a hearing this week before a part of the Senate Banking Committee , there was complete agreement across the political spectrum on this point .
The disagreement concerns what must be done to finish this important piece of Dodd-Frank business .
The Republican proposal is to modify the bankruptcy code , creating special provisions for large , complex financial institutions .
There are three problems with this approach .
First , all companies in the US should be able to fail under the same rules .
Privileged treatment for anyone perpetuates the perception that it is safer to lend to some large financial firms – and further strengthens their unfair advantage .
Second , it is fanciful to believe that the private sector would want to get involved in providing funding to a huge financial firm under court supervision , particularly during a systemic crisis .
The definition of such a crisis is precisely that moment when private-sector loans are not readily available .
And a large loan – in the tens of billions of dollars – provided by the US Treasury to a bankruptcy court judge is unlikely to be politically acceptable or economically sensible .
Finally – and most fatally – the bankruptcy of any large US financial firm today would induce a scramble for assets by regulators around the world .
Some foreign regulators – such as the Bank of England – have agreed not to act preemptively in a resolution process run by the FDIC .
But such agreements do not apply to a court-run bankruptcy process ; authorities everywhere would move to protect local creditors and taxpayers by seizing assets in their jurisdiction .
The only reasonable alternative is to make large , complex financial institutions smaller and less complex so that it is possible for them to fail under standard bankruptcy rules .
This is the intent of Dodd-Frank .
The FDIC has pushed hard in this direction , whereas the Federal Reserve Board of Governors has been less enthusiastic .
