Conflict Management and Economic Growth
NEW DELHI – One of the most interesting aspects of the prolonged economic crisis in Europe , and of the even longer crisis in Japan , is the absence of serious social conflict – at least thus far .
Yes , there have been strikes , marches , and growing anger at political leaders , but protests have been largely peaceful .
While that may change , the credit for social peace must go to institutions such as elections ( “ throwing the rascals out ” is a non-violent way to vent popular anger ) , responsive democratic legislatures , and effective judiciaries .
All of these institutions have successfully mediated political conflict during a time of great adversity in advanced countries .
This suggests that a major reason for underdevelopment may be that such institutions , which allow countries to cope with distress , are missing in poor economies .
Economic growth permits conflict between social actors to be papered over .
A downturn , however , usually exposes or sharpens latent social tension .
Why do the benefits of growth seem to be easier to share than are the burdens of adversity ?
This is not a trivial question .
Perhaps the answer lies in human psychology .
If consumption is shaped by habit , an income loss is very hard to bear and one might fight to avoid it , while fighting for additional gain when one is doing well is less important .
Also , because conflict may destroy growth opportunities , it may be seen as costlier when growth is strong .
For example , squabbling between workers and management may drive away investors – and thus the chance to start new projects .
But if there are no new investment opportunities on the horizon , squabbling is less costly , because the existing plant and machinery are already sunk costs .
Regardless of why conflicts are greater in times of economic adversity , how a society deals with them depends on the scope and quality of its conflict-management institutions .
The Oxford University economist Paul Collier has shown that years of weak economic growth typically precede civil war in poor countries .
Even after establishing peace , the probability that these countries will relapse into conflict is high .
Not surprisingly , these states typically have weak conflict-management institutions – patchy law enforcement , limited adherence to democratic principles , and few meaningful checks and balances on the government .
Similarly , Dani Rodrik of Harvard University has found that the countries that experienced the sharpest declines in growth after 1975 had divided societies and weak conflict-management institutions .
Societies with well-functioning institutions allocate the burden of distress in predictable ways .
For example , people who suffer the most adversity can fall back on an explicit social safety net – a minimum level of unemployment insurance , for example .
In the United States in recent years , federal and state legislatures prolonged unemployment benefits as joblessness persisted .
Similarly , debtors and creditors can rely on credible bankruptcy proceedings to determine their relative shares .
With an explicit institutional mechanism in place to dictate the division of pain , there is no need to take to the streets .
By contrast , when institutions are too weak to offer predictable and acceptable settlements , or to protect existing shares , everyone has an incentive to jockey for a larger slice of the pie .
Outcomes will be mediated more by actors ’ relative bargaining power than by pre-existing implicit or explicit contracts .
Often , bargaining will break down .
Everyone is made worse off by strikes , lockouts , and even violent conflict .
Can countries without a reliable and effective legislature or legal system do better to protect against downturns ?
One answer may be to use arrangements that depend in a limited way on the legal system for enforcement .
For example , labor contracts in many developing countries effectively prohibit employers from firing workers .
This is regarded as inefficient because firms cannot adjust quickly to changing business conditions .
Often , such prohibitions are attributed to overly strong unions that hold the economy hostage .
But , if slow or corrupt courts mean that a worker who is wrongfully dismissed has no legal recourse , perhaps the prohibition on firing – enforced by mass protests against violations , which are easily and publicly observable – is the only way to protect workers from arbitrary decisions by employers .
Job tenure may also serve as a form of social security , because the government performs miserably on providing a safety net and private insurance markets do not exist .
Thus , an inflexible contract can protect workers when the preponderance of bargaining power is with firms .
Such inflexible arrangements are not without cost .
In a downturn , too many firms will fail , because they cannot shed labor .
Alternatively , knowing that they cannot fire permanent workers , firms may remain tiny in order to remain below the authorities ’ radar .
Or they may hire informal workers who have no rights , or pay inspectors to look the other way ( a related point could be made about workplace safety in Bangladesh ’ s garment factories ) .
Thus , the attempt to protect workers with rigid labor laws may have the unintended consequence of generating too few protected jobs .
This may be the situation in India , where most workers have few rights , and the few large firms that are established in the formal sector tend to use a lot of labor-saving capital in order to avoid hiring protected workers .
Change is not easy .
Protected workers have no reason to give up their benefits .
Moreover , removing rigid protections without offering alternative , contingent safety nets and judicial redress is a recipe for conflict .
At the same time , some protection is better than none , and if most workers are unprotected , change becomes necessary to avoid even worse conflict .
Sustainable change in developing countries requires reforming not only specific arrangements , such as rigid labor laws , but also more basic institutions , such as the legislature and the judiciary , to make them more responsive to people ’ s needs .
If developed countries ’ citizens want to feel slightly better about their economies ’ slow growth and high unemployment , they should contemplate how much worse matters could be without the institutions that they have .
The view expressed here are the author ’ s own .
