Why Women Still Can ’ t Ask the Right Questions
NEW YORK – We are just recovering , in the United States , from the entirely predictable kerfuffle over a plaint published by Anne-Marie Slaughter , former Director of Policy Planning at the State Department and a professor at Princeton University , called “ Why Women Still Can ’ t Have it All . ”
The response was predictable because Slaughter ’ s article is one that is published in the US by a revolving cast of powerful ( most often white ) women every three years or so .
The article , whoever has written it , always bemoans the “ myth ” of a work-life balance for women who work outside the home , presents the glass ceiling and work-family exhaustion as a personal revelation , and blames “ feminism ” for holding out this elusive “ having-it-all ideal . ”
And it always manages to evade the major policy elephants in the room – which is especially ironic in this case , as Slaughter was worn out by crafting policy .
The problems with such arguments are many .
For starters , the work-family balance is no longer a women ’ s issue .
All over the developed world , millions of working men with small children also regret the hours that they spend away from them , and go home to bear the brunt of shared domestic tasks .
This was a “ women ’ s issue ” 15 years ago , perhaps , but now it is an ambient tension of modern life for a generation of women and men who are committed to gender equality .
Such arguments also ignore the fact that affluent working women and their partners overwhelmingly offload the work-family imbalance onto lower-income women – overwhelmingly women of color .
One can address how to be an ethical , sustainable employer of such caregivers ; nannies in New York and other cities are now organizing to secure a system of market-pegged wages , vacation time , and sick days .
Or , as so often happens in a racist society , one can paint the women who care for the elite ’ s children out of the picture altogether .
Moreover , an inflexible and family-unfriendly corporate environment is no longer the only choice for working women .
Many , particularly in the US , have left that world to start their own businesses .
Most importantly , Americans have a remarkable tendency to reduce problems that others addressed through public policy to a matter of private “ choice ” and even personal psychology .
But the real question is not whether “ women can have it all . ”
Rather , it is how a sophisticated foreign-policy professional can write as if countries like Canada and the Netherlands simply did not exist .
In Canada , couples with a baby may sequence six-month leaves of absence at up to 90 % pay .
In the Netherlands – the best scenario I have seen yet – families can take a day off each week , and the government subsidizes full-time daycare .
This solution was not framed as a “ women ’ s issue , ” but as a family benefit .
And Dutch women have simply moved on , focusing on other interesting goals in their personal and family lives .
In America , by contrast , the Chamber of Commerce and other business interests lobby hard to keep politicians from ever proposing such solutions .
They know that billions of dollars are made from hiring women at lower income levels than men , and then ensuring that a work-family conflict derails women ’ s careers before they become too expensive to compensate fairly .
Of course , Europe is not gender-equality Nirvana .
In particular , the corporate workplace will never be completely family-friendly until women are part of senior management decisions , and Europe ’ s top corporate-governance positions remain overwhelmingly male .
Indeed , women hold only 14 % of positions on European corporate boards .
The European Union is now considering legislation to compel corporate boards to maintain a certain proportion of women – up to 60 % .
This proposed mandate was born of frustration .
Last year , European Commission Vice President Viviane Reding issued a call to voluntary action .
Reding invited corporations to sign up for gender balance goals of 40 % female board membership .
The Forte foundation in America has now followed suit with its own list of “ board-ready women . ”
But Reding ’ s appeal in Europe was considered a failure : only 24 companies took it up .
Do we need quotas to ensure that women can continue to climb the corporate ladder fairly as they balance work and family ?
“ Personally , I don ’ t like quotas , ” Reding said recently .
“ But I like what the quotas do . ”
Quotas get action : they “ open the way to equality and they break through the glass ceiling , ” according to Reding , a result seen in France and other countries with legally binding provisions on placing women in top business positions .
I understand Reding ’ s reticence – and her frustration .
I don ’ t like quotas either ; they run counter to my belief in meritocracy .
But , when one considers the obstacles to achieving the meritocratic ideal , it does look as if a fairer world must be temporarily mandated .
After all , four decades of evidence has now shown that corporations in Europe as well as the US are evading the meritocratic hiring and promotion of women to top positions – no matter how much “ soft pressure ” is put upon them .
When women do break through to the summit of corporate power – as , for example , Sheryl Sandberg recently did at Facebook – they garner massive attention precisely because they remain the exception to the rule .
If appropriate public policies were in place to help all women – whether CEOs or their children ’ s caregivers – and all families , Sandberg would be no more newsworthy than any other highly capable person living in a more just society .
