The Wrong Lesson of Munich
NEW YORK – Seventy years ago this month in Munich , the British prime minister , Neville Chamberlain , signed a document that allowed Germany to grab a large chunk of Czechoslovakia .
The so-called “ Munich Agreement ” would come to be seen as an abject betrayal of what Chamberlain termed “ a far away country of which we know little . ”
But that was not what many people thought at the time .
Chamberlain ’ s belief that Britain was not yet ready for war with Nazi Germany , and that diplomacy and compromise were safer options , was in fact shared by many Europeans , who knew from personal experience the horrible consequences of war .
Nonetheless , Chamberlain has gone down in history as a coward , and his “ appeasement ” of Nazi Germany is often blamed for Hitler ’ s subsequent campaign to conquer the rest of Europe .
Chamberlain was probably wrong .
Britain and France could have stopped Germany .
“ Munich , 1938 , ” was one of the rare occasions in the history of democracies when careful diplomacy was a mistake .
What was needed was a bloody-minded romantic hero , willing to gamble the fate of his nation by fighting on , “ whatever the cost may be , ” in the words of Winston Churchill .
George Santayana famously warned that “ those who cannot learn from history are doomed to repeat it . ” History , however , teaches many lessons , some of them contradictory , and is never repeated in quite the same way .
Sometimes too much attention paid to the past can lead us badly astray .
So , what , exactly , has the world learned from Munich , 1938 ?
If anything , West Europeans after World War II drew conclusions that were closer to Chamberlain ’ s thinking in 1938 than Churchill ’ s .
After two catastrophic wars , Europeans decided to build institutions that would make military conflict redundant .
Henceforth , diplomacy , compromise , and shared sovereignty would be the norm , and romantic nationalism , based on military prowess , would be a thing of the past .
Out of the ashes of war a new kind of Europe arose , as did a new kind of Japan , which even had a pacifist constitution ( written by idealistic Americans , but gratefully accepted by most Japanese ) .
Nationalism ( except in football stadiums ) gave way to smug self-satisfaction at having found more civilized , diplomatic , and pacific solutions to human conflicts .
To be sure , the peace was kept .
But only because it was guaranteed by the United States , which still stuck to pre-World War II notions of national and international security .
In the US , Munich has had a very different resonance .
There , it fed the Churchillian illusions of many a “ war president ” who dreamed of going down in history as freedom ’ s heroic defender .
Munich has been invoked over and over – to fight Communism , to topple Saddam Hussein , to stop Iran , and to wage a “ war on terror . ”
These different perspectives have caused peculiar tensions between the US and its democratic allies .
Europeans and Japanese depend on American military power for their security , but often don ’ t like the way the US uses it .
Too much dependence has also had an infantilizing effect .
Like permanent adolescents , Europeans and Japanese crave the security of the great American father , and deeply resent him at the same time .
There is little doubt that the US , like all great powers , has embarked on foolish wars and acted like a bully , especially toward nations in its own hemisphere .
But , even without invoking the ghosts of Munich , there are occasions when military force is the only way to deal with a tyrant .
Europeans were unwilling to stand up to Serbian mass murderers .
The Americans ( after initial reluctance ) had to do the dirty work .
When the US decided to push Saddam Hussein ’ s killers out of Kuwait , German protesters screamed that they would never “ shed blood for oil . ”
On the other hand , European diplomacy has had some remarkable successes .
The prospect of joining the European Union helped consolidate democracy in central and eastern Europe , and in Turkey , too .
Some of these democracies have joined NATO , and others desperately want to .
NATO , however , unlike the EU , is a military organization .
Therein lies Chamberlain ’ s old problem : are Europeans prepared to fight wars on behalf of their fellow members ?
During the Cold War , this was not a serious dilemma .
Europeans relied on NATO and the US to defend them in case of Soviet aggression .
Now Georgia and the Ukraine would like to expect that Europeans and Americans would shed blood to defend them against Russia .
The choice is stark : if Europeans are prepared to fight for Georgia or Ukraine , these countries should be invited to join NATO .
If not , not .
But , instead of choosing , major European countries , such as Germany , have dithered , first dangling NATO membership as a juicy carrot , and then withdrawing the offer , leaving the Americans to indulge in heroic rhetoric without the necessary follow-through .
All this is making the Western alliance look incoherent , and , despite its vast wealth and American military power , strangely impotent .
It is time for European democracies to make up their minds .
They can remain dependent on US protection and stop complaining , or they can develop the capacity to defend Europe , however they wish to define it , by themselves .
The first option may not be feasible for very much longer in the twilight days of Pax America .
The second will be expensive and risky .
Given the many divisions inside the Union , Europeans will probably muddle on , until a serious crisis forces them to act , by which point it could well be too late .
