Why Did Economists Not Foresee the Crisis ?
CHICAGO – At the height of the financial crisis , the Queen of England asked my friends at the London School of Economics a simple question , but one for which there is no easy answer : Why did academic economists fail to foresee the crisis ?
Several responses to that query exist .
One is that economists lacked models that could account for the behavior that led to the crisis .
Another is that economists were blinkered by an ideology according to which a free and unfettered market could do no wrong .
Finally , an answer that is gaining ground is that the system bribed economists to stay silent .
In my view , the truth lies elsewhere .
It is not true that we academics did not have useful models to explain what happened .
If you believe that the crisis was caused by a shortage of liquidity , we had plenty of models analyzing liquidity shortages and their effects on financial institutions .
If you believe that the blame lies with greedy bankers and unthinking investors , lulled by the promise of a government bailout , or with a market driven crazy by irrational exuberance , we had studied all this too , in great detail .
Economists even analyzed the political economy of regulation and deregulation , so we could have understood why some US politicians pushed the private sector into financing affordable housing , while others deregulated private finance .
Yet , somehow , we did not bring all this understanding to bear and collectively shout our warnings .
Perhaps the reason was ideology : we were too wedded to the idea that markets are efficient , market participants are rational , and high prices are justified by economic fundamentals .
But some of this criticism of “ market fundamentalism ” reflects a misunderstanding .
The dominant “ efficient markets theory ” says only that markets reflect what is publicly known , and that it is hard to make money off markets consistently – something verified by the hit that most investor portfolios took in the crisis .
The theory does not say that markets cannot plummet if the news is bad , or if investors become risk-averse .
Critics argue that the fundamentals were deteriorating in plain sight , and that the market ( and economists ) ignored it .
But hindsight distorts analysis .
We cannot point to a lonely Cassandra like Robert Shiller of Yale University , who regularly argued that house prices were unsustainable , as proof that the truth was ignored .
There are always naysayers , and they are often wrong .
There were many more economists who believed that house prices , though high , were unlikely to fall across the board .
Of course , these expectations could have been distorted by ideology – it is hard to get into the past minds of economists .
But there is a better reason to be skeptical of explanations relying on ideology .
As a group , neither behavioral economists , who think that market efficiency is a joke , nor progressive economists , who distrust free markets , predicted the crisis .
Could it be corruption ?
Some academic economists consult for banks or rating agencies , give speeches to investor conferences , serve as expert witnesses , and carry out sponsored research .
It would be natural to suspect us of bias .
The bias could be implicit : our worldview is shaped by what our friends in industry believe .
Or it may be an explicit bias : an economist might write a report that is influenced by what a sponsor wants to hear , or give testimony that is purely mercenary .
There are enough instances of possible bias that the issue cannot be ignored .
One remedy would be to ban all interaction between economists and the corporate world .
But if economists were confined to the ivory tower , we might be unbiased , but we would also be ignorant of practicalities – and thus even less capable of predicting problems .
One way to restore trust may be disclosure – for economists to declare a monetary interest in a particular analysis and , more generally , to explain who pays us .
A number of universities are moving in this direction .
But I believe that corruption is not the main reason that the profession missed the crisis .
Most economists have very little interaction with the corporate world , and these “ unbiased ” economists were no better at forecasting the crisis .
I would argue that three factors largely explain our collective failure : specialization , the difficulty of forecasting , and the disengagement of much of the profession from the real world .
Like medicine , economics has become highly compartmentalized – macroeconomists typically do not pay attention to what financial economists or real-estate economists study , and vice versa .
Yet , to see the crisis coming would have required someone who knew about each of these areas – just as it takes a good general practitioner to recognize an exotic disease .
Because the profession rewards only careful , well-supported , but necessarily narrow analysis , few economists try to span sub-fields .
Even if they did , they would shy away from forecasting .
The main advantage that academic economists have over professional forecasters may be their greater awareness of established relationships between factors .
What is hardest to forecast , though , are turning points – when the old relationships break down .
While there may be some factors that signal turning points – a run-up in short-term leverage and asset prices , for example , often presages a bust – they are not infallible predictors of trouble to come .
The meager professional rewards for breadth , coupled with the inaccuracy and reputational risk associated with forecasting , leads to disengagement for most academics .
And it may well be that academic economists have little to say about short-term economic movements , so that forecasting , with all its errors , is best left to professional forecasters .
The danger is that disengagement from short-term developments leads academic economists to ignore medium-term trends that they can address .
If so , the true reason why academics missed the crisis could be far more mundane than inadequate models , ideological blindness , or corruption , and thus far more worrisome ; many simply were not paying attention !
