Tipping Points to Asia ’ s Future
TOKYO – A week , it is said , is a long time in politics .
But events in Asia over the past week may define the region for decades to come .
Thailand , one of Asia ’ s most prosperous countries , seems determined to render itself a basket case .
A military coup , imposed following the Thai constitutional court ’ s ouster of an elected government on spurious legal grounds , can lead only to an artificial peace .
Unless Thailand ’ s military is prepared to serve as a truly honest broker between deposed Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra ( and her supporters ) and the anti-democratic Bangkok elite , which has sought a right to permanent minority rule , today ’ s calm may give way to a new and more dangerous storm .
To Thailand ’ s east , Vietnam is the latest Asian country to feel pinched by China ’ s policy of creating facts on the ground , or in this case at sea , to enhance its sovereignty claims on disputed territory .
Vietnam ’ s government reacted vigorously to China ’ s placement of a huge , exploratory oilrig near the disputed Paracel Islands in the South China Sea .
Ordinary Vietnamese , taking matters into their own hands , reacted even more vigorously , by rioting and targeting Chinese industrial investments for attack .
China ’ s unilateral behavior has exposed a strain of virulent anti-Chinese sentiment bubbling beneath the surface in many Asian countries .
Renewed protests over China ’ s mining investments in Myanmar this week confirmed this trend , one that China ’ s leaders seem either to dismiss as trivial , or to regard as somehow unrelated to their bullying .
Indeed , like Russian President Vladimir Putin , who faces widespread public antipathy in Ukraine , China ’ s leaders appear to believe that popular protests against them can only be the product of an American plot .
Yet , despite their shared contempt for expressions of the popular will , China ’ s President Xi Jinping and Putin struggled , during Putin ’ s two-day visit to Shanghai , to agree on a new gas deal that the Kremlin desperately needs .
Putin had viewed China as his backup option should the West seek to isolate Russia following its annexation of Crimea .
Putin ’ s idea was that he could pivot Russia ’ s economy into a partnership with China .
But Xi balked , signing the gas agreement only after Putin offered a steep , long-term discount .
Xi ’ s self-confidence reflected not only the Chinese leadership ’ s contempt for Putin ’ s mismanagement of the Russian economy , but also the fact that China ’ s energy worries have lessened considerably of late .
Successful deployment of hydraulic fracturing ( “ fracking ” ) technology in Xinjiang suggests that China , like America , will soon be able to draw on its own reserves of shale energy .
Moreover , plentiful gas supplies from Myanmar and Central Asia will provide China with sufficient supplies of energy for at least a decade .
China ’ s hard bargaining with Russia has exposed the limits of the two countries ’ bilateral cooperation , which has important geo-strategic consequences for Asia and the world .
China , it now seems , is happy to see Putin poke his finger in the West ’ s eye and challenge America ’ s global leadership .
But it is not willing to underwrite with hard cash Russian pretensions to world power status .
Instead , China appears interested in turning Russia into the sort of vassal state that Putin is seeking to create in Ukraine .
But the most epochal events of the last week took place in two of Asia ’ s great democracies : India and Japan .
Narendra Modi ’ s landslide victory in India ’ s general election was not only a huge personal triumph for the son of a tea seller , but may well mark a decisive break with India ’ s traditional inward-looking policies .
Modi is determined to reform India ’ s economy and lead the country into the front rank of world powers .
Here , Modi will find no stauncher ally than Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe , who was among the first Asian leaders to embrace him in his bid to lead India .
Given that both countries have almost perfectly aligned regional security interests , there should be plenty of scope for the two to act in tandem to improve regional security and mutual prosperity .
Thailand ’ s crisis might well mark a good early test of their ability to work together , because both countries have strong interests in Thailand ’ s rapid return to democracy and the credibility needed to act as an honest broker in ending the country ’ s crisis .
In the past week , Abe created for himself considerably more political space to act as a strategic partner , not only to India , but also to Japan ’ s other allies , particularly the United States .
Quietly , a panel appointed by Abe ’ s government this week offered a reinterpretation of a key element of Article 9 of Japan ’ s constitution .
For the first time since the Pacific War ’ s end in 1945 , Japan ’ s Self-Defense Forces would be able to participate in “ collective self-defense ” – meaning that Japan could come to the aid of its allies should they come under attack .
Of course , China and others in Asia have tried to muddy this change with the alarmist charge of a return to Japanese militarism .
But the new interpretation of Article 9 augurs just the opposite : it embeds Japan ’ s military within an alliance system that has been , and will remain , the backbone of Asia ’ s prevailing structure of peace .
Abe will make this clear when he delivers the keynote address in Singapore at this year ’ s Shangri La Dialogue , the annual meeting of Asian military and civilian military leaders .
Modi ’ s victory and Abe ’ s increased ability to stand by Japan ’ s allies can help to forge deeper bilateral ties and , if properly understood by China , foster a greater strategic equilibrium in the region .
It is now possible for Asia ’ s greatest powers – China , India , Japan , and the US – to form something akin to the concert system that gave Europe a century of almost complete peace in the nineteenth century .
Of course , such a system would require China to set aside its goal of regional hegemony .
Clear-sighted Chinese must already see that , short of a victorious war , such dominance is impossible .
Now is the moment for China to anchor its rise within a stable and mutually acceptable Asian regional order .
Indeed , for China , this may be the ultimate tipping point in its modernization .
