America Adrift
TOKYO – US President Barack Obama ’ s hesitations , ambivalence , U-turns , and political gamesmanship with the US Congress over punishing Syria for its use of chemical weapons has achieved only two things with certainty : it has raised Russia ’ s diplomatic profile for the first time in many years , and it has spooked those of America ’ s allies – from Saudi Arabia and Israel to Japan and South Korea – that rely heavily on US promises .
To minimize the impact of both consequences , the United States now must enforce with utmost determination its agreement with Russia on eliminating Syria ’ s chemical weapons .
But will it do so ?
US Secretary of State John Kerry ’ s heat-of-the-moment comment that a military strike on Syria could be avoided if all chemical weapons were turned over was a diplomatic gift to Russia , and it responded with alacrity .
Not usually noted for its diplomatic dexterity , the Kremlin quickly proposed compelling Syrian President Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime to join the Chemical Weapons Convention ( CWC ) , and to place its chemical-weapons stockpile under United Nations control .
Putin ’ s initiative turned out to be a diplomatic lifeline , as Obama ’ s gambit of seeking Congressional approval for an attack on Syria looked certain to fail , which would have dented his authority as America ’ s commander-in-chief .
Although the agreement may yet strip Assad ’ s regime of some of its most dangerous weapons , the process – if it can be called that – which brought it about has strengthened a global perception that US foreign policy in Obama ’ s second term is either adrift or drifting into isolationism .
The US response to the so-called “ Arab Spring , ” for example , has lacked political conviction , much less strategic direction .
Egypt ’ s old-new military rulers , for example , have concluded that American criticism can be ignored , because America cannot cut off its aid to Egypt for geopolitical reasons .
When I met with Egypt ’ s foreign minister , Nabil Fahmy , in August , he hinted at the new regime ’ s dissatisfaction with attempts by the European Union and the US to influence his country ’ s domestic affairs .
Egypt , he said , understood the importance of democracy and human rights , but avoiding turmoil must be the government ’ s highest priority .
Of course , appeals to “ stability ” are nothing new from authoritarian governments .
As Pakistan ’ s then-president , Pervez Musharraf , dismissively put it when I visited Islamabad as Japan ’ s defense minister , “ Democracy ?
I know all about that . ”
The US , of course , claims that it , too , knows all about democracy .
But its diplomatic cognitive dissonance – criticizing the Egyptian regime while continuing to supply it with military hardware – can serve only to undermine bilateral relations , just as the same American approach to Musharraf ’ s regime thoroughly eroded US-Pakistani ties .
Moreover , the consequences of such foreign-policy waffling extend far beyond the Middle East .
In November 2009 , when Obama visited Japan for the first time as President , he emphasized that he was from Hawaii and proud to be “ Americans ’ first Pacific president . ”
Two years later , then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton published “ America ’ s Pacific Century , ” indicating a shift in America ’ s global strategy .
This declaration of a “ return to Asia ” marked the start of the famous “ pivot ” to the Pacific in US foreign policy – a shift away from the Middle East that was intended to meet the challenges posed by China ’ s growing geopolitical ambitions .
All of Asia ’ s democracies ( and a few of its autocracies , particularly Vietnam ) welcomed it .
But , though rhetoric matters in diplomacy , the pivot will be fatally undermined if Asians perceive the same sort of gap between America ’ s words and its actions that has become apparent in its Middle East policy ( despite Kerry ’ s determined efforts to revitalize peace talks between Israel and the Palestinian Authority ) .
In particular , there is a gnawing fear that the US may yet choose the “ G-2 ” option : a grand bargain with China for the two countries to decide Asia ’ s fate by themselves and over our heads .
Given the size and clout of countries like India , Japan , Indonesia , and South Korea , such a condominium is , no doubt , doomed to failure .
So , as tempting as such a relationship may be , the US ought to resist it .
Meanwhile , in Japan , Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has begun a national discussion concerning how the country can take greater responsibility for its own defense .
His government continues to place great faith in the Japan-US alliance as the bedrock of Japanese ( and Asian ) security .
But Abe ’ s government also recognizes that the world ’ s geopolitical tectonic plates are shifting , and that many in the US are tempted by the siren song of isolationism .
So Abe feels obliged to put Japan in a position to be able to help Asia ’ s democracies manage any crisis that may emerge in the event of a change in America ’ s regional presence .
In the coming days , Japan will welcome Caroline Kennedy , the daughter of President John F. Kennedy and the likely new US ambassador .
She will find a Japan renewing itself and its commitment to Asia ’ s freedoms .
May that example , similar to her father ’ s appeal 53 years ago for the defense of freedom , also call forth the best in the American spirit .
