Weimar Russia Revisited
The phrase “ Weimar Russia ” first appeared about 13 years ago , at the height of the confrontation between then President Boris Yeltsin and the Supreme Soviet that ended when Yeltsin ’ s tanks shelled the parliament .
The meaning was clear to all : Weimar Russia , like Weimar Germany , signified a weak republic attacked from within by nationalists yearning to restore authoritarian ways .
In the late 1990 ’ s and the early years of this decade , the problems that incited fears of a dysfunctional state seemed to fade .
But over the past 18 months , the specter of Weimar has once again begun to haunt Russia .
If taken to extremes , Russian society ’ s response to its wrenching modernization could degenerate into a nationalist revolution led by xenophobes .
A different and healthy conservative response is possible if the tattered remnants of old threads , torn apart in the course of postcommunist modernization , can reconnect and grow together in a new way .
The problem is that everyone writes history in their own manner , and that there are no scales that can fix the precise point at which the remedy of unifying patriotism turns into the lethal poison of rabid nationalism .
Weimar Germany blindly poisoned itself .
In the period from 1991 to 1993 , nationalism was on the rise because Yeltsin ’ s infant democracy seemed weak , with the country in the throes of a deep economic crisis , as well as an acute confrontation between different branches of government .
But what explains today ’ s resurgence of nationalism , when the regime and economy are strong , and all branches of government appear to operate in total unity ?
Indeed , there are no practical reasons for Russia ’ s current system of governance to fall into crisis ( although such reasons may emerge in the event of an economic downturn ) .
But there is another reason , no less important , that concerns morals and ideology .
Challenges to established political authority have been chilled , fairly effectively , by means of state-sponsored patriotism .
But the virus of nationalism has survived and multiplied .
Opinion polls , for example , indicate that 50 % of Russians support the slogan “ Russia for Russians . ”
Moreover , nationalism has spread from the streets into the elite .
Nationalist statements that would have been confined to the extremist newspaper Den in the early 1990 ’ s are now considered normal , “ centrist , ” even commonplace .
Today ’ s hardcore Russian nationalists consider Putin ’ s regime too soft , too pragmatic , too reasonable – in their language , “ weak and indecisive . ”
They loathe it for its “ surrender ” in Ukraine to the “ Orange Revolution , ” and they condemn the decision to give land along Siberia ’ s Amur River to China .
The “ Putin Center ” can be displaced .
Recall that Russia ’ s pro-Western liberals , ascendant a decade ago , have been relegated to the ideological fringe , with the very word “ democrat ” ( let alone “ pro-West ” ) now a term of abuse .
Fortunately , there is no sign yet ( not even on the horizon ) of a charismatic leader capable of forging the scattered energies of national-socialist grievances into a critical mass of hatred and “ national revival . ”
Stalin ’ s ghost is no substitute for a real live leader ; he will never leap out of his portraits , no matter how often they are waved .
Moreover , times have changed .
For example , no one even mentions the idea of introducing a dictatorship , abolishing elections , and so on .
No matter how harshly Russia ’ s “ democrats ” are abused , the word “ democracy ” remains a sacred cow .
Instead , a populist-nationalist revolution might resemble the attempt to overthrow Mikhail Gorbachev in August 1991 , or a Russian version of Ukraine ’ s Orange Revolution .
It might be some sort of “ democratic nationalist revolution ” – spontaneous , and not made by any one political party but by a popular mass movement .
It would be anti-bureaucrat , anti-oligarch , anti-West , and staunchly pro-nationalist .
These are the key ingredients in the nationalist stew that seems to appeal to Russians nowadays .
Judging by Putin ’ s most recent address to parliament , his regime is fully aware of the danger posed by populist nationalists .
It is likely that the regime will attempt to counter this eruption of nationalism while maintaining its strong statist rhetoric .
But , in order to defeat the far right , Putin ’ s regime will be forced to take its stand on more or less liberal ideological grounds .
This won ’ t be easy for a regime based on the twin pillars of bureaucracy and the security apparatus .
What liberals should do in these circumstances is obvious : support Putin ’ s regime insofar as it maintains the foundation and institutions of a liberal order .
The populist nationalists , because they reject these fundamentals , are the unremitting political antagonists of all liberals .
Yet an alliance with the nationalists against Putin currently tempts many Russian liberals .
Indeed , the most popular tactic among liberals nowadays is to unite with all opponents of the regime .
That scheme is both absurd and dangerous .
After all , the word “ Weimar ” draws its infamy from the pact with the devil that German conservatives and royalists made by backing Hitler .
