Vladimir Putin ’ s Potemkin Nation
MOSCOW – “ Image is everything ” might be a viable credo if you are the house of Gucci or a catwalk model , but it is definitely not appropriate as a national strategy .
Yet “ Putinism , ” the ruling ideology of the Russia that Vladimir Putin has forged during his ten years in power , is all about image – the image of a reconstituted great power restored to the world stage .
The problem is that , unlike the rail thin catwalk model who starves herself half to death to stay slim , the image of Russia that Putin seeks to project is completely imaginary .
The Russian economy is a shambles , and Russia ’ s mighty military had to exert itself to its fullest to vanquish tiny Georgia in 2008 .
Of course , Russia ’ s rulers have usually preferred myth to reality .
After all , it was during the reign of Catherine the Great that the “ Potemkin village ” was invented , whereby the squalor of the lives of Catherine ’ s serfs was hidden behind cheerfully painted housing façades as the Empress toured her country .
In today ’ s Russia , the overriding myth is that Putin has presided over a rapidly modernizing country .
Here the cheerful façade is composed of Russia ’ s miniature president , Dmitri Medvedev , whose job – like that of the American First Lady – is to keep up appearances .
And the appearance that needs the most maintenance is that of a modern and civilized Russia .
Upon assuming the presidency in 2008 , Medvedev proclaimed : “ We must achieve a true respect for law , and overcome the legal nihilism that is hampering modern development . ” And , in a much discussed newspaper article entitled “ Russia Forward , ” he declared , “ Should we continue to drag into the future our primitive raw-materials economy , endemic corruption , and inveterate habit of relying on the state to solve our problems ?
And , just this October , remembering the victims of Stalin , Medvedev wrote in his blog ( itself a sign meant to convey how up-to-date he is ) , “ We can hear voices saying that those numerous deaths were justified by some supreme goals of the state .
I am convinced that no development of a country , no success or ambitions , can be achieved through human grief and losses .
Nothing can be valued above human life , and there is no excuse for repressions . ”
Of course , if Medvedev actually meant what he says , he would be leading the opposition to the Russian state that Putin has built .
But , since Putin put Medvedev in his job and can remove him anytime he pleases , Russia ’ s president is not opposed to the ways of the Putin regime .
So what is going on here ?
Putin ’ s political genius is that he understands that , for Russians , being perceived as powerful is even more important than actually being powerful .
He does not need to modernize Russia so that it can actually compete with the world ’ s mightiest powers ; he just needs to bluster enough that people – particularly his own – believe that Russia is once again among the first rank of nations .
Putin ’ s promise to restore national self-respect , shattered by Russia ’ s bitter loss of superpower status in 1991 , is centered around cowing Europe into submissively accepting Russia ’ s sphere of “ privileged interest ” in the post-Soviet nations .
By increasing oil and gas prices , or limiting supplies , flexing its military muscles in Georgia , or sending ships to Cuba and Venezuela to parade Russia ’ s power on the world stage , Putin has convinced many people that Russia is back .
Moreover , Putin ’ s project to safeguard “ great Russian statehood ” from the disarray of the post-Soviet era has seen the imprisoning of “ dishonest ” oligarchs ; the prosecution of an “ irresponsible ” press ; and the establishment of his personal dictatorship over the rule of law .
Because the world associates these traits with the Soviet era , many people mistake their reappearance as a sign that Russian power is now approaching that of the USSR .
Nothing could be farther from the truth .
As in the Soviet era , the dictatorial mask disguises the system ’ s economic and political fragility .
Thus , instead of investing in the energy industry – the lifeblood of the economy – in order to reverse declining output , the Kremlin is devoting its energy to a presidential commission to “ counteract attempts to falsify history to the detriment of Russia ’ s interests . ” This means that the state will decide which interpretations of history should be considered “ true , ” creating endless opportunities for manipulation to serve the agenda of those in power .
Likewise , instead of welcoming the sort of foreign investors who can modernize the economy , the regime continues to wage its judicial war against Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev of Yukos Oil .
They were convicted for financial crimes in a 2004 trial , but in August faced a fresh round of charges , including tax evasion and embezzlement .
Journalists and human rights activists and lawyers – Anna Politkovskaya , Stanislav Markelov , Anastasia Baburova , Natalia Estemirova , and dozens of others – are murdered , and no one in the Kremlin seems to mind , because they are not really a part of the New Russia that Putin is building .
Indeed , just this November , Sergei Magnitsky , a lawyer for Hermitage Capital Management , died in prison because of his captors ’ negligence .
Perhaps US Vice President Joe Biden summed up Russia ’ s predicament best : “ The reality is , the Russians are where they are , having a shrinking population base , a withering economy , and a banking structure that is unlikely to withstand the next 15 years .
The world ’ s changing before them and they ’ re clinging to something in the past that ’ s not sustainable . ” So long as the façade holds , Russians will continue to cling to Putin ’ s illusion of power .
