A Warrant of Hypocrisy
LONDON – Earlier this month , the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) upheld the request of the court ’ s chief prosecutor to issue an arrest warrant for Omar el-Bashir , the President of Sudan , charging him with war crimes and crimes against humanity .
Bashir responded by expelling foreign aid agencies looking after the refugee camps in Darfur .
This is the first time that a sitting head of state has been indicted for war crimes , with reaction around the world mainly divided between those who hailed the move as a great step for international justice and those who condemned it as colonialism .
Both positions are hopelessly buried in intellectual and moral fog .
The warrant was no leap forward .
From the legal point of view , it makes no difference whether the accused is a sitting or former head of state .
But it makes an enormous practical difference that an incumbent ruler can do a lot more future damage to his people than an ex-ruler , and therefore should be given no incentive to retaliate .
As a result of Bashir ’ s policies , 300,000 people are estimated to have died and 2.7 million displaced in Darfur .
The expulsion of the aid agencies has put over a million Darfuris at risk of epidemics and starvation .
According to the statute that established the ICC , the prosecutor is required to ensure that any prosecution is in the interests of the victims as well as of justice .
But , to lawyers like the ICC prosecutor , the abstract claims of justice are more vivid than any concrete duty of protection .
In this case , justice comes with poisoned arrows .
Emboldened by the warrant and its elusive suggestion of international support , the Darfuri rebels , the Justice and Equality Movement , have walked out of peace talks with Sudan ’ s government .
Meanwhile , Bashir , with little to lose , will no doubt take the opportunity to attack his enemies .
The counter-argument is that the threat of indictment will deter rulers from wicked behavior .
But the law will deter only if its sanctions are credible .
A law that cannot be enforced deters no one .
In fact , it weakens respect for law .
Moreover , while the fear of being hauled off to The Hague may have
Whatever the attractions of giving criminals “ nowhere to hide , whatever the consequences , ” the consequences cannot be ignored when the criminals are heads of state .
The policy of never negotiating with terrorists cannot be scaled up to state level when hundreds of thousands of lives are at stake .
The charge of colonialism , meanwhile , is simply reflex : colonialism no longer exists .
The charge that international law is
In the Nuremberg trial of 1946 , which laid the basis of current international law , the main charge against the Nazi leaders was that of “ planning and waging aggressive war . ”
Prohibition of war except for self-defense is embedded in the United Nations Charter .
But the ICC ’ s creators deemed the waging of aggressive war – which the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg called “ the supreme international crime ” – to be outside the court ’ s jurisdiction .
This guaranteed legal immunity for the leaders who carried out the invasion of Iraq .
The charge of selective application also applies to the Bashir warrant .
Bashir stands accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity .
The latter were first defined in the Nuremberg principles of 1950 to include murder , extermination , enslavement , deportation and “ other inhumane acts . ”
In 1998 , these other acts were clarified to mean false imprisonment , torture , rape , persecution of a group , enforced disappearance of persons , and apartheid .
It comes as no surprise , then , to read in the
The answer is simple : where the interests of a UN Security Council member or one of their clients are at stake , the court ’ s jurisdiction ends .
The ICC is like a cobweb : small flies get stuck , but wasps and hornets get through .
Until the United States ratifies the ICC treaty , the Court is bound to seem to many to be little more than a politicized kangaroo court .
Without American support , it has little hope of earning legitimacy , let alone doing its job effectively .
The Security Council has the power to defer the warrant for Bashir ’ s arrest for renewable periods of one year .
It can do this indefinitely , and it seems likely that it will .
The idea is that deferring the warrant will give the Security Council leverage over Sudan .
Gareth Evans , a former Australian Foreign Minister , has called it “ a powerful diplomatic tool , ” while the
If this proves true , the ICC and its sponsors have muddled justice with diplomacy .
If the world can dispense justice only at the expense of the weak and to the advantage of the strong , it should stick to the older tools of crime prevention : force and negotiation , and leave justice out of it .
