Will Next Time Be Different ?
CHICAGO – Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff , in their excellent , eponymous book on debt crises , argue that the most dangerous words in any language are “ This time is different . ” Perhaps the next most dangerous words are “ Next time will be different . ”
These words are often uttered when politicians and central banks want to bail out some troubled segment of the economy . “ Yes , ” one can almost hear them saying , “ we understand that bailing out banks will subvert market discipline .
But you cannot expect us to stand by and watch the system collapse , causing millions of innocent people to suffer .
We have to live with the hand we are dealt .
But next time will be different . ” They then use every tool they have to prevent economic losses on their watch .
The government ’ s incentives are clear .
The public rewards them for dealing with the problem at hand – whether building levees to protect houses built on a flood plain or rescuing banks that have dodgy securities on their balance sheets .
Politicians and central bankers gain little by letting the greedy or careless face the full consequences of their actions , for many innocent people would suffer as well .
A sympathetic press would amplify their heart-rending stories of lost jobs and homes , making those counseling against intervention appear callous .
Democracies are necessarily soft-hearted , whereas markets and nature are not ; government inevitably expands to fill the gap .
To the extent that the rough justice meted out by markets or nature teaches anyone to behave better , it has consequences far beyond the horizon of anyone in power today .
When asked to choose between the risk of being known to posterity as the central banker who let the system collapse and the intangible future benefits of teaching risk takers a lesson , it does not take genius to predict the central banker ’ s decision .
Democracy tends to institutionalize moral hazard in sectors that are economically or politically important , such as finance or real estate , allowing them to privatize gains and socialize losses .
Even though the authorities insist that the next time will be different , everyone knows that they will make the same decision when confronted with the same choice again .
So , knowing that next time will not be different , the authorities try their best to prevent a “ next time . ”
But risk takers have every incentive to try their luck again , knowing that , at worst , they will be bailed out .
In this cat-and-mouse game , risk takers have the upper hand .
For one thing , risk takers are typically small , cohesive interest groups that , once rescued , have a powerful incentive , as well as the resources , to buy the political influence needed to ensure a return to the status quo ante .
If risk takers were allowed to face more serious losses , they would have fewer resources to fight political attempts to constrain their risky activities .
Moreover , the public does not have a long memory , a long time horizon , or an appetite for detail .
Even as the United States ’ voluminous Dodd-Frank bill tried to ensure that bankers never subjected American taxpayers to undue risk again , public attention had moved on to the state of the real economy and unemployment .
Why focus on financial regulation when the risks of an immediate collapse are small , and when the details are so tedious ?
As technical experts and lobbyists took over , and the public lost interest , Dodd-Frank became friendlier and friendlier to the banks .
So how can this one-way betting be stopped ?
The scary answer may be that it does not end until governments run out of money ( as in Ireland ) or the public runs out of sympathy ( as in Germany vis-à-vis the rest of Europe ) .
To avoid that fate , governments should start by recognizing that the system is programmed to respond to deep distress , and that they can do nothing about it .
But they must try to ensure that they do not destroy incentives by doing too much .
And they must offset the distortions created by intervention in other ways .
For example , the US Federal Reserve has essentially guaranteed the financial sector that if it gets into trouble , ultra-low interest rates will be maintained ( at the expense of savers ) until the sector recovers .
In the early to mid-1990 ’ s , rates were kept low because of banks ’ real-estate problems .
They were slashed again in 2001 and kept ultra-low after the dot-com bust .
And they have been ultra-low since 2008 .
Senior Fed policymakers deny that their interest-rate policy bears any responsibility for risk taking , but there is much evidence to the contrary .
It would be difficult for the Fed to respond differently if the financial sector gets into trouble again .
But it does not have to maintain ultra-low interest rates after the crisis has passed , especially if those rates have little impact on generating sustainable economic activity .
Doing so merely rewards banks for their past excesses – and taxes savers .
More importantly , if the Fed wants to restore incentives for risk takers and savers , it should offset the effects of staying “ low for long ” in bad times by increasing interest rates more rapidly than is strictly necessary as the economy recovers .
This will , of course , be politically difficult , because the public has been programmed to think that ultra-low rates are good , and higher rates bad , for growth , without any consideration for the long-term sustainability of growth .
Finally , the pressure on governments to intervene would be lower if individuals had access to a minimum safety net .
Official US policy is so activist in downturns ( regardless of its effectiveness ) partly because unemployment is so costly to workers – who have little savings , unemployment benefits that run out quickly , and health care that is often tied to a job .
A stronger safety net for individuals might allow politicians to accept more corporate or financial-sector distress , and help bolster their claim that next time really will be different .
