Europe ’ s Next Great Mistake
PRINCETON – In constructing Europe ’ s monetary union , political leaders did not think through all of the implications , which led to major design flaws .
Worse , they do not appear to have learned from that experience , for they are about to take the same approach to the monetary union ’ s political analogue .
The logic of the financial crisis is driving Europeans toward greater integration , which implies new mechanisms for political expression .
Well before the crisis , the European Union was widely perceived to be suffering from a “ democratic deficit . ”
Now , with many Europeans blaming the EU for painful austerity measures , that complaint has grown more powerful – and Europe ’ s political leaders believe that they must act now to address it .
Unfortunately , Europe confronts another deficit : a lack of political leadership .
The charismatic figures of the mid-twentieth century – Churchill , Adenauer , and de Gaulle – have no contemporary counterparts .
Citizens associate the EU with , above all , bureaucratic grayness and technocratic rationality .
European officialdom is now responding to these deficits with an initiative to reform and democratize the European Commission .
Current Commission President José Manuel Barroso suggests that ideologically like-minded political parties running in the next European Parliament elections should intensify their cooperation in political “ families ” that would then jointly nominate candidates for the Commission presidency .
Voters would thus play a more direct role in choosing a new European chief executive .
They would feel as if they were appointing a government .
And politicians would need to beef up their charisma in order to be elected .
This approach has been supported by luminaries such as former British Prime Minister Tony Blair .
Because it apparently does not imply any real loss of power for national governments , it has achieved a certain acceptance and seems close to being implemented .
But that does not make it a good idea .
In particular , the perceived need to channel Europe ’ s existing political families into a two-party system , with social democrats on one side and “ people ’ s parties ” on the other , is deeply problematic .
The two-party parliamentary model emerged in nineteenth-century Great Britain .
Electors chose only a representative for the House of Commons , and the majority party then appointed the prime minister .
The contemporary British comic opera Iolanthe celebrated the fact that “ every boy and every gal that ’ s born into the world alive is either a little Liberal or else a little Conservative . ”
But what if not every little boy and girl is born that way ?
In the stable British model , if a political party is too radical , it will lose the political center in the next election .
The parties ’ rivalry is healthy , though there is a built-in tendency to seek solutions that command a broad social consensus .
But such an institutional outcome is not inevitable ( and it probably no longer endures even in contemporary Britain ) .
British lawyers liked to recommend this model to other countries .
They were especially persuasive in Britain ’ s former colonies , notably in newly independent African states .
The results were disastrous .
Citizens could not understand why they should be expected to align their political preferences along a simple left-right spectrum .
Instead , politics was usually recast in terms of old inter-group or inter-ethnic tensions .
The contemporary United States also is not a compelling demonstration that competition between two parties leads to increasing moderation and political centrism .
On the contrary , the partisan struggle can play to the parties ’ extremes .
The two-party moderation thesis makes sense only if the main differences concern redistributive preferences in a simple model driven by an almost Marxist kind of economic determinism .
The left-wing party wants to redistribute wealth and incomes more , and the right-wing party less ; but both need to restrain themselves , and in appealing to the median voter , they become near-identical alternatives .
In a globally inter-connected world , however , a new politics has developed , in which both the left and right fringes fear that outside competition or influences will limit their ability to shape political choices .
Their main political preference then becomes resistance to those external threats .
The old left-right polarity no longer works .
Artificially creating a new European polity split between left and right would create new struggles – and intensify old ones – about redistribution .
The only thing that would hold the left together would be the claim that there should be more redistribution : but to whom , and according to what mechanism ?
Nor is it clear that Spanish socialists have more in common with German social democrats than with their fellow nationals .
Each ideological grouping would most likely become factionalized along complex national lines – divisions likely to be reflected in the ensuing competition to be charismatic .
Instead of encouraging new Churchills and Adenauers , the result might be new imitators of Hitler or Stalin .
There is a better model , one developed in a linguistically , culturally , and religiously diverse test-tube in the geographic heart of Europe : the Swiss model of Konkordanzdemokratie .
In the Swiss system , several parties compete , but they do not aim to control the government exclusively .
Instead , all the major parties are represented in the government , and are consequently obliged to hammer out compromises .
Members of the federal government are driven by regional loyalties at some times , and by ideological commitments at other times ; they all need to be negotiated when making decisions .
The Swiss solution of electing an all-embracing and balanced government tends to produce boring and uninspiring politics .
Famously , few people know who even holds Switzerland ’ s annually rotating presidency .
Charismatic politicians act by polarizing , galvanizing , and mobilizing supporters ; routine politics , by contrast , requires maintaining a low profile and being willing to strike compromises .
Europe today does not need inspirational leaders who can whip up a populist frenzy .
Instead , it needs locally respected leaders who are capable of working in a complex and multi-dimensional political world .
