Ukraine ’ s Orange Christmas
That Ukrainians will vote for their freedom this Christmas season is a coincidence of true perfection .
For our movement is a triumph , not of mobs but of joyous crowds ; of protests , not of looting ; of clear purpose , not confusion .
As a result , something new will color the habits of those who govern Ukraine from now on : respect for individuals , which is the ultimate check on the abuse of power .
Nothing can ever diminish what was at stake – and the victory that has been won – on the streets of Kyiv .
Ukraine ’ s people have renewed their self-respect through courage and resolution .
They have reason to be proud .
Self-confidence among the governed and caution among the rulers : these are the psychological springs of democracy and true freedom , and they can never again be diverted in our homeland .
Nobody ever doubted that Ukraine had changed vastly in its twelve years of independence .
Yet , caught in the sights of a gun barrel , nobody – not even the brave men and women who camped in their hundreds of thousands in the snow before Ukraine ’ s parliament – knew with certainty whether those changes had wrenched Ukrainians from the grip of fear and apathy .
The success of their defiance shows the power of the idea that bewilders outgoing President Leonid Kuchma and his acolytes : that democracy means taking responsibility for one ’ s fate into one ’ s own hands .
The regime clearly expected the crowds that protested the fraudulent election of November 21 to scatter in apathy .
They did not .
This left the regime to choose between using force to quell the growing resistance or cutting its losses .
By refusing to leave the streets and squares of Kyiv , Ukraine ’ s mass volunteer army of democrats forced our country ’ s gray old men of the past to retreat into the past .
This is a breakthrough that will endure .
For 70 cynical years , and for centuries before that , everything done in the name of Ukrainians was done without our consent .
Corrupt regimes , through intimidation and bribery , insisted on the loyalty of the bureaucracy , police , and armed services .
Newspapers and broadcasts were packed with lies .
The Kuchma regime ’ s vast wealth , stolen from ordinary Ukrainians , suggested that the reign of thuggery and deceit could go on forever .
But Ukrainians have now given their seal of approval to democracy and an open society .
From now on , the force of ideas , not the force of arms , will win the day .
For once , Karl Marx , the mischievous cause of so much of Ukraine ’ s misery , got something right : “ the point , ” he said about the world , “ is to change it . ”
Of course , our movement was created out of opposition : opposition to corruption , opposition to surrendering our national independence , opposition to the rule of the bully .
The joy of opposition is its simplicity ; Ukrainians understood what we opposed and stood side by side with us .
Now we must lead a nation in which – thanks to the cynical ploys and hate-filled rhetoric of a discredited regime – some sections seem to be set against the democracy we seek to build .
But no section of Ukraine is our enemy and none will be treated that way .
For we need no reminding of what must be Ukraine ’ s priority .
We have shouted it from every platform in the country : end corruption and abuse of power for personal and partisan gain .
It is a message carved on our hearts .
Thus , our first task is legal and judicial reform , and here we are given hope by the courage of Ukraine ’ s Supreme Court , which in overturning the stolen election of November 21 upheld the law and the liberties of Ukrainians against a regime determined to sweep them away .
So we will resist the temptation of revenge and retribution .
That way lays demoralization and new divisions .
Ruling in the national interest , rather than for the benefit of favored sections or clans , we will apply the law equally to our supporters and our opponents .
We will be guided , and bound , by the rule of law – and the spirit of ordered liberty that animates it .
Of course , immense difficulties remain .
The first is repairing our country ’ s unity .
Yes , Ukraine has Ukrainian speakers and it has Russian speakers ; yes , it has Orthodox and Catholics .
But those divisions were manipulated with the same sort of cynicism that Slobodan Milosevic and Franjo Tudjman used to pit Serbs , Croats , and Bosnian against each other in the former Yugoslavia .
Ukrainians recoil , in anger and horror , at the very idea of dividing the nation .
Our nation ’ s unity is not artificial .
We are united as a people and in our shared history of suffering .
Having laid the foundations of genuine democracy , our house will not be divided by anyone .
In renewing our liberties , we will renew our unity .
We will renew Ukraine .
