The Road to Prosperity and Sound Markets
BERLIN – The near global financial meltdown and ensuing downturns left the Anglo-Saxon nations pondering what they should do both to set their economies on a path toward recovery and to avoid a similar crisis in the future .
Some recommendations by members of Columbia University ’ s Center on Capitalism and Society were sent to last April ’ s G20 meeting .
To create more jobs in the economy , I proposed that governments establish a class of banks that would acquire the lost art of financing investment projects in the business sector – the type of financing the old “ merchant ” banks did so well a century ago .
I also renewed my support for a subsidy to companies for their ongoing employment of low-wage workers .
( Singapore adopted this idea with enviable results . )
To protect commercial banks from risking their own solvency ( and the whole country ’ s solvency besides ) once again , Richard Robb suggested that a small tax on banks ’ short-term debts be imposed in order to deter banks from over-borrowing .
Amar Bhide suggested that commercial banks return to “ narrow banking . ”
If they did that , they could not borrow at all .
But despite all the policy action and talk since then , none of these suggestions has been adopted by G20 countries .
Their emphasis has been on countercyclical measures intended to moderate the downturn rather than on restructuring .
Such moderation , taken alone , is welcome , of course .
But the measures taken may be delaying recovery .
Much of the fiscal “ stimulus ” to consumers causes companies to hang onto employees a little longer rather than to release them to export and import-competing industries that are expanding .
Much of the stimulus to homeowners is propping up housing prices at unsustainable levels .
This is slowing the absorption into the economy of the excess resources in the construction industry .
Another round of global stimulus after the downturn is over or nearly so would push world interest rates up and drive investment activity down .
Government initiatives to rebuild “ infrastructure ” – to replace waning private investment with state investment in health care , climate control and energy conservation – do not have that downside .
But as a means to job creation there are questions .
Private investment is sustained by private innovation , which renews good opportunities .
But would good opportunities for state investment be similarly renewed ?
Might the uncertainties raised by entering into such unknown territory exact a serious toll on private investment activity ?
Governments must shake off the delusion that full recovery is just a matter of pushing buttons .
Beginning with the astonishingly innovative economies that sprouted up in the 19th century , the tried and true method for gaining high prosperity – for an ample supply of engaging and challenging jobs – has been a system of innovative private enterprise in the business sector .
What governments ought to do is “ stimulate ” an innovative economy , not endless roads , wind energy and other building projects .
The best way to shorten the downturn is to restructure the economy in such ways that it recovers to a higher “ new normal ” level .
This December , the Center on Capitalism and Society is meeting in Berlin , just weeks after commemorations of the fall of the Berlin wall . & # 160 ;
The meeting is intended to seek ways to streamline and buttress complex and stumbling economies so that they possess the dynamism that delivers high prosperity – plentiful jobs and ample job satisfaction .
Not all the instruments for creating that prosperity are known , of course .
Yet many are .
It is good to have a banking industry run by a diversity of canny financiers capable of recognizing and willing to fund innovative investment projects .
It is good to have a business sector in which shareowners are not prey to self-dealing CEOs .
It is bad to have fund managers that dump a company ’ s shares if it does not hit its earnings targets for the next quarter .
Yet the goal of high dynamism raises a problem .
Markets , being peopled by mere human beings , have trouble figuring out where profitable investment opportunities are ( let alone the most profitable ) .
A company ’ s knowledge of the future results of a new business undertaking is imperfect to say the least .
And the more innovative the undertaking the more imperfect is any advance understanding of its potential outcome .
An investor ’ s knowledge of the results of a decision to buy this or that asset , financial or real , is likewise imperfect .
Moreover , what others think – particularly , what rivals are doing – may have a big effect on the results of a decision and much of what others understand and plan is private , thus inaccessible .
So an economy ’ s dynamism depends on enough people daring to act in spite of how little they know .
Those of us who , at the Berlin conference and elsewhere , seek to rebuild economies for greater dynamism must do so with awareness of these economic realities .
The market ’ s magic powers are limited .
Fortunately , there are some policy precepts and ideas that governments would do well to invest their political capital in if they want innovation and its attendant prosperity to resume .
A time-honored precept is to avoid shaking investor confidence unnecessarily .
When John Maynard Keynes went to see President Roosevelt in the depths of the Depression , he advised toning down the administration ’ s anti-business rhetoric .
Yet governments must also avoid pumping up businesses with over-confidence , which could tempt them to raise mark-ups and hurt sales .
Simplifying financial institutions , especially those with an implicit government backstop , must also play a role in rebuilding a dynamic economy .
Ratings that pretend to take into account “ systemic risk ” might prove as dangerous as ratings that ignore such risk .
Hedge funds , venture capital firms that actually venture into new things , and recreated merchant banks are relatively well suited to make financial decisions that require judgment , the ability to engage the unknown , and to do so over a horizon not dictated by quarterly earnings .
There are also ideas to address speculative swings .
They may induce wasteful investment and a loss in innovation .
Their “ corrections ” may also have costs – a business slump and a further loss of innovation .
A conceptual framework – Imperfect Knowledge Economics – recently developed by a Center member , Roman Frydman , in collaboration with Michael Goldberg , shows how excessive swings in asset prices arise from market participants ’ imperfect understanding of the future rewards of their decisions .
This framework provides a rationale for policy intervention in asset markets , and also has important implications for how regulators should measure and manage systemic financial risk .
The analysis acknowledges that , within a wide range , the market does a far better ( though not perfect ) job in setting prices than regulators could .
But it makes the case for novel measures , including “ guidance ranges ” for asset prices and targeted variation of margin and capital requirements , to help dampen such excessive price movements .
Regaining a well-functioning capitalism may be a steep mountain to climb .
Yet there are grounds to hope that it is within our reach .
