Why We Need “ Game of Thrones ”
PARIS – Today ’ s popular television programs have become the equivalent of the feuilletons that began appearing in newspapers in the nineteenth century .
Series like “ Game of Thrones ” and “ Downton Abbey , ” like Balzac and Dickens before them , serve as a source of entertainment and fodder for debate .
In this sense , our television screenplays have emerged as key tools of social and political analysis .
Such tools can be used to comprehend , for example , the difference between Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and US President Barack Obama .
Netanyahu is still stuck in the third season of “ Homeland ” – that is , obsessed with Iran – whereas Obama , having begun to include the renewed Russian threat in his strategic calculus , has already moved into the third season of “ House of Cards . ”
Of course , the availability of such comparisons is rooted in what often drives a TV series ’ popularity : its ability to hold up a mirror to a society – to reflect its anxieties and longings – and create a window through which outsiders can peer in .
Consider “ Downton Abbey , ” a British period drama that follows the lives of the Crawley family and its servants in the family ’ s classic country house , from 1912 to the mid-1920s .
Why are millions of people worldwide – from Europe to the United States to Asia – so attracted to these characters ?
Are they nostalgic for a time long past , which the show reconstitutes with exacting verisimilitude ?
Or are they fascinated by the social dynamics that the show explores ?
For Julian Fellowes , who created the series , the explanation lies elsewhere – in our search for order in a chaotic world .
People feel so disoriented nowadays , he believes , that they are drawn to “ Downton Abbey ’ s ” tidy realm , in which the setting , clearly delineated in space and time , is governed by strict rules .
Just as the Crawley house serves as a kind of refuge for its characters , it may give its viewers a safe , predictable outlet by which to escape the tumultuous present – and avoid the unknown future .
Similarly , the American political drama “ House of Cards ” reflects a kind of disillusionment – this time , with US politics .
Whereas “ The West Wing , ” a popular political drama that ran from 1999 to 2006 , portrays the US presidency – held by a sophisticated , cultivated , and humanistic leader – with a kind of longing , “ House of Cards ” immerses the viewer in a murky milieu of humanity ’ s worst impulses .
In “ House of Cards , ” the world is not as viewers believe it should be , but as they fear it is .
This is the opposite of the approach taken by the Danish political drama “ Borgen , ” which presents an idealized prime minister , Birgitte Nyborg .
But the effect is similar .
One often hears people saying that the true problem facing Denmark – and , in particular , its political class – is that Prime Minister Helle Thorning-Schmidt lacks Nyborg ’ s strengths .
By exposing the fundamental challenges and anxieties facing a society , a TV series can , at times , almost prefigure the future .
In France , “ Engrenages ” – sold in English under the title “ Spiral ” – explores the deep malaise of French society .
In retrospect , the series seems to have foreshadowed the tragedies that beset the country in January .
In particular , the fifth season , which aired in France in late 2014 , offered a clinical description of how young people in the Paris suburbs went astray , while portraying the relationship between the police and their political superiors as cynical and even combative .
The show ’ s dialogue could have come straight out of a real-life Parisian “ power lunch . ”
The TV show that has emerged as the most hotly debated of our time is , without a doubt , “ Game of Thrones , ” a medieval fantasy epic based ( increasingly loosely ) on George R.R. Martin ’ s best-selling book series A Song of Ice and Fire .
The series has become known not just for its massive budget or intricate storytelling , but also for its sustained choreography of brutal violence .
Students of international politics , especially in Canada and the US , wonder whether the show , by stressing the role of sheer brutality , encourages a “ realist ” vision of the world .
Could the savagery featured on “ Games of Thrones ” – including abundant beheadings , rape , and sexual torture – have helped to encourage the tactics of , say , Boko Haram and the Islamic State ?
Or could the series – in which violence often begets more violence , but does not necessarily get the characters what they want – actually be highlighting the limits of force ?
On a more philosophical level , the show ’ s universe – a combination of ancient mythology and the Middle Ages – seems to capture the mixture of fascination and fear that many people nowadays feel .
It is a fantastic , unpredictable , and devastatingly painful world – one that is so complex that even the show ’ s most loyal viewers often are confused .
In this sense , it is much like the world in which we live .
Though the West has no monopoly on the production of TV series , it undoubtedly dominates the field – and thus the worldview that such shows reflect .
Given this , one might wonder whether Chinese or Russian leaders are making time in their busy schedules to watch series such as “ House of Cards ” or “ Games of Thrones , ” in order to understand their rivals ’ mentality .
Leading government advisers , at least , seem to recognize the value of tuning in .
A Chinese friend recently told me that “ House of Cards ” was very popular among China ’ s political elite .
They relish the reminder that politics is just as ruthless in the US as it is at home .
