Back to the Brink for the Eurozone ?
ISTANBUL – When European Central Bank President Mario Draghi announced in late July that the ECB would “ do whatever it takes ” to prevent so-called “ re-denomination risk ” ( the threat that some countries might be forced to give up the euro and reintroduce their own currencies ) , Spanish and Italian sovereign-bond yields fell immediately .
Then , in early September , the ECB ’ s Council of Governors endorsed Draghi ’ s vow , further calming markets .
The tide of crisis , it seemed , had begun to turn , particularly after the German Constitutional Court upheld the European Stability Mechanism , Europe ’ s bailout fund .
Despite the ECB ’ s imposition of conditionality on beneficiaries of its “ potentially unlimited ” bond purchases , financial markets across Europe and the United States staged a major rally .
It seems , however , that the euphoria was short-lived .
Yields on Spanish and Italian government bonds have been inching up again , and equity investors ’ mood is souring .
So , what went wrong ?
When I welcomed Mario Draghi ’ s strong statement in August , I argued that the ECB ’ s new “ outright monetary transactions ” program needed to be complemented by progress toward a more integrated eurozone , with a fiscal authority , a banking union , and some form of debt mutualization .
The OMT program ’ s success , I argued , presupposed a decisive change in the macroeconomic policy mix throughout the eurozone .
There has been some progress , albeit slow , toward agreement on the institutional architecture of a more integrated eurozone .
The necessity of a banking union is now more generally accepted , and there is a move to augment the European budget with funds that could be deployed with policy or project conditionality , in addition to ESM resources .
( Germany and its northern European allies , however , insist that this be an alternative to some form of debt mutualization , rather than a complement to it . )
The ESM , supported by the ECB , could become a European version of the International Monetary Fund , and the new funds in the European budget could become , with support from the European Investment Bank , Europe ’ s World Bank .
All of this will take time , but there is some movement in the right direction .
Where there has been virtually no progress at all is in the recalibration of the macroeconomic policy mix .
The prevailing strategy in Europe remains simply to force internal devaluation on the southern countries , with excessive austerity aimed at causing severe wage and price deflation .
While some internal devaluation is being achieved , it is producing so much economic and social dislocation – and , increasingly , political upheaval – that there is no supply response , despite the accompanying structural reforms .
Indeed , the deflationary spiral , particularly in Greece and Spain , is causing output to contract so rapidly that further spending cuts and tax increases are not reducing budget deficits and public debt relative to GDP .
And Europe ’ s preferred solution – more austerity – is merely causing fiscal targets to recede faster .
As a result , markets have again started to measure GDP to include some probability of currency re-denomination , causing debt ratios to look much worse than those based on the certainty of continued euro membership .
While all of this is happening in Europe ’ s south , most of the northern countries are running current-account surpluses .
Germany ’ s surplus , at $ 216 billion , is now larger than China ’ s – and the world ’ s largest in absolute terms .
Together with the surpluses of Austria , the Netherlands , and most non-eurozone northern countries – namely , Switzerland , Sweden , Denmark , and Norway – northern Europe has run a current-account surplus of $ 511 billion over the last 12 months .
That is larger than the Chinese surplus has ever been – and scary because it subtracts net demand from the rest of Europe and the world economy .
Inflicting excessive austerity on the southern European countries while limiting their exports by restricting effective demand in the north is like administering an overdose to a patient while withholding oxygen .
The political and economic success of southern Europe ’ s much-needed structural reforms requires the proper dose and timing of budgetary medicine and buoyant demand in the north .
The northern countries argue that permitting wage growth and boosting domestic demand would reduce their competitiveness and trade surplus .
But that misses the entire point : surplus countries must contribute no less than deficit countries to global and regional rebalancing , because the world economy cannot export to outer space .
This argument was always emphasized when the Chinese surplus was deemed excessive , but it is virtually ignored when it comes to northern Europe .
If conservative politicians and economists in Europe ’ s north continue to insist on the wrong overall macroeconomic policy mix in Europe , they could yet bring about the end of the eurozone , and , with it , the end of the European project of peace and integration as we have known it for decades .
This is not to argue against the need for vigorous structural and competitiveness-enhancing reforms in the south ; it is to give those reforms a chance to succeed .
