Tymoshenko ’ s Trial and Ukraine ’ s Future
STOCKHOLM – There is little doubt that the embarrassing spectacle of the trial of former Ukrainian Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko – and her recent arrest on contempt charges during the proceedings – is causing great damage to her country .
And there is little doubt that how Ukraine develops will be of great importance for Europe ’ s future .
Ukraine ’ s Orange Revolution in 2004 ignited the hope of a new wave of democratic reforms in the countries to the east of the European Union – a period of so-called “ color ” revolutions .
Soon , however , those forces that feared losing power in this vast and important region began a determined counter-offensive .
Nonetheless , Ukraine continued to stumble in a European direction , preserving important parts of the gains made in 2004 .
The 2010 comeback of President Viktor Yanukovych was essentially the result of a free and fair election .
It took some time , but Yanukovych ’ s determination to press on with the European integration efforts begun by his predecessor , Viktor Yushchenko , has become increasingly clear – in the face of repeated calls ( and sometimes thinly veiled threats ) by Russia to join its customs union with Belarus and Kazakhstan .
Indeed , tension with Russia could well escalate towards the end of the year , because Ukraine ’ s foreign-policy orientation is of clear consequence to the Kremlin .
A democratic Ukraine with an open economy and close ties with the European Union could not fail to influence Russia ’ s future path as well .
Negotiations for an association agreement between Ukraine and the EU , which includes far-reaching provisions for trade and regulatory integration , are well advanced , and could even be concluded this year .
The agreement could become a model for similar agreements with other countries belonging to the EU ’ s Eastern Partnership .
Georgia and Moldova arelined up to start similar negotiations .
Ukraine , reasonably enough , wants this agreement to be accompanied by an acknowledgment of its European destiny , and by clear steps towards reciprocal visa-free travel .
Such an acknowledgement could be seen as formal recognition of the fact that membership of the EU remains a long-term option for Ukraine .
All of that has been put in profound jeopardy by Tymoshenko ’ s trial .
Of course , few saints grace Ukrainian politics . Indeed , large-scale corruption has become entrenched in the country ’ s political system , with various oligarchic groups often battling each other .
The corruption networks surrounding the old Soviet pipeline system carrying gas from Siberia to Western Europe have obviously impeded Ukraine ’ s political development .
But , whether saint or sinner , everyone deserves a fair hearing , not a show trial .
The rule of law must apply to all , and very few believe that any of the charges against Tymoshenko would stand the slightest chance of being upheld in a Western court .
It all smacks of a politically directed attempt by Yanukovych and his supporters to rid themselves of a powerful opponent before the next election .
Together with other similar cases , these trials raise serious questions about Ukraine ’ s judicial system and law enforcement agencies .
They provide the clearest indication yet that Ukraine , despite assurances by Yanukovych ’ s government , is developing in the wrong direction .
Negotiations on the EU association agreement should proceed – this is an issue of strategic importance to Europe – but subsequent steps will inevitably depend on Ukraine ’ s commitment to the values and principles underpinning European integration .
If the bizarre scenes now being witnessed in Kyiv continue , even Ukraine ’ s closest friends in Europe will find it very difficult to make the case for a deepening of relations .
Tymoshenko ’ s trial , and how she is treated by the Ukrainian authorities , must not only be fair , but also must be seen to be fair .
Ukraine ’ s moves in the direction of the EU reflect its efforts to modernize and reform its economy .
Indeed , the country could develop into a mini-China , placing massive manufacturing capacity immediately adjacent to the global economy ’ s largest integrated market .
And Ukraine ’ s potential as an agricultural producer is equally impressive .
Yet Ukraine currently is struggling to meet the conditions of its IMF assistance program .
Parliament watered down a proposal for far-reaching pension reform to the point that it borders on useless , and repeated promises to stop subsidizing wasteful energy consumption through low gas prices have not been honored .
Determined reform policies could overcome these obstacles ; but , if Ukraine wants to proceed on the EU path , it must understand that the rule of law is a precondition for substantial integration .
Yanukovych ’ s government must take stock of its behavior .
Freedom House concluded earlier this year that , since Yanukovych came to power in 2010 , Ukraine “ has become less democratic and , if current trends are left unchecked , may head down a path toward autocracy and kleptocracy . ” But its assessment also noted that “ political and cultural diversity is a bulwark against any one force dominating political space throughout the country . ”
So Ukraine ’ s future remains open .
It is a great country that deserves a secure and prosperous future as a member of Europe ’ s family .
The show-trial of Yulia Tymoshenko , unfortunately , risks turning it into an estranged cousin .
