Austerity Politics , Then and Now
PRINCETON – Britain ’ s policy of fiscal consolidation , recently announced by Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne , sent shock waves around the world .
Osborne argued that Britain was on the brink : that there was no alternative to his policy if the country was to avoid a massive crisis of confidence .
Other countries , such as Greece , needed to have a full-blown crisis in order to prompt such adjustment measures , whereas Britain was acting prudently and preemptively .
If Britain , with a relatively low share of public debt to GDP ( 64.6 % ) is worried , the implication is that many other countries should be much more concerned .
But drastic attempts at fiscal consolidation immediately evoke memories of the Great Depression .
Andrew Mellon , the United States Treasury Secretary at the time , talked about liquidating workers , farmers , stocks , and real estate in order “ to purge the rottenness out of the system . ”
In Britain back then , Philip Snowden , a small man with a narrow , pinched face , who needed a cane to walk , seemed to want to remake the British economy in his physical image .
Given these historical analogies , a slew of heavyweight Keynesian critics are warning that the world is about to repeat all the disasters caused by bad fiscal policy in the 1930 ’ s .
But this interpretation of the Great Depression , common though it is , is misguided .
In the first place , the critics get their history wrong .
US President Herbert Hoover ’ s administration did not initially respond to the depression by emphasizing the need for fiscal austerity .
On the contrary , Hoover and other figures argued in a perfectly modern , Keynesian fashion that large-scale public-works programs were needed to pull the economy out of the trough .
Moreover , today ’ s Keynesians ignore the urgency behind the depression-era concern with balanced budgets .
When the Hoover administration did swing to fiscal tightening , it was responding to pressures from the capital and foreign-exchange markets , which in turn were responding to the crises in Latin America and Central Europe , where public finances had been a major part of the problem .
Beginning in September 1931 , the markets became nervous about the US , causing large outflows from American banks – and thus from the dollar .
The Depression had rendered capital markets incapable of absorbing large quantities of government ( or , indeed , any other ) debt .
As a result , fiscal consolidation appeared to be the only way to restore confidence .
Great Britain in 1931 already grasped this logic .
Snowden was worried that any attempt by the British government to borrow would fail , which would constitute an “ admission of national bankruptcy . ”
That September , concerns about public debt and the British government ’ s ability to enforce austerity led to a run on the pound .
Rather than trying to mount a last-ditch defense of the fixed exchange rate , the government , at the suggestion of the Bank of England , agreed to abandon the gold standard and devalue the pound .
A third problem with the conventional Keynesian interpretation is that the balanced-budget approach during the Great Depression did actually work .
It calmed markets , and Britain ’ s departure from the gold standard freed monetary policy from its previous constraints , and allowed a monetary stabilization .
The country was no longer subject to imported deflation via the fixed exchange rate .
But an equally important part of the recovery process was that Britain had left gold with a more or less balanced budget .
That was why monetary policy could be managed with greater flexibility .
The balanced budget thus allowed Britain to have a strong recovery , ensuring that the 1930 ’ s were a much better decade for the British economy than the 1920 ’ s had been .
Finally , those who view the Great Depression as fundamentally a product of tight fiscal policies and “ Treasury orthodoxy ” overlook the much greater culpability of a fixed exchange-rate regime for the transmission of bad monetary policy , and thus for fueling the contraction .
The major question today should be whether the failure of capital markets ( and the implications for government debt ) after 2007 has been as severe as during the Great Depression .
At the moment , there has not been widespread revulsion against all government debt , and some countries today clearly have better access than others to capital markets , enabling them to finance their deficits externally .
The debate about room for fiscal maneuver in practice soon becomes a debate about whether countries that have easily financed debt in the past can automatically continue to do so .
We are still in the last stages of a bubble in government debt that arose in the first stage of the financial crisis from the “ flight to security ” of US Treasuries .
When that bubble collapses , it will hit not just the weaker countries – the equivalent of sub-prime mortgages – but also stronger creditors .
In the Great Depression , one of the big surprises was the devastating abruptness with which markets turned on the US .
In the late summer of 1931 , the dollar , alongside the French franc , appeared to be the strongest currency in the international system .
That precedent should serve as a warning of how vulnerable governments and their finances can rapidly become , and of how fiscal policy can stand in the way of a monetary approach oriented toward stability .
Greece in the spring of 2010 sent a wake-up call to Great Britain .
The British response should prompt other industrial economies , above all the US , to tackle their long-term fiscal weaknesses .
