Getting the Trans-Pacific Partnership Right
WASHINGTON , DC – The United States Congress has now given President Barack Obama so-called fast-track negotiating authority to conclude the Trans-Pacific Partnership ( TPP ) , the proposed mega-regional free-trade agreement among the US and 11 other countries .
But Obama ’ s victory was not an easy one : Members of his own Democratic Party overwhelmingly opposed fast-track authority , which limits Congress to a single up-or-down vote on finished trade agreements , thereby ruling out amendments .
The fast-track measure , officially known as Trade Promotion Authority , passed only because Obama was able to rely on rare backing from the Republican majority in both the House of Representatives and the Senate .
But the Democrats have a point .
They want the Obama administration to ensure that the TPP includes core international labor standards for all participants , a high level of environmental protection , and access to affordable medicines , among other measures .
If the administration takes these entirely reasonable demands on board , the resulting agreement would have considerable bipartisan support .
If it chooses to ignore such demands , the final agreement would be much more polarizing – and would be approved by Congress with very little Democratic support .
Though Obama has promised that the TPP will be the most progressive trade agreement in history , which is achievable , the shroud of secrecy that surrounds almost all details of the negotiations has made it difficult to evaluate claims and counterclaims on this point .
But once the agreement is concluded , it will be published in full , leaving no possibility of obfuscation .
And the markers that have been laid down by congressional Democrats are very clear , quite specific , and well thought-out .
In fact , in an agreement between House Democrats and former President George W. Bush ’ s administration in May 2007 , almost all of the key principles were already spelled out in considerable detail .
In 2005 , only 15 House Democrats voted for the Central American Free Trade Agreement , precisely because its terms on labor standards and the environment were so weak .
In 2007 , by contrast , 109 House Democrats voted in favor of the US-Peru Trade Promotion Agreement , precisely because its terms had been adjusted as requested and in line with the May agreement .
And , in October 2011 , the House approved the much-debated US-Korea Free Trade Agreement with 59 Democrats in favor .
The extent of congressional Democratic support depends directly on what exactly is in any trade agreement .
The main principles in the May 2007 agreement are straightforward and difficult to oppose . Workers should be allowed to form trade unions .
All forms of forced or compulsory labor – including human trafficking – should be prohibited . Vague promises on these issues are not acceptable ; countries must enter into compliance before a trade agreement takes effect .
Moreover , the agreement calls for the inclusion of existing international environmental standards in free-trade agreements , including rules concerning pollution and endangered animals .
Likewise , such agreements should support fair access to pharmaceutical patents and to the data used to prove the safety of medical treatments .
And the May 2007 agreement makes it clear that “ foreign investors in the US will not be accorded greater substantive rights with respect to investment protections than US investors in the US . ”
In a paper issued in January 2015 , and again in a major speech in May , Sander Levin , the ranking Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee , applied these principles to all of the outstanding issues regarding the TPP .
It would not be difficult for the administration to give Levin and his colleagues what they want .
Some participants in the TPP may indeed balk at being required to raise labor or environmental standards ; in such case , however , policymakers need to ask whether these countries should get easier access to the US market .
Similarly , access to affordable medicines is something other countries desperately need ; it is large pharmaceutical companies that are not entirely enthusiastic .
The most difficult challenge for the Obama administration may be the issue of currency manipulation .
Democrats are pushing for provisions to prohibit or limit currency-market intervention by central banks that is intended to give a country ’ s exporters a competitive edge .
This is also a huge potential problem with the TPP , because competitive devaluations can swamp any other gains from trade by an order of magnitude , with substantial negative effects on US jobs .
The administration urgently needs to take this point on board .
“ Free trade ” has always been something of a misnomer .
Yes , the logic of market-based global commerce is very strong .
But every market exists within a specific set of rules , which are not random and are not handed down from the heavens .
The TPP represents an important opportunity to write better rules for international trade and investment .
