Why China Won ’ t Rule
LONDON – Is China poised to become the world ’ s next superpower ?
This question is increasingly asked as China ’ s economic growth surges ahead at more than 8 % a year , while the developed world remains mired in recession or near-recession .
China is already the world ’ s second largest economy , and will be the largest in 2017 .
And its military spending is racing ahead of its GDP growth .
The question is reasonable enough if we don ’ t give it an American twist .
To the American mind , there can be only one superpower , so China ’ s rise will automatically be at the expense of the United States .
Indeed , for many in the US , China represents an existential challenge .
This is way over the top .
In fact , the existence of a single superpower is highly abnormal , and was brought about only by the unexpected collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
The normal situation is one of coexistence , sometimes peaceful sometimes warlike , between several great powers .
For example , Great Britain , whose place the US is often said to have taken , was never a “ superpower ” in the American sense .
Despite its far-flung empire and naval supremacy , nineteenth-century Britain could never have won a war against France , Germany , or Russia without allies .
Britain was , rather , a world power – one of many historical empires distinguished from lesser powers by the geographic scope of their influence and interests . & nbsp ;
The sensible question , then , is not whether China will replace the US , but whether it will start to acquire some of the attributes of a world power , particularly a sense of responsibility for global order .
Even posed in this more modest way , the question does not admit of a clear answer .
The first problem is China ’ s economy , so dynamic on the surface , but so rickety underneath .
The analyst Chi Lo lucidly presents a picture of macro success alongside micro failure .
The huge stimulus of RMB4 trillion ( $ 586 billion ) in November 2008 , mostly poured into loss-making state-owned enterprises via directed bank lending , sustained China ’ s growth in the face of global recession .
But the price was an increasingly serious misallocation of capital , resulting in growing portfolios of bad loans , while excessive Chinese household savings have inflated real-estate bubbles .
Moreover , Chi argues that the crisis of 2008 shattered China ’ s export-led growth model , owing to prolonged impairment of demand in the advanced countries .
China now urgently needs to rebalance its economy by shifting from public investment and exports towards public and private consumption .
In the short run , some of its savings need to be invested in real assets abroad , and not just parked in US Treasuries .
But , in the longer term , Chinese households ’ excessive propensity to save must be reduced by developing a social safety net and consumer credit instruments .
Moreover , to be a world economic power , China requires a currency in which foreigners want to invest .
That means introducing full convertibility and creating a deep and liquid financial system , a stock market for raising capital , and a market rate of interest for loans .
And , while China has talked of “ internationalizing ” the renminbi , it has done little so far .
“ Meanwhile , ” writes Chi , “ the dollar is still supported by the strong US political relations with most of the world ’ s largest foreign-reserve-holding countries . ”
Japan , South Korea , Saudi Arabia , Kuwait , Qatar , and the United Arab Emirates all shelter under the US military umbrella .
The second problem is one of political values .
China ’ s further “ ascent ” will depend on dismantling such classic communist policy icons as public-asset ownership , population control , and financial repression .
The question remains how far these reforms will be allowed to go before they challenge the Communist Party ’ s political monopoly , guaranteed by the 1978 constitution .
Two important cultural values underpin China ’ s political system .
The first is the hierarchical and familial character of Chinese political thought .
Chinese philosophers acknowledge the value of spontaneity , but within a strictly ordered world in which people know their place .
As the Analects of Confucius puts it : “ Let the ruler be a ruler , the subject a subject , a father a father , and a son a son . ”
There is also very little belief in the sanctity of human life : Buddhism holds that there is no difference between humans and animals and plants .
A pledge to protect human rights was written into the Chinese constitution in 2004 ; but , as the recent case of the blind dissident Chen Guangcheng illustrates , this is mostly a dead letter .
Similarly , private property ranks below collective & nbsp ; property .
Then there is the Confucian doctrine of the “ mandate of heaven , ” by which political rule is legitimized .
Today , the mandate of Marxism has taken its place , but neither has any room for a & nbsp ; mandate of the people .
Ambivalence about the source of legitimate government is not only a major obstacle to democratization , but is also a potential source of political instability .
These historical legacies limit the extent to which China will be able to share in global leadership , which requires some degree of compatibility between Chinese and Western values .
The West claims that its values are universal , and the US and Europe will not cease pressing those values on China .
It is hard to see this process going into reverse , with China starting to export its own values .
China has a choice : it can either accept Western values , or it can try to carve out an East Asian sphere to insulate itself from them .
The latter course would provoke conflict not only with the US , but also with other Asian powers , particularly Japan and India .
China ’ s best possible future thus probably lies in accepting Western norms while trying to flavor them with “ Chinese characteristics . ”
But neither choice is a scenario for China “ replacing ” the US .
Nor , I think , is this what China wants .
