Asia and a Post-American Middle East
KUWAIT CITY – When the consequences of the United States-led invasion of Iraq ten years ago are fully assessed , the importance of the subsequent rise of political Islam there – and throughout the wider Middle East – may well pale in comparison to that of a geostrategic shift that no one foresaw at the time .
That shift , however , has now come into view .
With America approaching energy self-sufficiency , a US strategic disengagement from the region may become a reality .
The Middle East , of course , has experienced the withdrawal of a great power , or powers , many times before : the disintegration of the Ottoman Empire after World War I ; the fraying of the French and British imperial mandates after World War II ; and , most recently , the nearly complete disappearance of Russian influence following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
Each time , monumental changes in the region ’ s politics , particularly its alliances , quickly followed .
If America attempts to wash its hands of the Middle East in the coming years , will a similar rupture be inevitable ?
Although many believe that the US-Israel alliance is the foundation of America ’ s Middle East policy , it was dependence on imported oil that motivated the US to establish a dominant military presence in the region after 1945 .
Indeed , until the Six Day War of June 1967 , the US was not a major supplier of military hardware to Israel .
America ’ s military presence was intended , above all , to preserve the Arab status quo , and hence the flow of energy from the Persian Gulf , for the benefit of the US , its allies , and the entire global economy .
Of course , no one should think that America ’ s shale-gas revolution ( which has brought it to the brink of energy self-sufficiency ) means that its Bahrain-based Fifth Fleet will lift anchor any time soon .
But the rationale for America ’ s commitment of military force to the region is changing fast ; when that happens – as it has in Europe , for example , since the Cold War ’ s end – the distribution of military assets tends to change as well .
That change is almost certain to be reflected in America ’ s relationships with its Arab allies and partners .
As the US statesman / academic Joseph Nye has argued : “ For decades the United States and Saudi Arabia have had a balance of asymmetries in which we depended on them as the swing producer of oil and they depended on us for ultimate military security . ”
Given America ’ s burgeoning domestic energy supplies , Nye argues , those “ bargains will be struck on somewhat better terms , ” at least from the US perspective .
But , whatever new terms are struck , the degree of US disengagement from the Middle East will depend on how two key questions are answered .
First , would even a partial withdrawal of military force create a security vacuum that could be filled by a rival – say , China or Iran ?
And , second , would any diminution of America ’ s commitment to the region incite the kind of instability that breeds failed states and terrorist havens ?
President Barack Obama ’ s current security strategy in Afghanistan , Yemen , and elsewhere suggests that the US will seek to mitigate the latter risk by continuing its covert interventions – particularly its use of unmanned aerial vehicles .
Preventing rivals from gaining overweening influence in the region , however , will require a very different type of response – one that will require the backing of old allies , such as Japan , and new friends , like India .
The reason for this is clear : China ’ s dependence on Middle East energy imports means that it is almost certain to seek to fill any regional security vacuum .
Indeed , China appears to have long anticipated the coming changes in the region ’ s security structure , and already seems prepared to take advantage of them if permitted to do so .
Its “ string of pearls ” across the Indian Ocean – a series of potential naval stations connecting China to the Middle East and Africa – would support a Chinese blue-water navy able to patrol the sea-lanes of the Persian Gulf .
But , in trying to strike new bargains with Middle East oil producers , China has already been compromised by its strong backing of Iran , which is locked in a power struggle with the region ’ s leading Sunni states , particularly Saudi Arabia .
Absent a complete shift in China ’ s relations with Iran , a strategic partnership with the monarchies of the Persian Gulf may prove impossible to achieve .
And , even then , China ’ s domestic repression of Xinjiang ’ s Muslims , which provoked a fierce dispute with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan just a few years ago , may preclude the necessary trust from ever taking root .
Still , China ’ s inevitable bid for greater influence in the Middle East means that countries like India , Indonesia , Japan , South Korea , Turkey and others will also need to become proactive in creating a regional security structure that protects their national interests .
They will need to be clear with themselves about whether they have the means to achieve their national security ends .
For example , could they provide some of the security that America has long provided to the region ’ s Arab states ?
Such a projection of Asian power – and of Asia ’ s power struggles – into the Middle East may seem a distant prospect today .
But ten years ago , so did the possibility of an American disengagement from the region .
