Thinking Computers Must Hallucinate , Too
Creating a computer that " thinks " is one goal of artificial intelligence research .
In 1950 , the great British mathematician Alan Turing guessed that " thinking computers " would arrive by 2000 .
But computers capable of simulating human thought processes are no closer today than they were then , because we put science before common sense .
Put simply , we failed to notice obvious and important facts about the nature of thought that exist right before our eyes .
Philosophy is intended to show us facts that are so obvious that we might miss them .
Most philosophers , it seems , have been asleep on the job for a long time .
Consider four familiar situations .
In one , you are thinking about a problem - say , what pension plan you should join - logically and analytically .
In the second , you are thinking casually , drawing on experience rather than analysis .
( My computer is stuck .
The last time this happened , I fixed it by doing such and such ;
I 'll try that again . )
In the third , you are looking out a window , letting your mind wander .
Finally , you are asleep and dreaming .
The single most important fact about thought follows from an obvious observation : these four styles are connected .
We can label them " analysis , " " common sense , " " free association , " and " dreaming . "
But the key point is that they are four points on a single continuous spectrum , with analysis at one end and dreaming at the other .
Psychologists and computer scientists like to talk about analysis and common sense as if they were salt and steel , or apples and oranges .
We would do better to think of them as red and yellow , separated not by some sharp boundary , but by a continuous range of red-oranges and orange-yellows .
Most people do their best analytic thinking when they are wide-awake .
As your alertness declines , your analytic ability declines - and you rely less on analysis , more on common sense .
As your alertness declines further , your mind starts to wander .
At some point you are looking out the window , free-associating .
Falling asleep is also a gradual transition .
( One of experimental psychology 's most interesting findings is that people start to dream before they fall asleep , while they are still physiologically awake . )
Free-association and dreaming are blue and violet , with a beautiful spectrum of violet-blues in between .
To understand color , it is not enough to understand red and yellow , or blue and violet .
Understanding color requires understanding the entire spectrum .
Likewise , to understand thought , it is not enough to understand " analysis " and " common sense , " or " free association " and " dreaming . "
Understanding thought implies understanding the entire cognitive spectrum .
It is therefore nonsense to believe that we can simulate thought on a computer without first understanding and simulating all of its component hues .
Dreaming , for example , is merely hallucinating while you sleep .
So , to put the same point another way , no thinking computer is possible until we can build a computer that hallucinates .
To understand the mind , we can conceive of it as being equipped with an imaginary dial marked " mental focus " or " alertness " or " attention . "
( I do not know the physiological basis of " mental focus " ; physiologists cannot tell me , because most of them also do not know what " mental focus " is .
It is right in front of their noses , too close to notice . )
Different people have different " cognitive personalities . "
Some are more comfortable than others thinking analytically , with their dials at " high focus . "
Everyone 's focus oscillates during the day .
Your analytic abilities decline as your " wide awakedness " declines .
You cannot fall asleep unless your focus setting dips below some threshold .
( If we understood the physiological basis of mental focus , we would almost certainly have a better understanding about sleep disorders . )
Psychologists tried for generations to understand creativity , which is distinct from analytical thinking .
Creativity evidently depends on inventing analogies .
If you are good at analogies ( " that fluttering oak leaf reminds me of a butterfly wing " ; " that 17th-century clock is a computer with a round screen " ) , you have a basis for creative thinking , for approaching old problems in new ways .
But how do we invent analogies ?
The answer must have something to do with the thought-spectrum .
Notice the similarity between falling asleep and thinking creatively - no matter how hard you try , you can not force yourself to do either .
You cannot make yourself fall asleep by concentrating .
To fall asleep you must un -concentrate .
Various studies have reached the same conclusion about analogies .
Creative thinkers are most productive not when they are concentrating but when they are un -concentrating , when they are thinking not about the problem to be solved but about something else .
So , to think analytically you must set your " focus " to maximum ; to think creatively , you must let your focus setting decline - but not so far that you fall asleep .
To complete the picture , we notice that emotion becomes increasingly important as " focus " falls .
Emotions then become " signatures " or " encodings " of complex thoughts .
When two ideas seem unrelated , but make you feel the same way , you have a basis for connecting them - and for inventing a new analogy .
Viewed from this perspective , it appears self-evident that no " thinking computer " whose focus is permanently set on high can come close to simulating human thought .
