What Happened to India ?
CHICAGO – Emerging markets around the world – Brazil , China , India , and Russia , to name the largest – are slowing .
One reason is that they continue to be dependent , directly or indirectly , on exports to advanced industrial countries .
Slow growth there , especially in Europe , is economically depressing .
But a second reason is that they each have important weaknesses , which they have not overcome in good times .
For China , it is excessive reliance on fixed-asset investment for growth .
In Brazil , low savings and various institutional impediments keep interest rates high and investment low , while the educational system does not serve significant parts of the population well .
And Russia , despite a very well educated population , continues to be reliant on commodity industries for economic growth .
Hardest to understand , though , is why India is underperforming so much relative to its potential .
Indeed , annual GDP growth has fallen by five percentage points since 2010 .
For a country as poor as India , growth should be what Americans call a “ no-brainer . ”
It is largely a matter of providing public goods : basic infrastructure like roads , bridges , ports , and power , as well as access to education and basic health care .
And , unlike many equally poor countries , India already has a very strong entrepreneurial class , a reasonably large and well-educated middle class , and a number of world-class corporations that can be enlisted in the effort to provide these public goods .
Satisfying the demand for such goods is itself a source of growth .
But , also , a reliable road creates tremendous additional activity , as trade increases between connected areas , and myriad businesses , restaurants , and hotels spring up along the way .
As India did away with the stultifying License Raj in the 1990 ’ s , successive governments understood the imperative of economic growth , so much so that the Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) contested the 2004 election on a pro-development platform , encapsulated in the slogan , “ India Shining . ”
But the BJP-led coalition lost that election .
Whether the debacle reflected the BJP ’ s unfortunate choice of coalition partners or its emphasis on growth when too many Indians had not benefited from it , the lesson for politicians was that growth did not provide electoral rewards .
In any event , that election suggested a need to spread the benefits of growth to rural areas and the poor .
There are two ways of going about that .
The first , which is harder and takes time , is to increase income-generating capabilities in rural areas , and among the poor , by improving access to education , health care , finance , water , and power .
The second is to increase voters ’ spending power through populist subsidies and transfers , which typically tend to be directed toward the politically influential rather than the truly needy .
In the years after the BJP ’ s loss , with a few notable exceptions , India ’ s political class decided that traditional populism was a surer route to re-election .
This perception also accorded well with the median ( typically poor ) voter ’ s low expectation of government in India – seeing it as a source of sporadic handouts rather than of reliable public services .
For a few years , the momentum created by previous reforms , together with strong global growth , carried India forward .
Politicians saw little need to vote for further reforms , especially those that would upset powerful vested interests .
The lurch toward populism was strengthened when the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance concluded that a rural employment-guarantee scheme and a populist farm-loan waiver aided its victory in the 2009 election .
But , while politicians spent the growth dividend on poorly targeted giveaways such as subsidized petrol and cooking gas , the need for further reform only increased .
For example , industrialization requires a transparent system for acquiring land from farmers and tribal people , which in turn presupposes much better land-ownership records than India has .
As demand for land and land prices increased , corruption became rampant , with some politicians , industrialists , and bureaucrats using the lack of transparency in land ownership and zoning to misappropriate assets .
India ’ s corrupt elites had moved from controlling licenses to cornering newly valuable resources like land .
The Resource Raj rose from the ashes of the License Raj .
India ’ s citizenry eventually reacted .
An eclectic mix of idealistic and opportunistic politicians and NGOs mobilized people against land acquisitions .
With investigative journalists getting into the act , land acquisition became a political land mine .
Moreover , key institutions , such as the Comptroller and Auditor General and the judiciary , staffed by an increasingly angry middle class , also launched investigations .
As evidence emerged of widespread corruption in contracts and resource allocation , ministers , bureaucrats , and high-level corporate officers were arrested , and some have spent long periods in jail .
The collateral effect , however , is that even honest officials are now too frightened to help corporations to navigate India ’ s maze of bureaucracy .
As a result , industrial , mining , and infrastructure projects have ground to a halt .
Populist government spending and the inability of the supply side of the economy to keep pace has , in turn , led to elevated inflation , while Indian households , worried that no asset looks safe , have taken to investing in gold .
Because India does not produce much gold itself , these purchases have contributed to an abnormally wide current-account deficit .
Not much more was required to dampen foreign investors ’ enthusiasm for the India story , with the rupee falling significantly in recent weeks .
As with the other major emerging markets , India ’ s fate is in its own hands .
Hard times tend to concentrate minds .
If its politicians can take a few steps to show that they can overcome narrow partisan interests to establish the more transparent and efficient government that a middle-income country needs , they could quickly re-energize India ’ s enormous engines of potential growth .
Otherwise , India ’ s youth , their hopes and ambitions frustrated , could decide to take matters into their own hands .
