Ending East Asia ’ s History Wars
TOKYO – Georges Clemenceau , who , as France ’ s prime minister , led his country to victory in World War I , famously said that “ war is too important to be left to the generals . ”
Japan is now discovering that history is too important to be left to newspaper editors .
In the 1990s , the newspaper Asahi Shimbun caused a firestorm at home and in South Korea by publishing a series of articles , based upon testimony by the former Japanese soldier Seiji Yoshida , on “ comfort women ” – Koreans forced to provide sexual services to the Japanese Imperial Army during World War II .
Asahi has now admitted that the soldier ’ s confessions were unfounded , and has disavowed the core supporting evidence for the articles .
That retraction appears to be causing as much embarrassment – and diplomatic vitriol – in Japan and South Korea today as the original series did .
But , at a time when both countries cannot afford to permit partisan or sloppy abuses of history to roil their bilateral relations , Asahi ’ s careless work has turned out to be more than abysmal journalism ; it has introduced a dangerous element into regional diplomacy .
Some say that Japan and South Korea should follow the example set by France and Germany .
Reconciling in the first two decades following the Nazi Occupation of France , these countries ’ leaders understood that their security and economic ties were far too important to their citizens ’ wellbeing to allow the old hatreds to fester .
They knew that the unimaginable violence of WWII was a direct result of the antagonisms that had festered since the Napoleonic Wars and that were allowed to persist after 1918 .
In Charles de Gaulle and Konrad Adenauer , France and Germany had two of the twentieth century ’ s greatest statesmen , leaders who were able to discern the broad sweep of history through the fog of quotidian politics .
Their loyalty was not only to the citizens who elected them , but also to the generations of the past that had endured the consequences of Franco-German enmity , and to generations yet to come , which would benefit from reconciliation .
Of course , given that Japan and Korea have not fought a series of wars against each other , their relationship is not the same as that between Germany and France .
But it is clear that no one will benefit from a new round of heated historical debate .
To avoid this , political leaders like de Gaulle and Adenauer are needed .
Only when we can discuss the past without endangering the future will the countries of Northeast Asia be able to establish a truly durable structure of peace .
As Admiral Dennis C. Blair , a former commander of the US Pacific Fleet , stated at a recent conference , “ The history of Asia from the 1930s to about 1955 or so was not pretty in any way & hellip ; .I don ’ t think any country can have a monopoly on righteousness , or on guilt and shame ” for that time .
Blair added that “ the attempt to hold a ‘ we were right ’ and ‘ you were wrong ’ sweepstakes is not going to help our children and grandchildren understand what happened there . ”
Japan and South Korea need to take responsibility for the future , not obsess about the past .
A recent Japanese government white paper called South Korea the country “ that shares the closest relationship with Japan historically and in areas such as economy and culture . ” No doubt , many , if not most , South Korean foreign-policy experts and strategists share that sentiment .
But it will take committed leadership to transcend the history wars and tap the full potential of Japanese-Korean cooperation , something that both countries ’ key ally , the United States , strongly desires , as it seeks to draw China into a lasting and peaceful Asian order .
For too long , intemperate historical debates – often driven by biased newspaper accounts – have poisoned bilateral relations .
Now , as another war of words heats up , Japanese and South Korean leaders need to step back , recognize where the real interests of their people lie , both today and in the future , and calmly begin to take the measures required to ensure durable reconciliation .
