What do Egypt ’ s Generals Want ?
CAIRO – “ Whatever the majority in the People ’ s Assembly , they are very welcome , because they won ’ t have the ability to impose anything that the people don ’ t want . ”
Thus declared General Mukhtar al-Mulla , a member of Egypt ’ s ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces ( SCAF ) .
Al-Mulla ’ s message was that the Islamists ’ victory in Egypt ’ s recent election gives them neither executive power nor control of the framing of a new constitution .
But General Sami Anan , Chief of Staff and the SCAF ’ s deputy head , quickly countered that al-Mulla ’ s statement does not necessarily represent the official views of the Council .
So , one year after the revolution that overthrew Hosni Mubarak , who , exactly , will set Egypt ’ s political direction ?
The electoral victory of the Muslim Brotherhood ’ s political wing and the Salafi parties , which together won more than 70 % of the parliamentary seats , will give them strong influence over the transitional period and in drafting the constitution .
But they are not alone .
Aside from the Islamists , two other powerful actors will have their say : the “ Tahrirists ” and the generals .
Tahrir Square-based activism has not only brought about social and political change , but also has served as the ultimate tool of pro-democracy pressure on Egypt ’ s military rulers .
Indeed , while the army , the most powerful of the three actors , still officially controls the country , there is little confidence in the generals ’ commitment to democracy .
“ The SCAF are either anti-democratic … .or some of their advisers told them that democracy is not in their best interest , ” says Hazem Abd al-Azim , a nominee in the first post-Mubarak government .
If the generals do not want democracy , nor do they want direct military rule à la Augusto Pinochet .
So , what do they want ?
Ideally , they would like to combine the Algerian army ’ s current power and the Turkish army ’ s legitimacy .
This implies a parliament with limited powers , a weak presidency subordinate to the army , and constitutional prerogatives that legitimate the army ’ s intervention in politics .
The minimum that they insist on is reflected in statements by Generals al-Mulla , Mamdouh Shahim , Ismail Etman , and others .
That would mean a veto in high politics , independence for the army ’ s budget and vast economic empire , legal immunity from prosecution on charges stemming from corruption or repression , and constitutional prerogatives to guarantee these arrangements .
The new parliament and constitutional assembly will have to lead the negotiations with the SCAF .
But , given that any successful democratic transition must include meaningful civilian control over the armed forces and the security apparatus , the SCAF ’ s minimum demands could render the process meaningless .
The veto in high politics would include any issues that touch on national security or sensitive foreign policy , most importantly the relationship with Israel .
With an Islamist majority in the parliament promising to “ revise ” the peace agreement with Israel , tensions over foreign policy are likely to rise .
The independent military-commercial empire , which benefits from preferential customs and exchange rates , no taxation , land-confiscation rights , and an army of almost-free laborers ( conscripted soldiers ) , is another thorny issue .
With the Egyptian economy suffering , elected politicians might seek to improve conditions by moving against the military ’ s civilian assets – namely , by revising the preferential rates and imposing a form of taxation .
Immunity from prosecution is no less salient .
“ The Field-Marshal should be in jail now , ” screamed the elected leftist MP , Abu Ezz al-Hariri , on the second day of the new parliamentary session .
When Mahmoud Ghozlan , the Muslim Brotherhood spokesperson , proposed immunity ( known in Egypt as the “ safe-exit ” option ) , he faced a wave of harsh criticism .
Pressure from the United States has also influenced the SCAF ’ s decision-making .
“ The military establishment receives $ 1.3 billion from the US … .They are very sensitive to US requests , ” according to Saad Eddin Ibrahim , who lobbied the Obama administration to support the revolution in January 2011 .
But most of the SCAF ’ s pro-democracy decisions have come as a result of massive pressure from Tahrir Square .
This includes the removal of Mubarak , his trial ( and that of other regime figures ) , and bringing forward the presidential election from 2013 to June 2012 .
Two other factors are equally , if not more , influential : the status quo inherited from the Mubarak era and the army ’ s internal cohesion .
With few exceptions , the SCAF ’ s members benefited significantly from Mubarak ’ s regime .
They will attempt to preserve as much of it as possible .
“ The sight of officers in uniform protesting in Tahrir Square and speaking on Al Jazeera really worries the Field Marshal , ” a former officer told me .
And one way to maintain internal cohesion is to create “ demons ” – a lesson learned from the “ dirty wars ” in Algeria in the 1990 ’ s and Argentina in the 1970 ’ s and 1980 ’ s .
In particular , Coptic protesters are an easy target against which to rally soldiers and officers .
Last October , amid an unnecessary escalation of sectarian violence , state-owned television featured a hospitalized Egyptian soldier screaming , “ The Copts killed my colleague ! ”
The systematic demonization of the Tahririst groups , and the violent escalation that followed in November and December , served the same purpose .
Despite everything , democratic Egypt is not a romantic fantasy .
A year ago , Saad al-Ketatni , the Muslim Brotherhood leader , would never have dreamed of being Speaker of Parliament .
The same applies to the leftists and liberals who now hold around 20 % of the parliament ’ s seats .
If 2011 witnessed the miracle of Mubarak ’ s removal , a brave parliament ’ s institutional assertiveness , coupled with non-institutional Tahririst pressure , could force the generals to accept a transfer of power to civilian rule ( with some reserved domains for the army establishment ) in 2012 .
What is certain is that this year will not witness a return to the conditions of 2010 .
Egypt may become stuck in democratization ’ s slow lane , but there will be no U-turn .
The hundreds of thousands who marched to Tahrir Square on the revolution ’ s anniversary will guarantee that .
