Bernanke ’ s the One
BERKELEY – William McChesney Martin , a Democrat , was twice reappointed to the job of Chairman of the United States Federal Reserve by Republican President Dwight D. Eisenhower .
Paul Volcker , a Democrat , was reappointed once by the Reagan administration ( but not twice : there are persistent rumors that Reagan ’ s treasury secretary , James Baker , thought Volcker was too invested in monetary stability and not invested enough in producing strong economies in presidential years to elect Republicans ) .
Alan Greenspan , a Republican , was reappointed twice by Bill Clinton .
And now Barack Obama has announced his intention to re-nominate Republican appointee Ben Bernanke to the post .
As this history suggests , it is more remarkable for a US president not to reappoint a Fed chairman named by the opposite party than to reappoint one who wishes it .
Reagan ’ s failure to reappoint Volcker and Jimmy Carter ’ s failure to reappoint Arthur Burns are the main exceptions . The Fed chairmanship is the only position in the US government for which this is so : it is a mark of its unique status as a non- or not-very-partisan technocratic position of immense power and freedom of action – nearly a fourth branch of government , as David Wessel ’ s recent book In Fed We Trust puts it .
The reason , I think , that American presidents are so willing to reappoint Fed chairmen from the opposite party is closely linked to one of the two things that a president seeks : the confidence of financial markets that the Fed will pursue non-inflationary policies .
If financial markets lose that confidence – if they conclude that the Fed is too much under the president ’ s thumb to wage the good fight against inflation , or if they conclude that the chairman does not wish to control inflation – then the economic news is almost certain to be bad .
Capital flight , interest-rate spikes , declining private investment , and a collapse in the value of the dollar – all of these are likely should financial markets lose confidence in a Fed chairman .
And if they occur , the chances of success for a president seeking re-election – or for a vice president seeking to succeed him – are very low .
By reappointing a Fed chair chosen by someone else , a president can appear to guarantee financial markets that the Fed is not too much under his thumb .
And that can be a very valuable asset for an incumbent Fed chair – one that no other candidate could match .
But US presidents seek more than just a credible commitment to financial markets that the Fed chair will fear and fight inflation .
They seek intelligence , honor , and a keen sense of the public interest and the public welfare .
Presidents ’ futures – their ability to win re-election , to accomplish other policy goals , and to leave a respectable legacy – hinge on the economy ’ s strength .
It may or may not be true , especially these days , that what is good for General Motors is good for America and vice versa , but certainly what is good economically for America is good politically for the president .
It is here , I think that President Barack Obama has lucked out .
Ben Bernanke is , I think , a very good choice for Fed chair because he is so intelligent , honest , pragmatic , and clear-sighted in his vision of the economy .
He has already guided the Fed through two very tumultuous years with only one major mistake – the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers .
Bernanke ’ s deep knowledge of the Great Depression and of financial crises is exactly what America – and the world – needs in a Fed chair now .
And his commitment not to err on the side of underestimating either the difficulty of the situation or the value of keeping employment high would make him , I believe , one of the best possible choices for the position , even if he were not now the incumbent .
