Balancing Asia \ u0027s Rivals
OXFORD – George W. Bush is approaching the end of his presidency mired in low popularity ratings , which partly reflects his policies in the Middle East .
But Bush leaves behind a better legacy in Asia .
American relations with Japan and China remain strong , and he has greatly enhanced the United States ’ ties with India , the world ’ s second most populous country .
In 2005 , Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice prepared a visit to Delhi by Bush the following year in which he announced a major agreement on US-Indian civilian nuclear cooperation , as well as a variety of measures for commercial and defense cooperation .
The nuclear cooperation agreement was criticized in the US Congress for not being strict enough on non-proliferation issues , but it looked likely to pass .
In India , the Communist Party , a small ( but important ) member of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh ’ s ruling coalition , has blocked the agreement .
But , as one Indian friend explained to me , this is mainly symbolic politics for India ’ s Left .
Even if the nuclear agreement fails , the improvement in US-India relations is likely to continue .
Some attribute this to the fact that India and the US are the world ’ s two largest democracies .
But that was true for much of the Cold War , when they frequently talked past each other .
More importantly , with the end of the Cold War , the Soviet Union was no longer available as an Indian ally , and the US began to assess India and Pakistan in terms of separate interests , rather than as a pair linked in a South Asia balance of power .
As Evan Feigenbaum , the top State Department official for South Asia recently said , “ the world of 2008 is not the world of 1948 .
And so India really has the capacity , and , we think , the interest , to work with the United States and other partners on a variety of issues of global and regional scope . ” This change began under the Clinton administration and is likely to continue regardless of who is elected president in 2008 .
Personal contacts between Indians and Americans have increased greatly .
There are now more than 80,000 Indian students studying in the US , and many have stayed to establish successful companies .
The Indian diaspora in the US constitutes roughly three million people , many of whom actively participate in politics .
For example , Louisiana ’ s governor is of Indian origin , and has been mentioned as a possible running mate for John McCain .
In addition , India ’ s economy has begun to grow by 8 % annually , making it more attractive for foreign investment .
Trade between India and American is increasing , and reached $ 26 billion ( 11 % of India ’ s total trade ) in 2006 .
In addition to these practical reasons for the improvement in bilateral relations , the rise of China poses a strategic consideration .
As Bill Emmott , the former editor of The Economist argues in his new book The Rivals , “ where Nixon had used China to balance the Soviet Union , Bush was using India to balance China .
Like Nixon ’ s move , with hindsight Bush ’ s approach to India made perfect sense . ” And the concern is reciprocated on the Indian side .
As a senior foreign ministry official told Emmott in 2007 , “ the thing you have to understand is that both of us [ India and China ] think that the future belongs to us .
We can ’ t both be right . ”
Official pronouncements stress friendly relations between India and China , and some trade analysts argue that , given their rapid growth , the two giant markets will become an economic “ Chindia . ”
When Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao visited India in 2005 , he signed eleven agreements , including a comprehensive five-year strategic cooperation pact .
In addition , Wen announced that China would support India ’ s inclusion as a permanent member of an expanded United Nations Security Council , and oppose Japan ’ s inclusion , which the US supports .
As Singh put it during Wen ’ s visit , “ India and China can together reshape the world order . ”
The two countries ’ recent rapprochement marks a considerable change from the hostility that bedeviled their relations following their 1962 war over a disputed border in the Himalayas .
Nevertheless , strategic anxiety lurks below the surface , particularly in India . China ’ s GDP is three times that of India , its growth rate is higher , and its defense budget increased by nearly 18 % last year .
The border dispute remains unsettled , and both countries vie for influence in neighboring states such as Myanmar .
China ’ s rise has also created anxiety in Japan , again despite professions of good relations during Chinese President Hu Jintao ’ s recent visit to Tokyo .
Thus , Japan has increased its aid and trade with India .
Last year , the US suggested quadrilateral defense exercises including US , Japanese , Indian , and Australian naval units , but the newly elected Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd has pulled his country out of such arrangements .
Rudd wisely believes that the right response to China ’ s rise is to incorporate it into international institutional arrangements .
Or , as Robert Zoellick , currently the president of the World Bank , put it when he was a State Department official , the US should invite China to become a “ responsible stakeholder ” in the international system .
Improved relations between India and the US can structure the international situation in a manner that encourages such an evolution in Chinese policy , whereas trying to isolate China would be a mistake .
Handled properly , the simultaneous rise of China and India could be good for all countries .
