Exposing America
WASHINGTON , DC – If not for President Barack Obama ’ s bold , unexpected diplomatic breakthrough with Cuba , the last weeks of 2014 would have been relentlessly unkind to America .
The deep flaws in our country ’ s justice system , the continuing racism in our society , and our government ’ s recent record of torture and abuse have been on display for the entire world to see .
The video of five police officers subduing and then killing a man , despite his pleas that he could not breathe , could have come from many countries around the world .
But the killing of Eric Garner in New York City , like that of Michael Brown in Ferguson , Missouri , last summer and of 12-year-old Tamir Rice in Cleveland in November , reflect the heightened risk that young African-American men face at the hands of the police in many US cities .
Indeed , according to one recent analysis , young African-American males are 21 times more likely than young white males to be fatally shot by the police .
Then came the release by the US Senate Select Committee on Intelligence of 528 pages of its report on the CIA ’ s detention and interrogation program , established following the September 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on America .
What the committee described as an “ executive summary ” detailed horrific behavior by government officials acting on instructions from their superiors .
Worse , rather than seeking to make amends for the abuses , at least one group of former US officials sought to justify them .
When asked on US television about the estimated 25 % of detainees who were innocent , former Vice President Dick Cheney responded : “ I have no problem as long as we achieve our objective .
And our objective is to get the guys who did 9 / 11 and it is to avoid another attack against the United States . ” For their part , some current CIA officials continue to insist on the value of America ’ s “ enhanced interrogation ” program ( which Obama halted ) , despite the Senate report ’ s conclusion that the techniques it employed yielded no valuable intelligence .
Indeed , other accounts of America ’ s “ global war on terror ” also make it clear that many of the people who were detained and tortured were not threats to America ’ s security – at least not until US actions made them so .
The week the Senate report came out , I was reading Anand Gopal ’ s new book No Good Men Among the Living , & nbsp ; which tells contemporary Afghanistan ’ s story through the eyes of a supporter of former President Hamid Karzai , a Taliban commander , and a Kabul-born housewife who spent years in purdah in Taliban country .
Over and over again , the same story plays out : a local power-broker is willing , even eager , to support the new US-backed government , only to be denounced as a Taliban member by a fellow Afghan – typically for local political or personal reasons – to unwitting American troops .
Indeed , this pattern recurs in the accounts of anyone who has lived in Afghanistan , spoken the language , and understood the workings of patronage and power there .
It was often these denounced men who were detained – and tortured – for years .
From my vantage point as a US foreign-policy expert , the only bright spot in recent months has been Obama ’ s normalization of diplomatic relations with Cuba .
Finally , America has an opportunity to launch a new beginning , not only with Cuba but also with the Caribbean and Latin American countries that have pressed us hard and often to change our stance .
Indeed , the move will stand as one of Obama ’ s most substantial foreign-policy achievements , with implications that will reverberate for decades .
Yet a common theme runs through all of these recent events , good and bad alike .
In each case , US institutions and officials held other US institutions and officials to account .
Congress documented and publicized the actions of the executive branch in the torture report .
Senator Dianne Feinstein worked doggedly to ensure that the Senate intelligence committee could research and document US interrogation practices , even in the face of staunch opposition by the CIA ( which even surreptitiously searched the committee ’ s computers ) .
“ There are those who will seize upon the report and say ‘ see what Americans did , ’ ” Feinstein said , “ and they will try to use it to justify evil actions or to incite more violence .
We cannot prevent that .
But history will judge us by our commitment to a just society governed by law and the willingness to face an ugly truth and say ‘ never again . ’ ”
Likewise , the press and many civil-society groups documented and publicized not only the killings of Brown , Garner , and others , but also how those cases reflected a pattern of racially disparate treatment by the police .
And when Obama announced the restoration of full diplomatic relations with Cuba , the White House described the last half-century of US policy as a “ failed approach , ” isolating the US , constraining its influence in hemispheric politics , and tying its hands in Cuba itself .
Americans are no better ( and no worse ) than anyone else .
We have no right to moralize , and we have much to learn from others .
Fortunately , our founding fathers gave us the exceptional gift of a political system that pushes us continually in the direction of self-correction .
The ability to correct wrongdoing can never justify doing wrong in the first place .
The point of exposure is not to celebrate our ability to expose .
We Americans must learn how to look at ourselves and our government the way others do .
We have much to answer for .
But at least we know that we have asked the right questions .
