Turkey ’ s Diplomatic Dogfight
MADRID – Turkey ’ s downing of a Russian warplane risks opening a new front in the violence engulfing Syria , thereby dashing the hopes for a rapprochement between Russia and the West that had arisen in the wake of the Paris massacre .
With Russian President Vladimir Putin and Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan now engaged in a war of words , and given the nightmare scenario of something far worse , it is more important than ever that the European Union do all that it can to reinvigorate its ties with Turkey .
Prior to the attacks in Paris , Erdoğan had seemed to be holding all the cards in the bilateral relationship .
European leaders , faced with an escalating refugee crisis , agreed last month to pursue a joint action plan , which demanded that Turkey help stem the tide of migrants into Europe , in exchange for EU funds , visa liberalization , and , most relevant , renewed negotiations on Turkey ’ s EU accession .
Shortly after that decision , German Chancellor Angela Merkel reversed her previous opposition to Turkish membership in the EU , calling it an “ open-ended issue ” during a visit to Istanbul .
All of this served Erdoğan well in the run-up to Turkey ’ s November 1 general election .
The action plan and Merkel ’ s visit were viewed within Turkey as de facto endorsements of Erdoğan ; the EU even delayed the release of a critical “ progress report ” on Turkey ’ s accession negotiations until after the vote .
In the end , Erdoğan ’ s Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) regained its comfortable parliamentary majority .
The G-20 Summit in Antalya , held on November 15-16 , was to cement Erdoğan ’ s triumphant return to the world stage , ending a period of relative isolation by the West that reflected disapproval of his authoritarian tendencies .
And a joint EU-Turkey summit was scheduled for November 29 to formalize the action plan .
Then , as so often happens , events intervened .
The tragedy in Paris sidelined Turkey at its own summit , derailing Erdoğan ’ s international comeback .
Instead , the focus was on US President Barack Obama , Putin , and French President François Hollande acting from Paris .
Now , Erdoğan faces a different strategic outlook , particularly with Russia-Turkey relations under greater strain than at any time since the Cold War ’ s end .
With the world now more determined than ever to defeat the Islamic State – an enterprise that will , it is becoming clear , require boots on the ground – the major powers are seeking immediately available forces .
For the time being , that means , on the one hand , the Syrian Democratic Forces , dominated by the Kurdish People ’ s Protection Units , which oppose President Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime , and , on the other hand , the pro-regime forces backed by Russia , as well as Iran and its proxies , particularly Hezbollah .
From a Turkish perspective , both are unacceptable .
Meanwhile , Turkey faces a direct threat from the Islamic State , exemplified by the twin suicide bombings that killed more than 100 people in Ankara last month .
Turkish authorities have since foiled another attack , planned for the same day as those in Paris .
Finally , following Russia ’ s annexation of Crimea in 2014 , which drove a wedge between the Kremlin and the West , Turkey had carved out a strategically advantageous position between the two sides .
But Turkey now finds itself increasingly isolated from both camps , owing to its downing of the Russian fighter and its staunch opposition to Assad , whom both American and European leaders increasingly believe will have to play some role in any political settlement .
As France shuns NATO as the centerpiece of an international response to the Islamic State , Turkey ’ s zero-tolerance approach to encroachments on its airspace has put NATO-Russian relations under dangerous strain .
It is in easing those tensions that the EU has an important role to play .
While Turkey still has leverage vis-à-vis the EU , owing to the continued flow of refugees toward Europe , both sides are now approaching the partnership from positions of genuine need .
Neither side can afford further complication of the already volatile situation .
This should be reflected at the upcoming summit .
On the EU side , it is important to acknowledge Turkish sensitivities regarding Kurdish forces .
This means establishing credible safeguards to prevent potential safe zones in northern Syria , essential to stemming refugee flows and beginning to stabilize the country , from threatening Turkey ’ s internal security .
European leaders – along with the US – must weigh in to avoid an escalation between Turkey and Russia .
And they must do a better job of reassuring the Turkish government that , despite Assad ’ s possible inclusion in Syria ’ s initial transition , he has no long-term future as the country ’ s leader .
For its part , Turkey needs to broaden its perspective .
The developments on its southern border concern far more than the Kurdish question ; they have far-reaching implications for regional stability .
The AKP ’ s election victory offers a chance for the government to shift its attention back toward resolving the broader problems in its neighborhood – that is , to act like a true regional leader , instead of pursuing a narrow , self-serving agenda .
To address today ’ s most urgent challenges , Turkey and the EU must commit to building a genuine partnership , based on common interests , in particular security interests , rather than a transactional arrangement that addresses issues à la carte .
This necessarily includes a good-faith approach to negotiations on Turkey ’ s accession to the EU .
In the wake of Turkey ’ s fraying relations with Russia , the decision to proceed with the planned EU-Turkey Summit is an important one .
Now more than ever , the EU and Turkey have a responsibility to act together , before an already appalling situation gets even worse .
