The Tabloid Syndrome
The world is a complex and intricate place .
So how are we to understand even just a piece of it , say , the United States government and its economic policies ?
It is a big problem , for the standard sources that I was taught as a child to rely upon – newspapers and television news – are breaking down .
For example , in early February 2004 , the then Chairman of the President ’ s Council of Economic Advisers , N. Gregory Mankiw , spent some time trying to explain the issues surrounding “ outsourcing ” to America ’ s elite political news reporters .
Mankiw ’ s standard description of outsourcing is very much like mine – indeed , like that of all neoclassical and neoliberal economists – and goes something like this :
As with any change in technology that increases the volume of international trade in goods and services , the outsourcing of service-sector jobs creates winners and losers – but almost surely more and bigger winners than losers .
Big winners are workers in poor countries who get better jobs working for firms that can now export services to rich countries .
The major losers are those who previously held the now-outsourced service-sector jobs ; they must now find new and different jobs and almost surely find that their skills are worth less .
But even in the US , losers ’ losses are outweighed by winners ’ gains .
Workers in certain industries find their skills in higher demand as foreigners spend their increased dollar earnings , consumers benefit from lower prices , and shareholders and managers see their companies ’ profits increase .
However much we may worry about the distributional consequences of outsourcing , we should never overlook the fact that it increases the total size of the economic pie .
Mankiw made that argument , but he failed to be understood .
Indeed , on February 10 , 2004 , he woke up to an unpleasant news story in the Washington Post : ” President Bush ’ s top economist yesterday said the outsourcing of US service jobs to workers overseas is good for the nation ’ s economy ....
Mankiw ’ s comments come as the president struggles to shore up support in manufacturing states that have lost millions of jobs .... Mankiw ’ s conclusions may prove discordant during an election year ... ”
It happened again on February 11 : “ Democrats ... lit into President Bush ’ s chief economist yesterday for his laudatory statements on the movement of U.S. jobs abroad ....
Rep. Donald Manzullo ( R-Ill . ) called for the resignation of N. Gregory Mankiw ... ”
Of course , the Washington Post ’ s journalists know , on some level , that they were being unfair to Mankiw .
They didn ’ t claim that what he said was inaccurate , or shortsighted , or analytically unsound .
The descriptive terms they used – “ discordant , ” “ embarrassing , ” “ political liability ” – suggest that they knew they were giving Mankiw a raw deal .
But was there any sign of the standard economic analysis of outsourcing in their stories ?
Not one .
Greg Mankiw thought a bunch of reporters were coming to talk to him about the state of the economy and the analysis made by the Council of Economic Advisers in its “ 2004 Economic Report of the President . ”
But the last thing the reporters wanted to do was to convey a thumbnail summary of Mankiw ’ s analysis of outsourcing .
That ’ s simply not the business they saw themselves as being in .
The problem is not that the Washington Post and papers like it hire people who are unintelligent or lazy .
The problem is that conveying accurate information about the economy is far down the list of priorities for normal news reporters .
Making a splash matters .
So does keeping track of who is up politically and who is down .
So does pleasing your editors so that they ’ ll give your stories better placement , and pleasing your sources so that they ’ ll keep talking to you .
Compared to these imperatives , there is little to be gained from informing the public about how the economy really functions and about the dilemmas of economic policy .
Indeed , the economy is vastly inferior to Hollywood as a source of glitterati gossip , but much economic reporting makes the coverage of the birth of Brad Pitt ’ s and Angelina Jolie ’ s baby look profoundly serious .
Likewise , government is vastly inferior to the World Cup as a sporting spectacle , but much political reporting focuses on who played well and who played badly .
What can we do about this ?
The answer is simple , and it is a matter of demand , not supply .
After all , few people go into journalism to deliberately mislead the public .
If we demand better economic and political journalism the way we demand excellent coverage of the World Cup , we ’ ll get it .
