Three Iraqs , Not One
America 's mounting difficulties in setting up a coherent form of government in Iraq , let alone a democratic one , inspire a question that most statesmen consider unthinkable : is it possible that there is no way to re-constitute Iraq as one state , and that alternative options must be considered , unpalatable as they may appear ?
Like so many problems in the re-birth of states wounded by dictatorship--Eastern Europe is a good example--Iraq 's difficulties have deep historical roots .
To blame everything on the heavy-handedness of the Americans is too simplistic and shallow , even if their mistakes have , indeed , been legion .
Iraq was established in the 1920 's by the British , who occupied the region after the Ottoman Empire disintegrated at the end of WWI .
Their policies were dictated by British imperial interests , and gave no consideration to the wishes , interests , or characteristics of the local population .
What British imperial planners did was to stitch together three disparate provinces of the old Ottoman Empire and put at their head a prince from Hedjaz ( now a part of Saudi Arabia ) .
The three provinces--Mosul , Baghdad , and Basra--each had very distinct characters and very different population structures .
Mosul had a Kurdish majority , with significant Assyrian-Christian and Turkoman minorities ;
Baghdad was mainly Sunni ; and Basra was predominantly Shi 'ite .
Throwing such disparate groups into one body politic doomed the newly invented country to decades of strife and repression .
The old Ottoman Empire ruled these three provinces--as it ruled all of its imperial possessions--through its historically autocratic means .
The challenge facing the new Iraqi state was to try to create a non-despotic , relatively representative form of government in which all sectors of the population would find an expression of their political will .
This turned out to be an impossible mission .
For this reason Iraq--even before Saddam Hussein--always suffered the most repressive regime of any Arab state .
In a country where Shi 'ites form the majority , the Sunnis--traditionally the hegemonic group in all Arab countries--were totally unwilling to allow any democratic process to jeopardize their rule .
A Shi 'ite insurrection was brutally put down in the 1920 's ( with the help of the British Royal Air Force ) .
Similarly , Kurdish attempts at autonomy before WWII were drowned in bloody massacres of tens of thousands of innocent civilians , and even the Assyrian Christian minority--a relatively small group , with no political ambitions--was exposed to murderous assaults in the 1930 's .
Under these conditions , with the Sunni ruling minority constantly feeling threatened , it was no accident that the only attempt in any Arab country to establish something like a pro-Nazi fascist regime occurred in Iraq in the early 1940 's under Rashid Ali al-Khailani .
The British suppressed this misadventure , but not before hundreds of Jews in Baghdad were murdered in a wild farhood ( pogrom ) instigated by the short-lived pro-Nazi government .
Saddam 's regime was merely the most extreme manifestation of the harsh underlying fact that Iraq 's geography and demography condemned it to rule by the iron fist .
Nor has Saddam 's fall changed this fact : anti-US violence is not only an expression of anger at foreign occupation ; it is also a Sunni attempt to abort the establishment of a democratic order that would put them--the historical masters--in a subordinate position .
Similarly , one cannot see the Kurds in the north submitting willingly to a Baghdad-dominated Arab regime , let alone a Shi 'ite one ( most Kurds are Sunnis ) .
There is little understanding in the West of how deep the Sunni / Shi 'ite divide runs .
Put yourself in pre-1648 Europe , a time when Protestants and Catholics slaughtered each other with abandon , and you 'll understand the enmity immediately .
So what can be done ?
Yugoslavia 's example shows that in multi-ethnic and multi-religious countries deeply riven by conflict , partition and separation may be the only way to ensure stability and democratization .
There is no doubt today that Croatia and Serbia--despite their difficulties--stand a better chance of becoming more or less stable democracies than if they were still fighting for mastery among themselves within the Procrustean bed of the former Yugoslavia .
Nor is federation an alternative--as the terms of the federation itself become the bones of contention ( see Bosnia or Cyprus ) .
Even the pacific Czechs and Slovaks found it easier to develop their respective democratic structures through a velvet divorce rather than be joined in an unworkable marriage .
The time has come to think the unthinkable , about creating a Kurdish state in the north , an Arab Sunni one in the center around Baghdad , and an Arab Shi 'ite state in the south around Basra .
Repeating mantras about territorial integrity--the conventional wisdom of international relations--is productive only as long as it ensures stability and averts chaos .
Again , as Yugoslavia--and the Soviet Union--showed , once strife replaces stability , territorial integrity loses its strategic meaning and legitimacy .
This is not a universal prescription for ethnically homogenous states .
The point is simply that there are moments in history when democratization and nation building coincide , and that in deeply divided societies the minimum consensus needed for both to succeed simultaneously is difficult to achieve .
All this may run contrary to conventional wisdom , but who thought that the USSR would disintegrate ?
Creative and innovative thinking is needed about Iraq ; otherwise today 's mayhem will continue--and worsen .
