Saving Ukraine
MUNICH – Ukraine faces two major threats to its future .
On one side stands the risk of protracted conflict and the partition of its territory .
On the other lurks the danger of bankruptcy and economic turmoil .
Looming over them both is the country ’ s relationship with Russia .
Addressing the challenges facing Ukraine will require policymakers inside and outside of the country to work together to stabilize the country ’ s economy , protect its territory , and create space for reforms , while seeking to improve cooperation with its powerful eastern neighbor .
Sending a clear military message remains essential .
NATO rightly responded to Russia ’ s annexation of Crimea , ongoing support for separatists in eastern Ukraine , and mock attacks on Western countries with a program of political and military reassurance .
Just as the alliance demonstrated solidarity with West Germany during the Cold War , it must now do the same with its eastern allies .
This effort should be buttressed by a reversal in the downward trend in defense spending by many NATO members .
The European Union must also begin to put in place a more credible and capable defense policy .
The time has come to realize fully the principle of European defense integration .
Doing so would not only strengthen the EU ’ s ability to act , it would also send a powerful signal of resolve to the Kremlin .
At the same time , the EU must advance its energy union , diversifying its oil and gas imports and lessening its dependence on Russia . Finally , given the threat a defenseless Ukraine poses to European stability , it would be a mistake to rule out the provision of military aid to the country .
In addition to the military response , an economic intervention will be necessary .
Ukraine is in desperate need of financial assistance – a point that George Soros was among the first to recognize .
Indeed , providing Ukraine with assistance is far more important than punishing Russia with sanctions .
Just as European Central Bank President Mario Draghi ’ s declaration that “ the ECB is ready to do whatever it takes to preserve the euro ” calmed financial markets , so would a proclamation by the EU that it will do everything necessary to support Ukraine ’ s recovery .
Given the debate over Greece , spending the sums necessary to pull the country out of its slump is likely to be politically pricey , but the cost – political , military , and financial – of allowing Ukraine to collapse is too high for failure to be an option .
Putting in place a rigorous oversight mechanism could help reassure governments and voters , and facilitate the country ’ s Association Agreement with the EU .
The power of European values should not be underestimated .
The young Ukrainians who protested on Maidan square – not against Russia , but against a corrupt elite that was robbing their country of its European future – must be supported .
The EU has an opportunity to make a large social impact by moving ahead with a visa-free travel program , creating more grants for Ukrainian students , and increasing support for NGOs .
These steps on their own , however , will not be enough .
Even as the EU and NATO move to support Ukraine , they must also work to address Russia ’ s concerns .
Their central strategy should be to demonstrate that while the West remains committed to the defense of Ukraine , it is ready to work constructively with Russia should the Kremlin prove willing to change course .
Sanctions must be maintained for as long as the Kremlin and the Ukrainian separatists it has supported fail to comply with the Minsk Protocol , but it is important to begin to bring Russia out of the cold .
To start , the dispute over Ukraine ’ s prospects of joining NATO must be definitively settled .
After all , the question of whether to admit Ukraine into NATO has already essentially been answered in the negative in many European capitals .
The EU could , while offering increased assistance , encourage Ukraine to redefine itself as a bridge between East and West – as Finland , Austria , and even Switzerland have done in the past .
In the meantime , steps must be taken to work around Russia ’ s exclusion from the G-8 .
One possible approach would be to turn the “ 5 + 1 ” format – which enabled the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council ( China , France , Russia , the United Kingdom , and the United States ) , plus Germany , to conduct negotiations with Iran – into a broader relationship .
Such a forum could address all kinds of global and regional issues , ranging from Ukraine to Syria , with the additional benefit of increasing American involvement in the effort to manage the crisis in Ukraine .
A greater emphasis must be put on preventing military miscalculations and unintended escalations , especially given the dramatic increase in provocations .
A military-to-military dialogue between NATO and the Russian armed forces could greatly reduce these risks .
This kind of cooperation could serve as a first step in a collective effort by key states – including Russia – to strengthen Europe ’ s security architecture .
Conventional and nuclear arms control must be put back high on the agenda .
Visions of strategic economic cooperation also deserve attention .
The inclusive multilateral framework of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe could serve as a basis for the way forward .
Diplomatic and political progress proved possible even during the Cold War .
Russia should be offered the chance to give new life to such an effort .
The ultimate objective , however , should be made explicitly clear .
Neither the conflict in Ukraine nor the dialogue with Russia should be allowed to undermine the Helsinki principles or the Paris Charter agreed at the Cold War ’ s end .
The goal should be for Russia and the West to work together to reaffirm and reinforce European security principles and , if necessary , add to them .
Russia should be made to understand that it is welcome to join the effort – or risk further isolation .
