The Children ’ s Revolution
LONDON – Two tragic and haunting images have emerged this year : hooded Islamic State executioners holding their knives to the necks of innocent victims , and masked medical workers bravely fighting an uphill battle against an Ebola outbreak for which the world was not prepared .
But the year ’ s lasting legacy will be an even more extensive disaster , with recovery taking years , if not decades : nearly two million newly displaced children , trapped in conflict zones across Iraq , Syria , Gaza , the Central African Republic , and elsewhere .
These children have joined the ranks of 25 million displaced boys and girls worldwide – a number equivalent to the population of a midsize European country and the largest in the 70 years since the end of World War II .
Images of vulnerable , desolate refugee children – likely to be displaced for a decade or more – have become so common that the world seems unable to comprehend what it is seeing .
But the plight of child refugees is only one reason why a new approach to children ’ s rights is needed .
This year , an estimated 15 million school-age girls will become child brides , forced into marriage against their will .
Some 14 million boys and girls below the age of 14 are child laborers , many forced to work in the most hazardous of conditions .
And 32 million girls are denied the basic right to attend school , owing to gender discrimination ; around 500,000 of them are trafficked each year .
In the 1950s , the fight against colonialism dominated world politics .
In the 1960s , 1970s , and 1980s , great civil-rights battles were waged against racial discrimination and apartheid , followed by struggles to advance the rights of the disabled and sexual minorities .
It is our generation ’ s task to tackle the civil-rights movement ’ s unfinished business , by ending the exploitation of children , especially girls , and ensuring compulsory universal education .
To mark the 25th anniversary of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child ( CRC ) , I , along with this year ’ s Nobel Peace Prize winner , Kailash Satyarthi , and the head of the United Kingdom ’ s Overseas Development Institute , Kevin Watkins , am calling on the world community to offer practical support to the burgeoning civil-rights struggle of young people .
We can do more to end child labor , child marriage , child trafficking , and discrimination against girls , by not only demanding the proper policing of domestic laws , but also by establishing a new International Children ’ s Court , buttressed by a credible reporting and sanctions system .
Violations of children ’ s rights are now so rampant that there simply is no alternative .
Indeed , though no human-rights treaty has been more widely ratified than the CRC , which requires governments to report on their compliance once every five years , its work lacks adequate resources and enforcement .
Only one in seven countries submit compliance reports on time , and one-third do not submit even a year late .
Meanwhile , the scantly funded offices that manage the information have a two-year backlog .
Another promising initiative – the “ optional protocol on communications , ” aimed at enabling children and their advocates , for the first time , to bring cases before the UN Human Rights Committee – has been similarly weakened by a lack of strong support , authority , and resources .
Indeed , only 14 countries have ratified the protocol since it was agreed in 2011 .
Moreover , states are not legally bound to change the policies or laws that are deemed to be violating their international human-rights obligations .
And a shortage of investigative resources has led to an emphasis on problematic legislation , instead of the larger issue of inadequate enforcement of laws that promote the CRC ’ s principles .
So there is a case not only for an International Children ’ s Court , but also for children and their representatives to be granted the right to petition it .
Such a court should have the capacity to receive and investigate individual complaints , the power to monitor independently the enforcement of laws , and the resources to devote to investigations into relevant areas , including child labor , child marriage , child slavery , genital mutilation , and child rape .
Over time , a reporting system could be implemented to facilitate an examination of the impact of health and education policies on the world ’ s most marginalized boys and girls .
Such research could provide compelling evidence to support compulsory universal education as the ideal mechanism not just for ending educational exclusion , but also for bringing an end to child labor and trafficking , early marriage , and discrimination against girls .
Another advance could follow , based on Graça Machel ’ s victory a decade ago in convincing the UN Security Council to implement a system for reporting violence against children in conflict zones .
At the time , it was agreed that a Special Representative on Children and Armed Conflict , whose work is backed by the threat of sanctions , would also be established .
Today , a similar post – underpinned by the same system of reporting and sanctions – should be created to focus on children ’ s other rights .
Next month , Satyarthi and the girls ’ -rights leader Malala Yousafzai will receive this year ’ s Nobel Peace Prize , reminding the world that a children ’ s-rights struggle is underway – one that is increasingly being led by young people .
Indeed , frustrated with adults ’ failure to discharge what should be their duties toward children , young people are forming child-marriage-free zones , launching anti-slavery groups , and organizing education-rights campaigns .
Such initiatives – including Bangladesh ’ s 20 child marriage-free zones , Nepal ’ s Kamlari Forum , and Ethiopia ’ s Yellow Movement of university students – may not yet be trending on Twitter and Facebook , but they are engaging millions of young people worldwide .
Now , the Global March Against Child Labor and A World at School have come together to support the # UpForSchool petition , which links the universal provision of education to ending child exploitation .
Over the next several months , youth groups in 190 countries will be collecting , it is hoped , a record number of signatures .
But we must do more than read and sign the petition .
We must recognize that today ’ s movement to ensure children ’ s rights is the civil-rights struggle of our generation – and do whatever it takes to support it .
