Malala ’ s Revolution
ISLAMABAD – The men who attempted to kill 14-year-old Malala Yousafzai on October 9 knew what she represented .
Her active involvement since the age of eleven in campaigning for the rights of girls in her region to be educated was well known .
Malala ’ s efforts , while applauded by the West and some segments of Pakistani society , were deeply resented by the obscurantist forces that go by the name of the Taliban , which in Pakistan calls itself Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan .
Their choice of name is an ironic one , for Taliban , an Arabic word , means those seeking to be educated , whereas the Taliban ’ s principal aim is to keep Muslim societies backward so that they can be persuaded to adopt a seventh-century version of Islam .
Education , particularly of women , stands in the way of achieving this goal .
But the attack on Malala will , most likely , have an effect that is opposite to that intended by those who carried it out .
Several religious leaders joined the chorus of condemnation that followed the attack on Malala .
In a sign of unity , a council of Sunni Muslim scholars in the eastern city of Lahore issued a fatwa , signed by 50 clerics , saying that the justifications cited by the girl ’ s attackers were “ deviant ” and had no basis in Islamic law .
The Taliban seem to have been taken aback by the public and media reaction to the attack .
Dawn , Pakistan ’ s largest-circulation English-language newspaper , reported that Hakimullah Mehsud , the Pakistani Taliban ’ s leader , had ordered his foot soldiers to target media organizations in Karachi , Lahore , Rawalpindi , and Islamabad in response .
Several TV channels had been extremely critical of the Taliban ’ s assaults on Pakistani society .
The extremists wanted to silence the majority that was waking up to the existential threat that radical Islam poses to their country .
There is a widespread belief that Pakistani women are doing poorly when it comes to obtaining education .
That impression is correct to some extent .
The overall literacy rate for women is undoubtedly low – much lower than that for men .
But male education and literacy in Pakistan is not very high , either .
Although Pakistan is a signatory to the United Nations Millennium Development Goals , which include attainment of universal literacy for both boys and girls by 2015 , the country is far from achieving the target , with literacy rates of 70 % for boys and only 45 % for girls in 2010 .
That said , over the 17-year period from 1993 to 2010 , the number of girls enrolled in primary education increased from 3.7 million to 8.3 million .
This implies a rate of growth of 6.7 % a year , about 2.5 times the rate of increase in the number of girls entering the primary-school age cohort .
But , even with this growth rate , girls still accounted for just 44.3 % of the total number of enrolled students in 2010 .
It is in higher education that Pakistani women have made extraordinary progress in recent years .
Their share of total college enrollment has increased from 36 % to 57 % over the last couple of decades , rising from less than 15,000 in 1993 to 436,000 in 2010 .
The proportion of women receiving higher education is approaching the 60 % mark , owing to an impressive 28 % annual rate of growth in their enrollment numbers in 2010 , up from a 20 % increase in 1993 .
Although a very large number of girls drop out after primary school , the number completing higher education is now large .
This year , roughly 750,000 women will graduate from Pakistan ’ s institutions of higher learning .
If the current rate of growth is maintained , by 2015 the number of women completing higher education could exceed 1.5 million a year .
Had Malala died , she eventually would have been forgotten – another victim of the war that the extremists are waging in Pakistan .
Her death would have added just one more individual to the tens of thousands who have already been killed in terrorist attacks across the country .
Malala ’ s survival – and possibly even full recovery – provides a vibrant symbol for a troubled country .
She will begin to be identified with the change that is already underway .
It is not often recognized that women in Pakistan – at least those of a certain class – are receiving the kind of education that enables them to enter the modern sectors of the economy or to become entrepreneurs .
In education , numbers make a revolution .
