Who Lost Turkey ?
PARIS – “ Who lost Turkey ? ” That question , often raised in the past , has been heating up in the aftermath of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan ’ s emotional outburst during the recent World Economic Forum 2009 in Davos , when he abruptly left a panel he was sharing with Israeli President Shimon Peres .
And the Turkish question matters greatly , because it touches on some of the most unstable and unsettling of the world ’ s diplomatic disputes .
If Turkey has indeed been “ lost , ” those responsible include the European Union , the United States , Israel , and Turkey itself .
The EU ’ s growing reservations about Turkey ’ s membership have been expressed unambiguously by French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
In the US , former President George W. Bush gets some of the blame because of the war in Iraq .
Israel , too , has played its part in Turkey ’ s alienation from the West , as a result of the Lebanon war of 2006 and its recent military operations in Gaza .
All of these events have disturbed and disoriented Turkey , and are magnified by the domestic impact of worst global economic crisis since the 1930 ’ s .
Of course , Turkey ’ s secular , pro-Western elites may still consider the EU and the US important , if not indispensable , allies and partners , and they may consider Islamic fundamentalism , Hamas , Hezbollah , and Iran real or at least potential threats .
Yet they are also convinced that Europe has behaved improperly toward Turkey , through a combination of short-term populist reflexes and the absence of a long-term strategic vision .
The Turkish question is , of course , complex .
Turkey ’ s geography is predominantly Asian , Turkey ’ s emotions are increasingly Middle Eastern , i.e. , Muslim on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict , and yet Turkey ’ s elites remain resolutely pro-Western and pro-European .
But for how long ?
At the beginning of the twenty-first century , when dialogue with the Islamic world is one of the Western world ’ s key challenges , Europe would commit a historic strategic blunder if it were to close its doors to Turkey .
To do so would push back the inheritors of the Ottoman Empire back onto an Asian , Muslim , and Middle Eastern historical trajectory .
In the question of Turkish accession to the EU , the journey matters more than the destination .
The reforms that Turkey has already implemented in a very short period of time , thanks to its EU candidate status , are impressive .
Should we in Europe really put at risk that progress by expressing an all-too-audible “ no ” ?
The EU desperately needs a strategic and diplomatic partner that can significantly reinforce its clout in the Middle East .
Europe also needs the dynamism of a youthful Turkey .
Above all , it needs the message of reconciliation sent to Islam that Turkey ’ s entrance into the Union would represent .
Of course , to want Turkey “ in ” is an act of will , if not an act of faith that is in many ways counterintuitive .
Most Europeans do not perceive Turkey as a “ European Other ” but as a “ non-European Other . ”
Even in Istanbul , the most Westernized of Turkish cities , as soon as one leaves the main arteries , one seems to be immersed in a Middle Eastern or Asian culture .
Israel is not in the European Union , but it , too , is in great danger of losing Turkey .
Far from reinforcing Israel ’ s security , its last two military adventures , in Lebanon and now in Gaza , have caused further self-isolation and loss of world sympathy .
Nowhere has this phenomenon been stronger than in Turkey , where those military escapades have strained the two countries ’ strategic alliance almost to the breaking point .
It is too early to speak of Obama ’ s policy towards Turkey ; suffice it to say that in his willingness to open a respectful dialogue with Islam , he is the only Western leader to move in the right direction .
But can positive American gestures towards Turkey , a key NATO member , be sufficient to offset Israel ’ s insensitive , if not reckless , policies ?
The answer is unclear .
Turkey , too shares some of the responsibility for this mounting process of estrangement . Erdogan ’ s behavior in Davos was , at the very least , irresponsible .
He may have gained popularity back home , but in today ’ s difficult economic times , the temptations of cheap populism are more dangerous than ever .
One does not play lightly with matches next to a pile of dry wood .
