Victors ’ Justice , Iraqi-Style
Saddam Hussein is dead , but not all Iraqis are celebrating .
On the contrary , the way in which the various religious and ethnic groups in Iraq responded to his execution is emblematic of the difficulty of holding Iraq together as a coherent entity .
To the Shiite majority , long brutally oppressed by Saddam and all previous Sunni-dominated Iraqi regimes , Saddam ’ s death symbolizes their attainment of political hegemony .
Moreover , their triumphalist rejoicing is a cruel reminder that when the oppressed become liberated , they can very easily turn into oppressors themselves .
To the Sunni minority , pushed from power by the American invasion and giving vent to their frustration with daily attacks on the Shi ’ a population and their holy sites , Saddam will remain a hero for a long time to come .
The Kurds – who , like the Shi ’ a , were victimized by Saddam for decades – quietly cling to their de facto independence in the north , making sure that they will never again come under Arab rule .
Iraq ’ s prime minister , Nuri el-Maliki , representing the ruling Shi ’ a-Kurdish coalition , expressed the hope that the dictator ’ s end would help to heal the sectarian divides .
But , however sincere his words may sound , reality is moving in the opposite direction , and the ugly verbal exchanges surrounding the act of execution itself will certainly do little to dispel the notion that this was “ victors ’ justice ” – the victors being not the United States , but the Shi ’ a .
None of this augurs well for the future of what we should get used to calling “ the former Iraq . ”
Indeed , the Washington debate surrounding how to “ fix Iraq ” is irrelevant , because something that does not exist any longer – namely , Iraq as a functioning state – cannot be fixed .
Under the guise of US-inspired constitutional arrangements , the Shia majority has succeeded in arrogating near-absolute power to itself .
Thus , what only a few months ago had looked from Washington like a successful transition to some sort of representative government is obviously a travesty : just as under Saddam , power today grows out of the barrel of the gun – only now the state does not hold a monopoly on the means of violence .
Every militia , every ministry , every Shia political faction , has its own guns , goons , and death squads – while the Sunnis continue to use the stockpiles of weapons they accumulated under Saddam to fight a rear-guard action against the new order , apparently legitimized by elections .
There is no power – save a new violent dictatorship – that can bring Shi ’ a , Sunnis , and Kurds to live once again in one body politic .
America ’ s chimerical dream of democratizing overnight a deeply divided society accustomed only to violence and coercion has unleashed a terrifying array of political demons .
In these circumstances , the post-Baker-Hamilton debate in Washington is largely irrelevant to the future of Iraq – though it continues to be crucial to the future of US power , prestige , and standing in the world .
The future of Iraq will be decided by the people of Iraq , but with bullets , not ballots .
The US and the entire international community are utterly unequipped to deal with this Middle Eastern version of Yugoslavia and its regional consequences .
And , unlike Yugoslavia ’ s successor states , which could look to Europe , the lack of a legitimate Arab democratic role model makes crafting a democratic order even more difficult .
Some Europeans and others may gloat over America ’ s failure in Iraq , and the ineptness – or worse – of US post-occupation policy cries to heaven .
Yet the root causes of that failure go deeper , to Iraq ’ s creation as an artificial entity in the 1920 ’ s by British imperialist planners , who stitched together three disparate provinces of the defeated Ottoman Empire into a state that never had a coherent identity .
Indeed , the very foundation of Iraq was based on victors ’ justice : the British Empire , having vanquished the Ottomans , made the Sunni Arabs overlords in a country in which they were a minority .
That arrangement has now come unglued following another cycle of victors ’ justice .
The consequences of this re-ordering of power are not yet clear .
But a coherent Iraqi state – whether unitary , federal , or confederal – will not grow out of a society in which one part of the population views Saddam , rightly , as a gruesome oppressor , while another part reveres him as a hero and martyr .
Wars always have unintended consequences and cruel ironies .
In Iraq , only now is it becoming evident that some states cannot be saved without being destroyed .
