Good Trade Intentions Gone Bad
WASHINGTON , DC – The debate in the United States about trade has taken an unfortunate turn .
Instead of discussing the detailed issues on their merits , President Barack Obama ’ s administration has chosen to emphasize the need for fast-track procedures ( also known as trade promotion authority , or TPA ) to negotiate any trade agreement .
The administration may win that fight , but there could be real damage as a result .
The current battle is over the precise content of the Trans-Pacific Partnership , a complex 12-country free-trade agreement .
Unfortunately , the TPP ’ s provisions remain secret – meaning that it cannot be seen or discussed by members of the public .
( Members of Congress may read the technical text , under restricted conditions , but are not allowed to describe its contents in detail . )
Anyone who raises legitimate concerns about any aspect of the TPP deal is immediately branded “ protectionist . ”
The line from the White House is : TPP will lower barriers to US exports , and thus increase jobs and wages .
Everything else , in this view , is a distraction .
In fact , TPP will do little for exports – and for an obvious reason .
The US already has standard tariff-lowering agreements with almost all of the participating countries .
Almost all tariffs on trade among Canada , Mexico , and the US are long gone – that was the effect of the North American Free Trade Agreement .
Under the Australia and Singapore free-trade agreements as well , almost all tariffs on US goods sold in those countries have been eliminated .
Goods from the US have entered Chile without tariffs since January 1 ; and most tariffs imposed by Peru have already been phased out .
The TPP will amount to a free-trade agreement with Brunei Darussalam ( with a population of less than 500,000 ) and New Zealand ( less than five million ) .
Encouraging exports to these countries is surely desirable , but the economic impact on the US is unlikely to be more than a rounding error .
That leaves three larger countries where the issues are more complex : Japan ( about 125 million people ) , Malaysia ( around 30 million people ) , and Vietnam ( 90 million people ) .
Japan resists reducing import tariffs on hundreds of agricultural goods , including meat from the US .
In addition , non-tariff barriers have long impeded , for example , the export of American-made cars to the Japanese market .
It remains unclear to what extent TPP will really open the Japanese market for auto-related products .
And Japan has had a history of currency intervention , holding down the yen ’ s exchange rate to boost exports and discourage imports – with major negative consequences for the US , among others .
Japan does not engage in such currency manipulation currently , and TPP represents a good opportunity to ask the Japanese for a commitment to abandon the practice .
Unfortunately , the Obama administration has declined to go down this path – currency manipulation is off the table as far as it is concerned .
As for Malaysia , important issues regarding forced labor in the export sector have emerged – and there should be full compliance with labor standards before the TPP deal is signed .
There are some grounds for optimism here , but promises to implement changes in labor standards after a trade agreement takes effect are seldom fulfilled .
In Vietnam , moving large subsidies provided to state-owned enterprises onto a measurable , market basis would be a sensible goal .
Workers ’ rights are also a significant issue .
Indications are that the TPP negotiations are making little progress – though , again , key details and potential agreements remain highly confidential .
In addition to trade , TPP includes important provisions related to investment , the most prominent of which concern intellectual property rights , such as patents .
Although Obama says that the TPP is the most progressive trade agreement in history , Sander Levin , the ranking Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee – and someone will full access to the text – disagrees .
He says that access to low-cost medicine in poor countries , for example , will be restricted .
Médecins Sans Frontières , the Nobel Peace Prize-winning humanitarian organization , agrees .
( These and related issues were raised at a recent event on Capitol Hill in which I took part . )
And TPP will also confer special status on foreign investors , allowing them to sue for financial judgments against host-country regulations .
Why we would want to provide such differential protection to non-domestic companies is a mystery .
Creating a quasi-legal process outside the regular court system , just for foreigners , can go wrong in many ways .
As Levin recently argued in a detailed and persuasive speech , the US should be having a full and open debate about these dimensions of the TPP deal .
It needs thoughtful , public deliberation about the provisions that are included , as they can have important consequences for the US and its trading partners .
Unfortunately , the Obama administration prefers to avoid public debate on substantive issues , instead merely insisting on using the fast-track TPA procedures for whatever TPP is agreed .
That is a mistake .
If the administration gets a trade agreement and it goes bad – on workers ’ rights , access to medicines , state subsidies , or anything else – how does that help trade , America ’ s foreign partners , or the US economy ?
