Troubling Interventions
PRINCETON – The most noteworthy commemoration of the second anniversary of Lehman Brothers ’ collapse on September 15 , 2008 , was Japan ’ s unilateral currency intervention to depreciate the yen .
That move marks a shift in the character of the global financial crisis , away from concern with banking problems and toward a focus on the world ’ s dysfunctional exchange-rate system – or , rather , its current lack of one .
The Japanese intervention was immediately controversial .
American politicians denounced it as predatory ; Europeans saw it as a step on the road to competitive devaluations .
And Switzerland ’ s central bank recently launched a costly and futile attempt to stop the Swiss franc ’ s rise against the euro – an effort that produced only large losses on the bank ’ s balance sheet .
Japan ’ s new activism also was widely imitated .
South Korea and then Brazil started similar action to drive down their currency .
The 1980 ’ s was the last time anyone tried this sort of intervention .
At that time there was little agreement about its usefulness as a tool of international policy , and the G-7 summit at Versailles in 1982 was extraordinarily conflict-ridden and unproductive .
Indeed , it was to be the first act in a long exercise of futile mega-diplomacy .
Almost the only concrete outcome was the commissioning of a report by a group chaired by a senior French civil servant , Philippe Jurgensen , on whether intervention was an effective instrument against the volatility that seemed to be undermining trade relations .
When the report eventually came out , it acknowledged that “ excess ” volatility had “ adverse consequences ” for individual economies , as well as for the smooth functioning of the international adjustment process .
But the Jurgensen report was ambiguous about the effectiveness of intervention .
It stated that interventions aimed at objectives inconsistent with economic fundamentals were futile and counter-productive .
Americans read this as affirmation of their belief that all intervention was useless . Europeans , especially in France , drew the opposite conclusion that intervention could be useful if it were intended to get exchange rates right .
But the report gave no guidance about how to judge whether exchange rates were appropriate or not .
The high water mark of intervention came a few years later , between the Plaza meeting of finance ministers in September 1985 and the Louvre meeting in February 1987 .
The Plaza meeting produced an accord on concerted intervention to push down the value of the dollar , which all participants agreed was overvalued .
The participants promised to use up to $ 18 billion over a six-week period .
But , in fact , the depreciation of the dollar began well before the September 1985 meeting , and the meeting was limited in the sense that there was no discussion of monetary or interest-rate policy .
By the time of the Louvre meeting , the dollar had fallen and the participants now discussed “ target zones ” or “ reference ranges ” around a central rate .
There was apparent agreement on a new wave of coordinated interventions , but the agreed exchange rates did not hold .
The Louvre agreement was not just ineffective .
In retrospect , it was blamed for triggering a highly politicized debate about exchange rates , with every country trying to devise an approach that favored its own interests .
The United States , in particular , put enormous pressure on Japan to take expansive policy measures to relieve the pressure on the international system .
The resulting monetary expansion in the second half of the 1980 ’ s fueled Japan ’ s massive asset-price bubble , the collapse of which seemed to lead directly to the country ’ s “ lost decade ” of stagnation .
As debate about Japanese economic decline intensified , a consensus emerged in Japan that outside pressure had forced the country into adopting a dangerous and ultimately destructive course .
The Japanese episode still echoes in modern debates .
As the US pushes China to revalue the renminbi , American economists try to support the case for a stronger renminbi by looking at examples of surplus countries that adjusted by carrying out more expansionary policies .
The most extraordinary contribution to this debate has come from the International Monetary Fund , whose April 2010 World Economic Outlook contains a chapter on how adjustment by surplus countries can be generally beneficial .
The recommendation , which contains a long section trying to show that Japan ’ s 1987 and 1988 experience was not damaging , will be read in China simply as a statement that the US wants China to follow Japan in committing what amounts to economic hara-kiri .
That is not a helpful message , given the current state of the world economy .
A more sophisticated approach is required .
After all , the real lesson of the 1980 ’ s is that exerting massive pressure for exchange-rate adjustment and looser monetary and fiscal policy won ’ t work – especially since China now , like Japan then , is already running substantial budget deficits .
As exchange markets became ever bigger during the past 20 years , most commentators assumed that central banks ’ ability to influence exchange rates through intervention had shrunk radically .
We are in danger of forgetting that vital lesson .
The debate about China ’ s artificially pegged exchange rate has led Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan and French President Nicolas Sarkozy to begin to believe that they , too , might try shaping exchange rates .
Indeed , Sarkozy has promised to make the search for a “ better ” exchange-rate system a key part of France ’ s agenda when it chairs the G-20 next year .
But the problem is that the world ’ s central banks do not sing from the same hymnbook .
The political obsession with a better exchange-rate regime amounts to an invitation to private markets to make large amounts of money by betting against those central banks that are pressed by politicians to take a particular view of the exchange rate .
The bankers will laugh , while politicians wail and gnash their teeth .
