Putin on Parade
NEW YORK – This May ’ s parade in Moscow to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II promises to be the greatest Victory Day celebration since the Soviet Union ’ s collapse .
Some 16,000 soldiers , 200 armored vehicles , and 150 planes and helicopters are set to pass through and over Red Square .
It will be a scene that would easily have been familiar to Soviet leaders like Leonid Brezhnev and Nikita Khrushchev , taking the salute atop Lenin ’ s tomb .
Yet , though Russia ’ s WWII allies were from Europe and North America , no Western leaders will attend the commemoration – a reflection of the West ’ s disapproval of Putin ’ s invasion of Ukraine and annexation of Crimea .
Instead , Russian President Vladimir Putin ’ s high-profile guests will include the leaders of China , India , and North Korea , underscoring just how few friends Russia has these days .
The surreal nature of this gathering reflects the increasingly bizarre nature of Putin ’ s regime .
Indeed , watching Russia nowadays is like watching the last installment of the X-Men film franchise , “ Days of Future Past . ”
Just as the X-Men in that film join forces with their younger selves to save mankind ’ s future , today ’ s Kremlin is harking back to Russia ’ s Soviet past in what it sees as a contemporary fight for the country ’ s survival .
Critical to this strategy is propaganda conflating the West today with the Germans who invaded Russia in 1941 , while painting Ukrainian government officials as “ fascists ” and “ neo-Nazis . ”
The Kremlin has relied on such claims , together with the supposed need to defend Russians abroad , to justify its aggression against Ukraine .
In Putin ’ s speech following the annexation of Crimea , he charged that the West ’ s refusal “ to engage in dialogue ” left Russia with no choice . “ We are constantly proposing cooperation on all key issues , ” he declared .
“ We want to strengthen our level of trust and for our relations to be equal , open , and fair . But we saw no reciprocal steps . ”
A month later , Putin reinforced this image of Russians as the morally superior victims of a cruel and uncompromising West . “ We are less pragmatic than other people , less calculating , ” he asserted , before adding that Russia ’ s “ greatness ” and “ vast size ” means “ we have a more generous heart . ”
It is not difficult to see the parallels between Putin ’ s approach and that of Joseph Stalin , who declared at the start of WWII that the “ enemy ” aims to “ destroy ” Russia ’ s “ national culture , ” to “ Germanize ” its people , and “ convert them into slaves . ”
The difference , of course , is that the Nazi Wehrmacht actually invaded the Soviet Union , whereas Ukraine simply wanted to decide its own future .
Without defending Stalin , one must recognize the immense Soviet contribution – including the lives of 26 million citizens – to the Allied victory in WWII .
At the time , the military parade in Red Square – featuring almost 35,000 troops , up to 1,900 pieces of military equipment , and a 1,400-man orchestra – was a well-deserved pageant .
The Soviet leadership spared no cost in staging its military displays , which , in the absence of an external military threat , became an important vehicle for rallying national unity .
After the Soviet Union ’ s collapse , Russia , no longer a superpower , put its military spectacles on ice .
But in 2005 , to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the end of WWII , Putin held a major parade – one that Western leaders , believing that Russia might have a European future , did attend .
The tone of this year ’ s Victory Day commemorations is far less anticipatory .
How can one celebrate the end of a war at a time when the descendants of those who fought it ( undoubtedly driven by the hope that future generations would live in peace ) are killing one another in a brutal little war in eastern Ukraine ?
What is the point of grandiose fireworks displays amid the firing of real howitzers and rockets ?
The historian Robert Paxton believed that one could tell much about a country by its parades .
His 1966 book Parades and Politics at Vichy describes how Philippe Pétain , as Chief of State of Vichy France , used pageantry , reactionary politics , and , of course , a partnership with Adolf Hitler to dupe his defeated country into believing that it still mattered in the world .
The Vichy state ’ s brand of authoritarian traditionalism lionized family and fatherland , with Pétain , a former military commander , serving as a kind of military king , exalted on the tribune .
The parallels with Putin ’ s Russia are clear .
Putin views himself as a new czar .
His KGB background dictates his leadership style , which includes the abolition of free and fair elections , the persecution of opponents , and the promotion of conservative values that he , like Pétain before him , juxtaposes with the corrupting influence of an “ immoral ” and “ decadent ” West .
Relying on this approach , Putin has built alliances with the likes of Syria ’ s President Bashar al-Assad and Egypt ’ s military ruler Abdel Fattah el-Sisi .
China , the world ’ s second largest economy , is a useful addition to this collection of friendly anti-democratic states , as it has its own strategic grievances with the West .
Unlike China , however , Russia is not a rising superpower .
Putin may try to portray his actions in Ukraine as a fight against fascism .
But it is really a fight for relevance – a fight he will never win .
No matter how grand the parade , he cannot hide the truth : Russia ’ s days as a superpower are in the past .
Putin ’ s patriotism , like Pétain ’ s , is that of the vanquished .
