Why China Can ’ t Adjust
CLAREMONT , CALIFORNIA – China ’ s current economic slowdown has no shortage of causes : Europe ’ s financial turmoil , sputtering recovery in the United States , and weak domestic investment growth , to name the most commonly cited factors .
Since exports and investment account , respectively , for 30 % and 40 % of China ’ s GDP growth , its economy is particularly vulnerable to weakening external demand and accumulation of non-performing loans caused by excessive and wasteful spending on fixed assets .
But China ’ s vulnerability to these factors , as serious as they are , is symptomatic of deeper institutional problems .
Until these underlying constraints are addressed , talk of a new consumption-based growth model for China , reflected in the government ’ s recently approved 12th Five-Year Plan , can be no more than lip service .
After all , China ’ s major trading partners , international financial institutions such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund , and senior Chinese officials themselves have long recognized the structural vulnerabilities caused by excessive investment and low household consumption .
And , for nearly a decade , China has been urged to undertake reforms to redress these economic patterns , which have undermined the welfare of ordinary Chinese and strained the global trading system .
The best-known feature of China ’ s macroeconomic imbalances is heavy dependence on exports for growth , which is typically attributed to weak domestic demand : as a middle-income country , China lacks the purchasing power to consume the goods that it produces .
With nearly unlimited access to advanced-country markets , China can tap into global external demand and raise its GDP growth potential , as it has done for the past two decades .
If this view is right , the solution is straightforward : China can correct its imbalances by increasing its citizens ’ incomes ( by cutting taxes , raising wages , or increasing social spending ) , so that they can consume more , thereby reducing the economy ’ s dependence on exports .
Indeed , nearly all mainstream economists prescribe this approach for China .
But there is another explanation for China ’ s excessive export dependence , one that has more to do with the country ’ s poor political and economic institutions .
Specifically , export dependence partly reflects the high degree of difficulty of doing business in China .
Official corruption , insecure property rights , stifling regulatory restraints , weak payment discipline , poor logistics and distribution , widespread counterfeiting , and vulnerability to other forms of intellectual-property theft : all of these obstacles increase transaction costs and make it difficult for entrepreneurs to thrive in domestic markets .
By contrast , if China ’ s private firms sell to Western multinationals , such as Wal-Mart , Target , or Home Depot , they do not have to worry about getting paid .
They can avoid all of the headaches that they would have encountered at home , because well-established economic institutions and business practices in their export markets protect their interests and greatly reduce transaction costs .
The Chinese economy ’ s institutional weakness is reflected in international survey data .
The World Bank publishes an annual review of “ the ease of doing business ” for 183 countries and sub-national units .
In its June 2011 survey , China was ranked 91st , behind Mongolia , Albania , and Belarus .
It is particularly difficult to start a business in China ( 151st ) , pay taxes ( 122nd ) , obtain construction permits ( 179th ) , and get electricity ( 115th ) .
Faced with such a hostile environment , Chinese private entrepreneurs have been forced to engage in “ institutional arbitrage ” – taking advantage of efficient Western economic institutions to expand their business ( most export-oriented businesses are owned by private entrepreneurs and foreign firms ) .
Unfortunately , as China has already claimed a large share of the world ’ s merchandise exports ( 10.4 % in 2010 ) and economic stagnation in the West is constraining external demand , this strategy can no longer work .
But reorienting their businesses toward the Chinese domestic market requires far more than government policies that put more money in consumers ' pockets .
In order to enjoy the same low transaction costs that they have in exporting , China ’ s entrepreneurs need a much better business environment : an effective legal system , a sound regulatory framework , a government that protects their brands by fighting intellectual-property theft , dependable logistics and distribution networks , and a graft-resistant bureaucracy .
China cannot create such an environment quickly .
In essence , the Chinese government must transform a predatory state into a nurturing one , and treat private entrepreneurs as creators of wealth rather than targets of extraction .
In nearly all other countries , such a transformation was accomplished by establishing the rule of law and / or moving from autocracy to democracy .
The impossibility of sustaining growth in the absence of the rule of law and political accountability presents the Chinese Communist Party with an existential dilemma .
Ever since it crushed the pro-democracy movement in Tiananmen Square in 1989 , the party has vowed not to surrender its political monopoly .
The investment boom and the globalization dividend of the last two decades allowed the Party to have its cake and eat it – maintaining its rule on the basis of economic prosperity , while failing to establish the institutions critical to sustaining such prosperity .
Today , this is no longer possible .
So in a sense , the Chinese bubble – as much an intellectual and political bubble as an economic one – has burst .
As China ’ s economic deceleration exposes its structural vulnerabilities and flawed policies , the much-hyped notion of “ Chinese exceptionalism ” – that China can continue to grow without the rule of law and the other essential institutions that a modern market economy presupposes – is proving to be nothing but a delusion .
