The Decadence of the People ’ s Car
PRINCETON – So far , the Volkswagen scandal has played out according to a well-worn script .
Revelations of disgraceful corporate behavior emerge ( in this case , the German automaker ’ s programming of 11 million diesel vehicles to turn on their engines ’ pollution-control systems only when undergoing emissions testing ) .
Executives apologize .
Some lose their jobs .
Their successors promise to change the corporate culture .
Governments prepare to levy enormous fines .
Life goes on .
This scenario has become a familiar one , particularly since the 2008 financial crisis .
Banks and other financial institutions have enacted it repeatedly , even as successive scandals continued to erode confidence in the entire industry .
Those cases , together with Volkswagen ’ s “ clean diesel ” scam , should give us cause to rethink our approach to corporate malfeasance .
Promises of better behavior are clearly not enough , as the seemingly endless number of scandals in the financial industry has shown .
As soon as regulators had dealt with one case of market manipulation , another emerged .
The trouble with the banking industry is that it is built on a principle that creates incentives for bad behavior .
Banks know more about market conditions ( and the likelihood of their loans being repaid ) than their depositors do .
This secrecy lies at the heart of financial activity .
Polite analysts call it “ management of information . ”
Critics consider it a form of insider dealing .
Banks are also uniquely vulnerable to scandal because many of their employees are simultaneously behaving in ways that could influence the reputation , and even the balance sheet , of the entire firm .
In the 1990s , a single Singapore-based trader brought down the venerable Barings Bank .
In 2004 , Citigroup ’ s Japanese private bank was shut down after a trader rigged the government bond market .
At JPMorgan Chase , a single trader – known as “ the London Whale ” – cost the company $ 6.2 billion .
What these repeated scandals show is that apologies are little more than words , and that talk about changing the corporate culture is usually meaningless .
As long as the incentives remain the same , so will the culture .
The Volkswagen case is a useful reminder that corporate wrongdoing is not confined to the banking industry , and that merely levying fines or ramping up regulation is unlikely to solve the problem .
Indeed , it is one of the iron laws of corporate physics : For every regulation , there is a proportionate proliferation of innovations to circumvent it .
It should come as no surprise that there were incentives in the automobile industry to game the system .
Everyone knows that actual fuel economy does not correspond to the numbers on the showroom sticker , which are generated by tests carried out with the wind blowing from behind or on a particularly smooth road surface .
Similarly , anyone who has stood next to a diesel vehicle , even one proclaiming the virtues of “ clean diesel , ” could tell that it was smellier than cars powered by gasoline .
There are two important similarities between the scandals in the finance industry and at Volkswagen .
The first is that large corporations , whether banks or manufacturers , are deeply embedded in national politics , with elected officials dependent on such firms for job creation and tax revenues .
Volkswagen in particular is an icon of German manufacturing .
Chancellor Angela Merkel has gone out of her way to support the company , as did her predecessor , Gerhard Schröder , who came to its defense in 2003 , when the European Commission challenged the legality of its holding structure .
The second similarity is that both industries are subject to multiple regulatory objectives .
Regulators may want banks to be safer , but they also want them to lend more to the real economy , which often means taking more risks .
As a consequence , they impose rules that do not clearly push banks in one direction or the other .
The regulation of automobile emissions faces a similar problem .
As regulators ’ focus turned toward limiting global warming , there were tremendous incentives to manufacture vehicles that produced fewer greenhouse-gas emissions , even if that meant , as with diesel engines , emitting other gases and micro-particles that are much more harmful to humans in their vicinity .
There was never a discussion of the tradeoff between limiting local pollution and fighting climate change .
As the Volkswagen crisis so vividly illustrates , we need more than corporate apology and regulatory wrist slapping .
It is time for a sustained discussion about how to craft regulations that provide the proper incentives to achieve the objectives we truly desire : economic and social wellbeing .
It is only when that discussion takes place that we will get the banks , cars , and other goods and services that we want .
