The Too-Quiet American
NEW YORK – It is now apparent that the United States is the main culprit in preventing the ten-year-old multilateral trade negotiations known as the Doha Round from being closed this year .
The US has even spurned World Trade Organization Director General Pascal Lamy ’ s desperate attempt to get member states to support a wholly emasculated agreement – described by critics as Doha Lite and Decaffeinated – which is mainly confined to some concessions to the least-developed countries .
While there are bit players who could be cast as villains , America ’ s ambassador to the WTO , Michael Punke , has assumed the role of global trade ’ s Mr. No .
But the problem is not Punke .
America ’ s rejectionist stance comes from the top of the US government , starting with President Barack Obama ’ s lack of leadership .
From the outset of his presidency , Obama ’ s defense of a liberal trade regime has been inadequate .
He has said repeatedly that exports are good for the US : they create jobs .
But US exports are other nations ’ imports , so Obama ’ s argument amounts to telling others to lose their jobs .
He needs to remind Americans that imports are also good : he can surely ask his audience to think of jobs in the UPS cargo planes , freight trains , and trucks that carry imports into the American interior .
The main problem , however , is that Obama has been unable to confront , and put to rest , US labor unions ’ fear-driven hostility to trade .
Nor has he been willing to confront the business lobbies that are willing to hold the Doha Round hostage in order to extract ever more concessions by other countries , even though they know that the trade talks are about to be sucked into the Bermuda Triangle of the 2012 US presidential election .
Yet there is little in the opposition by fearful unions and greedy business lobbies that Obama could not beat back with compelling arguments .
Besides , as the respected polling analyst Karlyn Bowman recently demonstrated , the US public is by no means strongly opposed to trade .
This is partly because , in virtually every state , so many jobs today – and not just at UPS – depend on trade .
Protectionism may , in fact , be an electoral dinosaur .
In any event , history ’ s great statesmen have always earned their spurs by bucking the political odds for a matter of principle .
If Obama actually wrote less and read more , he would find at least two historical episodes of courageous leadership on trade that are worthy of his admiration and emulation .
One is the repeal of England ’ s Corn Laws by Prime Minister Robert Peel in 1848 .
In the critical vote for repeal that brought his political career to an end , Peel won only 106 votes from his Conservative Party , while 222 Tory MPs opposed him .
He carried the day , but he lost the support of his party .
As Lord Ashley observed in his diary : “ [ Peel ] led the Tories and followed the Whigs . ”
The other example is Winston Churchill , who was elected as a Conservative member of Parliament from the northern industrial town of Oldham .
After converting to free trade in 1904 , he had to leave the party .
He then joined the Liberal Party , accepting the invitation of the Liberal Association of Northwest Manchester .
Churchill was also for free immigration , and firmly opposed the proposed Aliens Bill of 1904 ( partly because he saw traces of anti-Semitism in the fear , prompted by an influx of East European Jewish immigrants , of an “ alien invasion ” ) .
Churchill was a politician of principle who , like Peel , fought against his own party and , unlike Peel , survived to go on to yet greater political triumph , in the epic battle against the Nazis .
These “ profiles in courage , ” to borrow John F. Kennedy ’ s famous phrase , ought to inspire Obama at a time when Presidential leadership is a crying need in Washington on critical economic issues .
Obama campaigned on the slogan “ Yes , we can , ” not “ Yes , we can , but we won ’ t . ” As he watches an American economy assailed by economic ignorance , I have a new and better catchphrase for him : Nec aspera terrent , or “ Difficulties be damned . ”
