Who “ Lost ” Turkey ?
BERLIN -- Turkey ’ s “ no ” last month ( a vote cast together with Brazil ) to the new sanctions against Iran approved in the United Nations Security Council dramatically reveals the full extent of the country ’ s estrangement from the West .
Are we , as many commentators have argued , witnessing the consequences of the so-called “ neo-Ottoman ” foreign policy of Turkey ’ s Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) government , which is supposedly aimed at switching camps and returning to the country ’ s oriental Islamic roots ?
I believe that these fears are exaggerated , even misplaced .
And should things work out that way , this would be due more to a self-fulfilling prophecy on the West ’ s part than to Turkey ’ s policies .
In fact , Turkey ’ s foreign policy , which seeks to resolve existing conflicts with and within neighboring states , and active Turkish involvement there , is anything but in conflict with Western interests . Quite the contrary .
Turkey is and should be a member of the G-20 , because , with its young , rapidly growing population it will become a very strong state economically in the twenty-first century .
Even today , the image of Turkey as the “ sick man of Europe ” is no longer accurate .
When , after the UN decision , United States Secretary of Defense Robert Gates harshly criticized Europeans for having contributed to this estrangement by their behavior towards Turkey , his undiplomatic frankness caused quite a stir in Paris and Berlin .
But Gates had hit the nail on the head .
Ever since the change in government from Jacques Chirac to Nicolas Sarkozy in France and from Gerhard Schröder to Angela Merkel in Germany , Turkey has been strung along and put off by the European Union . Indeed , in the case of Cyprus , the EU wasn ’ t even above breaking previous commitments vis-à-vis Turkey and unilaterally changing jointly-agreed rules .
Only now , when the disaster in Turkish-European relations is becoming apparent , is the EU suddenly willing to open a new chapter in the negotiations ( which , incidentally , clearly proves that the deadlock was politically motivated ) .
The eastern Mediterranean , the Aegean , the western Balkans , the Caspian region and the southern Caucasus , Central Asia , and the Middle East are all areas where the West will achieve nothing or very little without Turkey ’ s support . And this is true in terms not only of security policy , but also of energy policy if you ’ re looking for alternatives to Europe ’ s growing reliance on Russian energy supplies .
The West , and Europe in particular , really can ’ t afford to alienate Turkey , considering their interests , but objectively it is exactly this kind of estrangement that follows from European policy towards Turkey in the last few years .
Europe ’ s security in the twenty-first century will be determined to a significant degree in its neighborhood in the southeast – exactly where Turkey is crucial for Europe ’ s security interests now and , increasingly , in the future .
But , rather than binding Turkey as closely as possible to Europe and the West , European policy is driving Turkey into the arms of Russia and Iran .
This kind of policy is ironic , absurd , and shortsighted all at once .
For centuries , Russia , Iran , and Turkey have been regional rivals , never allies .
Europe ’ s political blindness , however , seems to override this fact .
Of course , Turkey , too , is greatly dependent on integration with the West .
Should it lose this , it would drastically weaken its own position vis-à-vis its potential regional partners ( and rivals ) , despite its ideal geopolitical location .
Turkey ’ s “ no ” to new sanctions against Iran in all likelihood will prove to be a significant error , unless Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan can deliver a real turnaround in Iran ’ s nuclear policy .
This , however , is highly unlikely .
Moreover , with the confrontation between Israel and Turkey strengthening radical forces in the Middle East , what is European diplomacy ( both in Brussels and in European capitals ) waiting for ? The West , as well as Israel and Turkey themselves , most certainly cannot afford a permanent rupture between the two states , unless the desired outcome is for the region to continue on its path to lasting destabilization .
Worse still , while Europe ’ s listlessness is visible first and foremost in the case of Turkey and the Middle East , this lamentable state of affairs is not limited to that region . The same applies to the southern Caucasus and Central Asia , where Europe , with the approval of the smaller supplier countries there , should firmly pursue its energy interests and assert itself vis-à-vis Russia , as well as to Ukraine , where Europe should also become seriously involved .
Many new developments have been set in motion in that entire region by the global economic crisis , and a new player , China ( a long-term planner ) , has entered the geopolitical stage .
Europe risks running out of time , even in its own neighborhood , because active European foreign policy and a strong commitment on the part of the EU are sorely missed in all these countries .
Or , as Mikhail Gorbachev , that great Russian statesman of the last decades of the twentieth century , put it : “ Life has a way of punishing those who come too late . ”
