Equality or Estrangement
TOKYO – Those whom the gods would destroy , they grant their wishes .
Will that bit of ancient wisdom now hold for the United States and Japan ?
For a half-century , the US , which wrote Japan ’ s postwar “ peace ” constitution , has pressed the Japanese to play a greater role in maintaining Asian and global stability .
But now that Japan finally has a leader who agrees , the US is getting nervous , with Secretary of State John Kerry supposedly calling Japan under Prime Minister Shinzo Abe “ unpredictable . ”
These strains in the US-Japan relationship – surely the foundation stone of Asian stability – first became noticeable in December , when Abe visited the Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo , which houses the “ souls ” of ( among others ) Class A war criminals from the Pacific War .
The US has always criticized Japanese officials ’ visits to the shrine , but through diplomatic channels .
This time , America voiced its displeasure openly .
The US is rightly concerned about the negative impact of such pilgrimages on Japan ’ s relations with its neighbors , particularly China and South Korea .
But the harsh tone publicly adopted by President Barack Obama ’ s administration raised serious concerns among some in Abe ’ s government who question Obama ’ s commitment to the alliance and suspect that he was using the Yasukuni issue as a pretext to signal a weakening of America ’ s defense commitment .
Such suspicions were sharpened after China declared its new Air Defense Identification Zone , which overlaps Japanese sovereign territory .
The US tried to have it both ways : though the Obama administration sent US bombers through the new ADIZ to demonstrate its refusal to recognize China ’ s move , it also told US commercial airliners to acknowledge the zone and report their flight plans to the Chinese authorities .
Likewise , US acquiescence in China ’ s de facto ouster of the Philippines from the Scarborough Shoal ( a disputed outcropping in the South China Sea ) raised questions in Japan about the two countries ’ supposed harmony of interests .
In fact , although the US extols the virtues of its partnership with Japan , successive American presidents have been vague about the details .
Ultimately , the idea always seemed to be that Japan would pay more for defense , but the US would set the partnership ’ s objectives .
Abe ’ s conception of the US-Japan partnership presupposes much greater equality .
After all , a society like Japan , trying to escape two decades of economic malaise , cannot feel completely comfortable outsourcing its national-security strategy , even to an ally that is as respected and reliable as the US .
Far from being based on chest-thumping nationalism , Abe ’ s national-security strategy reflects , above all , a deep awareness of how a lost generation of economic growth has affected the Japanese .
His bravura diplomatic performances sometimes give the impression that a self-confident Japan has been a normal feature of the global landscape .
Strangely , it is all but forgotten – particularly by the Chinese – that for two decades Japan has watched China ’ s rise quietly from the sidelines ( even supportively , to the extent that Japanese investors have poured in billions of dollars in the three decades since Deng Xiaoping opened the economy ) .
Indeed , Abe has succeeded so well in returning Japan to the world stage that his US and Asian critics act as if the only problem now is to moderate Japanese self-confidence – a notion that would have been laughable just two years ago .
But the fact remains that one of Abe ’ s primary worries is the spiritual malaise that accompanied Japan ’ s long economic stagnation . Those who see in his patriotic rhetoric a desire to whitewash history miss his real concern : economic revival is meaningless if it does not secure Japan ’ s position as a leading Asian power .
The US , however , regards Abe ’ s worries about Japan ’ s spirit as peripheral to its efforts to forge a lasting relationship with China and overhaul its strategic presence in the Pacific .
For example , the US views the Trans-Pacific Partnership – the huge trade agreement involving it , Japan , and 10 other leading Pacific Rim countries – as a technical scheme that will bring economic benefits through greater trade .
But , for Abe , the TPP ’ s value for Japan ’ s sense of identity – that it is now a more outward-looking nation – is just as important .
In Abe ’ s view , Japan needs to regain , wherever possible , the right of independent decision-making if it is to manage successfully the challenge posed to it by China . This does not mean that Abe ’ s Japan will become an ally like France under Jacques Chirac , spurning US leadership for the sake of it ; instead , Abe seeks a policy of cooperation with the US that reflects the alliance 's voluntary nature .
He believes that , given the new balance of power in Asia , the alliance will be meaningful only if each partner has a real choice , and the wherewithal , to act autonomously or with regional allies .
Fortunately , Japanese and American analyses of Chinese trends are not very different .
Both generally view China as having embarked on a probing strategy in search of weak spots where it can expand its geopolitical reach .
And both believe that only when China is convinced that such probes will yield no lasting benefit can serious negotiations about a comprehensive security structure for Asia take place .
But even here , there is a difference .
The US , convinced of the importance of intentions in the conduct of foreign policy , believes that once China recognizes the limits to its power , a structure of peace will follow naturally .
Abe , by contrast , believes that only a favorable balance of power can be relied upon , and he is determined that Japan play its part in constructing that balance .
Although Abe has lifted Japan ’ s sights and self-confidence , he recognizes that Japan faces real limits .
The US , too , should recognize that there are limits to the extent of the subordination that it can ask of an ally .
