Wrongheaded in Rio
COPENHAGEN – Tens of thousands of people will soon gather in Rio de Janeiro for the United Nations Earth Summit .
The participants , ranging from weary politicians to enthusiastic campaigners , are supposed to reignite global concern for the environment .
Unfortunately , the summit is likely to be a wasted opportunity .
The UN is showcasing the alluring promise of a “ green economy , ” focused on tackling global warming .
In fact , the summit is striking at the wrong target , neglecting the much greater environmental concerns of the vast majority of the world .
Global warming is by no means our main environmental threat .
Even if we assumed – unreasonably – that it caused all deaths from floods , droughts , heat waves , and storms , this total would amount to just 0.06 % of all deaths in developing countries .
In comparison , 13 % of all Third World deaths result from water and air pollution .
So , for each person who might die from global warming , about 210 people die from health problems that result from a lack of clean water and sanitation , from breathing smoke generated by burning dirty fuels ( such as dried animal dung ) indoors , and from breathing polluted air outdoors .
By focusing on measures to prevent global warming , the advanced countries might help to prevent many people from dying .
That sounds good until you realize that it means that 210 times as many people in poorer countries might die needlessly as a result – because the resources that could have saved them were spent on windmills , solar panels , biofuels , and other rich-world fixations .
But of course , poor countries ’ tangible pollution problems are not trendy , and they do not engage outspoken campaigners , media , and governments the way that global warming can .
Nowhere are the failed priorities better illustrated than in the UN ’ s official , colorful “ Rio + 20 ” leaflet .
Here , the UN helpfully provides a layman ’ s explanation of the summit , along with examples of its envisioned “ green economy ” in action .
We see scary pictures of dry riverbeds ( the result of global warming ) , along with plenty of pretty solutions like wind turbines and solar panels .
The problem is that green energy mostly is still much more expensive , less effective , and more intermittent than the alternatives .
Yet , the summit literature claims that it will boost economic growth and eradicate poverty .
But seriously , why do well-meaning First Worlders think that the Third World should have energy technologies that are more expensive , feebler , and less reliable than their own ?
Without a hint of irony , the leaflet is called “ The Future We Want . ” But , in a world where a billion people go to bed hungry , and where six million die each year from air and water pollution , most of those in the developing world likely have a very different set of priorities for their future .
The leaflet cheerfully claims that China ’ s shift “ to a low-carbon growth strategy based on the development of renewable energy sources [ has ] created jobs , income , and revenue . ”
In fact , over the past 25 years , China has quadrupled its CO2 emissions .
While China does produce about half of the world ’ s solar panels , 98 % are exported to reap generous subsidies from rich-world markets .
Only 0.005 % of China ’ s energy comes from solar panels .
China ’ s decades-long economic expansion has lifted 600 million people out of poverty , but the enormous pollution that this has entailed does not fit into Rio + 20 ’ s green narrative .
Likewise , the brochure explains that some farmers in Uganda have embraced organic farming .
Unfortunately , Africa is almost entirely organic now – leading to low yields , hunger , and deforestation .
Africa needs to boost its yields , and that means enabling farmers to use modern crops , fertilizers , and pesticides .
Producing less with more effort might appeal to well-fed First Worlders , but it is literally starving the poor .
Reading further , the leaflet gushes that France has created 90,000 jobs in the green economy . But the stark reality remains hidden : the average cost of each green job is more than $ 200,000 per year , which French taxpayers patently cannot afford .
And economic models show that France has lost as many or more jobs because of the extra costs of the subsidies .
Adding insult to injury , a beautiful photograph shows electric cars finishing the “ Zero Emissions Race ” in Geneva .
Omitted is the fact that most electricity still comes from burning fossil fuels , so the cars are anything but “ zero ” emissions .
And , more importantly , most of our planet ’ s inhabitants still dream of owning some form of mechanized transport – which is unlikely to be an electric vehicle with a price tag of $ 50,000 or more .
In a world plagued by serious problems caused by air and water pollution , this breezy focus on trendy topics and unrealistic solutions is deeply disturbing .
A disconnected global elite is flying to Rio to tell the world ’ s poor to have a solar panel .
Rather than pandering to advanced countries ’ obsessions , Rio + 20 could do more good for humanity – and the planet – by focusing on the top environmental problems and their simple solutions .
