The Young General ’ s Old Tricks
TOKYO – Brinkmanship seems to be congenital in North Korea .
Under the late Kim Jong-il ’ s pudgy young successor – his third son , Kim Jong-un , dubbed “ the Young General ” – threats and mendacity still mark the Hermit Kingdom ’ s diplomacy .
With North Korea ’ s announcement of plans to use an Unha-3 rocket to launch its Bright Star-3 satellite into earth orbit in mid-April , the newest threat is a continuation of an old one .
Indeed , it signals a quick demise for the agreement reached with the United States just weeks ago .
The decision to launch the satellite , which had been planned by Kim Jong-il , is clearly intended to provide a “ heroic ” martial achievement for a new leader who lacks any military experience .
The regime aims to boost North Korea ’ s international prestige and domestic morale simultaneously , with the population supposedly keen to support this show of the country ’ s technological and military might .
And , no surprise , North Korea ’ s leaders also claim that what they propose to launch is a “ peaceful ” satellite .
But no one , particularly in the region , where North Korean missiles pose the gravest threat , accepts this claim at face value .
It is clear that the rocket to be launched is effectively a long-range ballistic missile , which might be able to reach Guam , the site of an important US military base .
So doubtful is the world of North Korea ’ s claim of peaceful intent that not only did the United Nations , South Korea , the US , Japan , and the European Union immediately express concern ; so did China and Russia – perhaps the only two countries in the world that are on good terms with the Kim regime .
Despite the international community ’ s almost unanimous demand for restraint , North Korea is highly unlikely to roll back its launch plans .
Halting such missile tests is simply not an option for a regime whose only claim to legitimacy is the military threat that it poses to others .
The announcement of the forthcoming launch is timed , as always seems to be the case with North Korea ’ s provocations , to the regime ’ s need for food and funds from around the world to prevent the reemergence of mass starvation at home .
Moreover , 2012 is a special year for North Korea , starting with the 70th anniversary of Kim Jong-il ’ s birth on February 16 .
That occasion will be followed by the 100th anniversary of Kim Il-sung ’ s birth on April 15 and the 80th anniversary of the creation of the People ’ s Army on April 25 .
The country ’ s undernourished masses are not being invited to the capital , Pyongyang , for the extravagant parades that will be held at enormous cost .
The missile launch , it seems , will have to suffice for them .
The regime uses food as the currency of its domestic power and foreign policy .
For the commemoration of Kim Jong-il ’ s birthday in February , a kilogram of fish was provided to residents in one district , but nowhere else .
At the same time , the regime sought 240,000 tons of nutritional support in its recent negotiations with the US and South Korea , though the North was forced to return 30,000 tons of rice from a previous food-aid package as part of its recent agreement with the US .
Indeed , the North lets few diplomatic occasions pass without strong-arming its interlocutors for more .
For Kim Jong-un , even a meeting with Japanese officials in Ulan Bator , Mongolia ’ s capital , to discuss the return of Japanese women who went to North Korea with their Korean husbands thinking that they were journeying to a socialist paradise , served as a platform to secure food aid from Japan .
The negotiations were to be held between Song Il-ho , North Korea ’ s ambassador responsible for normalizing relations with Japan , and Hiroshi Nakai , a former minister who negotiates officially for the release of Japanese citizens abducted by the North .
But Nakai was unable to leave Tokyo , and a university professor replaced him as Japan ’ s negotiator .
Rank-conscious North Korea would normally send a lower official than Song if his counterpart were substituted , but no change was made , so desperate is the North for food .
North Korea then asked Japan for economic aid and food supplies in exchange for returning not only the Japanese wives in question , but also seven Japanese known to have been abducted by the North .
The Japanese aid , like the ransom paid to a kidnapper , must be provided by April 15 , just in time for the commemoration of Kim Il-song ’ s birth – a clear indication of North Korea ’ s true intentions , and desperation .
And now , given the potential cost of scuttling the recent agreement with the US , the decision to launch a long-range missile takes that desperation a step further .
In fact , it has been suggested that the launch is intended to be a demonstration to Iran of the North ’ s missile prowess , as the Islamic Republic could become a customer for the illicit missile and nuclear-technology sales that are one of the regime ’ s few sources of hard currency .
Thus , the North Korean drama , now starring Kim Jong-un , plays on , relying on extorted proceeds from manufactured crises abroad to finance spectacular kitsch and brutal repression at home .
It is up to China , the real director of the North Korean production , to drop the curtain on this abominable show and its rogue star .
