Securing the Internet Commons
WASHINGTON , DC – Ever since Edward Snowden ’ s revelations about the National Security Agency ’ s spying on citizens and leaders around the world , a debate has raged in the United States about the proper balance between national security and individual privacy and liberty .
Most recently that debate has focused on encryption : whether technology companies should be able to develop programs that encrypt their users ’ messages so securely that no one but their intended recipients – not even governments – can read them .
It is a debate to which governments and citizens everywhere should pay attention .
Not surprisingly , the US government ’ s national security officials oppose full encryption by American technology companies , arguing that the country will be less safe if the proper authorities have no “ backdoor ” – a piece of code that lets them in .
Software engineers call backdoors “ vulnerabilities , ” deliberate efforts to weaken security .
They regard a request for backdoors the same way an automobile manufacturer would view a request for a defective engine .
A large coalition of technology companies and civil-society organizations recently sent a letter to President Barack Obama arguing against backdoors .
In addition to “ undermining every American ’ s cyber security and the nation ’ s economic security , ” the signers argued , “ introducing new vulnerabilities to weaken encrypted products in the US would also undermine human rights and information security around the globe . ”
What supporters of encryption recognize is that “ if American companies maintain the ability to unlock their customers ’ data and devices on request , governments other than the United States will demand the same access , and will also be emboldened to demand the same capability from their native companies . ”
The US government will not be able to object , given its own policies .
The result “ will be an information environment riddled with vulnerabilities that could be exploited by even the most repressive or dangerous regimes . ”
What is at stake is nothing less than the health of the “ global digital ecosystem . ”
The technology corporations that signed this letter understand that while they may be incorporated in the US , they are global players and have global responsibilities .
They also understand , in a more self-interested vein , that if foreign consumers believe that using American social media and search engines exposes them to the scrutiny of US intelligence agencies , those consumers will turn to other providers .
The response of many foreign governments has been to focus on how to ensure and protect their “ technological sovereignty . ”
Information may transcend borders , but servers and cables still have physical locations .
The Open Technology Institute at New America ( which I head ) is collaborating with the German Global Public Policy Institute ( GPPI ) on a series of transatlantic dialogues about “ security and freedom in the Digital Age . ”
An initial report identifies 18 proposals from more than a dozen European governments on subjects including new undersea cables , encryption , localized data storage , domestic industry support , international codes of conduct , and data protection laws .
Many of these proposals will not actually achieve their goals .
But the most important issues to sort out are less about feasibility than about desirability , from both a national and a global perspective .
As with US companies , it is important to differentiate among corporate , economic , and public interests at the national and global levels .
Citizens from around the world have a stake in getting this right .
For starters , digital protectionism should be as suspect as any other form of protectionism , albeit with exceptions for health , safety , and social solidarity . “ Technological sovereignty ” can easily be a pretext for insisting that citizens buy only homegrown tech products .
Moreover , rules should be formulated globally and implemented nationally .
The Internet is essentially a country with both state and non-state actors as its citizens .
It is our task to ensure that it is a free , open , and universally accessible country that advances and safeguards universal human rights .
Principle 1 requires that policymakers “ promote and protect the global free flow of information ” ; Principle 2 insists on promotion of “ the open , distributed , and interconnected nature of the Internet ” ;
Principle 8 mandates “ transparency , fair process , and accountability ” across the Internet ; Principle 11 promotes “ creativity and innovation ” ; and Principle 13 “ encourage [ s ] cooperation to promote Internet security . ”
Other countries and regional organizations have come up with similar guidance .
The point is less the specific wording or even content than the recognition that such principles are necessary for policymakers around the world .
From this perspective , it is not clear whether “ technological sovereignty ” is a helpful or harmful concept .
It makes digital space sound like airspace or territorial seas , something that is somehow derived from or adjacent to physical territory .
The New America-GPPI report is entitled “ Technological Sovereignty : Missing the Point ? ”
The authors conclude that “ data privacy and security depend primarily not on where data is physically stored or sent , but on how it is stored and transmitted . ”
For data purposes , at least , we are in a post-territorial age .
Decoupling sovereignty from territory is hard to do , particularly after Snowden showed the world just how far one country ’ s technological tentacles can reach .
Still , the larger lesson is that differentiating between national security and global security in the digital world may be both impossible and deeply counter-productive .
We need new maps and mindsets and new coalitions of business , civic activists , and all those who understand that national security must include the protection of privacy and freedom of expression .
And we need new ways to engage both governments and citizens in a new , exhilarating , dangerous , and still largely unexplored world .
