The Silence of China \ u0027s Intellectuals
Public opinion , as the crisis over the US spy plane demonstrated , now matters in China .
But where do China ’ s intellectuals stand and what role do they play ?
In the 1980s traditional Chinese respect for education was revived after the scourge of the Mao years .
So was the Confucian notion that an intellectual ’ s highest calling is to tell a ruler what is best for the realm , whether by persuasion or – if you dare – through criticism and taking the consequences .
In 1979 , Liu Binyan 's “ People or Monsters ? ” spelled out how communism breeds corruption ; in 1988 Su Xiaokang 's film “ River Elegy ” sketched ways in which aspects of the narrow-minded despotism in China 's imperial tradition remained alive and well in the Party .
Both works – and others of the 1980s – mesmerized the public .
The years since the Tienanmen Massacre seem politically and intellectually anemic by comparison . After 1989 China seemed to lose its moral compass .
Yet , at a time when an intellectual 's conscience might seem most useful – they were inaudible .
Why ?
Repression is one reason .
Ironclad taboos prevented public discussion of such subjects as the Cultural Revolution , the Tienanmen Massacre , Falun Gong or other topics perceived as vita the regime ’ s legitimacy and hold on power .
Moreover , most of China 's leading public intellectuals of the 1980s fled the country after 1989 .
A new generation of intellectual leaders needed time to emerge .
The collapse of socialist morality and the regime 's failure to provide a credible replacement created a " values vacuum " that people sought to fill in various ways .
Falun Gong boomed , as did Christianity and other religions . Some people embraced nationalism and chauvinism .
Contemporary intellectuals embraced all these trends .
In addition , literary intellectuals – who in the 1980s led the way in criticism – fell prey to Western postmodernist jargon , even though such things have little resonance in China .
State-sponsored repression , however , only partially explains the silence since 1989 .
Urban China 's rapid economic growth also shaped intellectual life .
Many scholars and writers “ jumped into the ocean of commerce ” ( xiahai ) to became more comfortable than twenty years ago , when intellectuals lived on tiny salaries and were still emerging from Mao 's censure that they were society ’ s " stinking dregs . ”
Today , intellectuals with marketable skills use them to make more in business than they ever could in academe .
The social and economic status of better-off intellectuals is second only to Communist officials and the new super-rich .
Moreover , the freedoms that intellectuals treasure – speech , publication , and travel – expanded greatly .
New subcultures , and even publications flourish so long as they avoid politically sensitive subjects .
In short , personal comfort resulted in political timidity and complacency .
Yet , economic boom generated an ugly gap between rich and poor , and the new political-moral questions that have arisen about this gap show that the Chinese intellectuals ' tradition of " worrying about the nation " remains alive .
How , they ask , can we accept the ways in which newly rich secured their wealth by exploiting power to steal state property ?
Regardless of how wealth was acquired , they wonder if society can accept the grotesque disparities that resulted ?
These questions create an awkward dilemma for intellectuals who favor opening to the West .
True , the West offers models of democracy , rule of law , a free press , and other means through which injustices can be resolved ; but the West also provided the capitalist model that created these injustices .
So , do you call for more Westernization or less ?
Will membership in the World Trade Organization do more harm or good ?
Is more Western pop culture advisable ?
A diverse , confusing spectrum of muted views has resulted .
A " new left " embraces the poor , but wants to remain distinct from the authoritarian " old left . "
Liberals have grown their own left and right wings – mainly over the issue of social justice versus political freedom .
These complexities make it more difficult than before the 1980s for Chinese intellectuals to speak in unison , let alone find their voice .
The main issues back then – " more reform " and " more opening to the West " – were not freighted with ambiguity and controversy .
So , the " silence " of Chinese intellectuals has several causes , and is in part illusory .
Yet , if we ask the Confucian question , " Have intellectuals offered anything that a wise ruler might use ? " the answer is yes . In terms of research and careful reasoning , books like He Qinglian 's “ Modernization 's Pitfalls ” on the weaknesses of the urban economy and Cao Jinqing 's “ China by the Yellow River ” about poverty and oppression in the countryside – to name two such works – are more substantial than many of the generalities offered in the 1980s .
Unfortunately , China 's leaders , deeply unsure of themselves , are in no mood to accept advice .
Late last year a publishing ban was imposed on ten leading intellectuals . Several were fired from state-sponsored jobs .
Happily , because the state no longer has monolithic control , some banned writers found other work , even publishing outlets , on their own .
Defiance , indeed , is now the exception rather than the rule .
But the government still is unwilling to listen .
