The World Bank ’ s Wrong Choice
NEW YORK – The selection of the American nominee Jim Yong Kim as President of the World Bank , over Nigeria ’ s finance minister , Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala , who was overwhelmingly regarded as a vastly superior candidate , is impossible to condone but easy to explain .
It also points to serious dangers for the unfinished task of development .
The selection process suffered from several inequities and non-transparent features that undermined the United States ’ claim to the contrary .
Indeed , those claims were of a piece with the linguistic obfuscations that dominate American public debate : just as carpet bombing was called “ pacification ” during the Vietnam War , today illegal immigrants are called “ undocumented aliens . ”
Thus , the rollout of the American propaganda machine for Kim , who traveled to many capitals worldwide with US Treasury support and promises of American largesse , surely biased the vote against Okonjo-Iweala .
And , after all , the World Bank is a donor institution .
So potential borrowers like India and Mexico , which should have voted for Okonjo-Iweala , acted prudently and voted for Kim instead .
Her human capital was no match for his financial capital .
In a genuinely open , merit-based contest , the 25-member Executive Board ’ s deliberations should have been preceded by debates between the candidates .
I suspect that Okonjo-Iweala , with her enormous competence and renowned wit , would have gotten the better of Kim .
The world would also have seen why so many of us were rooting for her .
Again , the worldwide influence of the powerful liberal media in the US should not be underestimated .
While The Economist backed Okonjo-Iweala , The New York Times endorsed Kim .
This is an election year in the US : if President Barack Obama had nominated a lamppost , America ’ s “ newspaper of record ” would have found it to be possessed of excellent credentials .
Moreover , just as Ralph Nader ’ s candidacy ( and the US Supreme Court ) prevented Al Gore from defeating George W. Bush in 2000 , one must recognize that Okonjo-Iweala was undercut by the candidacy of José Antonio Ocampo , a former finance minister of Colombia , who was backed by Brazil .
His candidacy made Okonjo-Iweala look like a regional “ African candidate , ” while Ocampo was the “ Latin American ” candidate .
Brazil should have worked with India , Mexico , and South Africa instead , to produce unified support for Okonjo-Iweala .
When Brazil did move in that direction , it was too late to make any difference .
And now one cannot suppress the thought that Kim ’ s election could turn into a disaster for the cause of development .
His tirade in 2000 against the liberal reforms that have transformed countries like India and China into global growth engines , reduced poverty , and benefited marginalized groups shows that he lacked good judgment on fundamental issues .
No one recalls any expression of regret by him , which suggests that he persists in such folly – and would use conditionality to turn the clock back on decades of progress in development economics .
But my fear is that Kim would be a disaster even on health-care issues – an area where he has rightly earned credit for his work on AIDS , malaria , and tuberculosis .
Thanks to the economic growth that resulted from the reforms that he denounced , countries like India and Brazil now have higher revenues to spend on health care for the poor , among other public goods .
As a result , the public-health questions that Kim will face at the World Bank are very different from the “ big ” diseases with which he dealt in the past .
India , for example , is struggling with the balance between public and private provisions of medical care for routine health problems , and with questions of medical training and availability ( that is , should India have “ barefoot doctors , ” or aim for only fully qualified practitioners ? ) .
Can Kim lead on these and other issues that are beyond his experience ?
