Treason in the Air
COPENHAGEN – Discussions about global warming are marked by an increasing desire to stamp out “ impure ” thinking , to the point of questioning the value of democratic debate .
But shutting down discussion simply means the disappearance of reason from public policy .
In March , Al Gore ’ s science adviser and prominent climate researcher , Jim Hansen , proclaimed that when it comes to dealing with global warming , the “ democratic process isn ’ t working . ”
Although science has demonstrated that CO2 from fossil fuels is heating the planet , politicians are unwilling to follow his advice and stop building coal-fired power plants .
Hansen argues that , “ the first action that people should take is to use the democratic process .
What is frustrating people , me included , is that democratic action affects elections , but what we get then from political leaders is greenwash . ” Although he doesn ’ t tell us what the second or third action is , he has turned up in a British court to defend six activists who damaged a coal power station .
He argues that we need “ more people chaining themselves to coal plants , ” a point repeated by Gore .
The Nobel laureate in economics Paul Krugman goes further .
After the narrow passage of the Waxman-Markey climate-change bill in the United States House of Representatives , Krugman said that there was no justification for a vote against it .
He called virtually all of the members who voted against it , “ climate deniers ” who were committing “ treason against the planet . ”
Krugman said that the “ irresponsibility and immorality ” of the representatives ’ democratic viewpoints were “ unforgivable ” and a “ betrayal . ”
He thus accused almost half of the democratically elected members of the House , from both parties , of treason for holding the views that they do – thereby essentially negating democracy .
Less well-known pundits make similar points , suggesting that people with “ incorrect ” views on global warming should face Nuremburg-style trials or be tried for crimes against humanity .
There is clearly a trend .
The climate threat is so great – and democracies are doing so little about it – that people conclude that maybe democracy is part of the problem , and that perhaps people ought not to be allowed to express heterodox opinions on such an important topic .
This is scary , although not without historical precedent .
Much of the American McCarthyism of the 1940 ’ s and 1950 ’ s was driven by the same burning faith in the righteousness of the mission – a faith that saw fundamental rights abrogated .
We would be well served to go down a different path .
Gore and others often argue that if the science of climate change concludes that CO2 emissions are harmful , it follows that we should stop those harmful emissions – and that we are morally obliged to do so .
But this misses half the story .
We could just as well point out that since science tells us that speeding cars kill many people , we should cut speed limits to almost nothing . We do no such thing , because we recognize that the costs of high-speed cars must be weighed against the benefits of a mobile society .
Indeed , nobody emits CO2 for fun .
CO2 emissions result from other , generally beneficial acts , such as burning coal to keep warm , burning kerosene to cook , or burning gas to transport people .
The benefits of fossil fuels must be weighed against the costs of global warming .
Gore and Hansen want a moratorium on coal-fired power plants , but neglect the fact that the hundreds of new power plants that will be opened in China and India in the coming years could lift a billion people out of poverty .
Negating this outcome through a moratorium is clearly no unmitigated good .
Likewise , reasonable people can differ on their interpretation of the Waxman-Markey bill .
Even if we set aside its masses of pork-barrel spending , and analyses that show it may allow more emissions in the US for the first decades , there are more fundamental problems with this legislation .
At a cost of hundreds of billions of dollars annually , it will have virtually no impact on climate change .
If all of the bill ’ s many provisions were entirely fulfilled , economic models show that it would reduce the temperature by the end of the century by 0.11 ° C ( 0.2 ° F ) – reducing warming by less than 4 % .
Even if every Kyoto-obligated country passed its own , duplicate Waxman-Markey bills – which is implausible and would incur significantly higher costs – the global reduction would amount to just 0.22 ° C ( 0.35 ° F ) by the end of this century . The reduction in global temperature would not be measurable in a hundred years , yet the cost would be significant and payable now .
Is it really treason against the planet to express some skepticism about whether this is the right way forward ?
Is it treason to question throwing huge sums of money at a policy that will do virtually no good in a hundred years ?
Is it unreasonable to point out that the inevitable creation of trade barriers that will ensue from Waxman-Markey could eventually cost the world ten times more than the damage climate change could ever have wrought ?
But I would never want to shut down discussion about these issues – whether it is with Gore , Hansen , or Krugman . Everybody involved in this discussion should spend more time building and acknowledging good arguments , and less time telling others what they cannot say .
Wanting to shut down the discussion is simply treason against reason .
