The Trouble with Libertarian Paternalism
CHICAGO – There are many arguments against government paternalism : apart from limiting individual choice ( for example , the choice to remain uninsured in the current health-care debate in the United States ) and preventing individuals from learning , history suggests time and again that the conventional wisdom prevalent in society is wrong .
And , since governments typically try to enforce the conventional wisdom , the consequences could be disastrous , because they are magnified by the state ’ s coordinating – and coercive – power .
A clear example is financial regulation , which in many ways is a form of paternalism .
In the US , the low risk assigned to senior tranches of mortgage-backed securities made them attractive instruments for banks to hold , given the relatively high return they offered .
But they proved far from safe , despite the prior conventional wisdom .
And , because the regulator had pronounced them safe , far too many banks overloaded on them , rendering them even more risky when the banks tried to sell them at the same time .
Other examples of the danger of the coordinating power of government paternalism abound .
As I drive to downtown Chicago , I pass a series of high-rise housing projects , meant in their time to be the miracle cure for homelessness , poverty , unemployment , and crime .
Today , they are seen as the best way to concentrate and perpetuate many of those ills .
Not only were the housing projects kept a safe distance from areas that had good jobs , but , with few residents experiencing stable families and livelihoods , there were not enough local examples of success to guide young people .
As a result , many went astray .
The fashion today is to integrate poor households into flourishing communities .
No doubt we will discover some unintended consequences in the future , and the power of government coordination will ensure that those consequences are widespread .
But some amount of paternalism is necessary in civilized societies .
Social security is a paternalistic form of forced savings for old age , preventing individuals from consuming and saving as they please .
It exists , in part , because individuals know that civilized societies will never stand by and watch the elderly starve .
So individuals are forced to save in order to prevent them from gaming the system – not saving when young , knowing that they will be assured a minimum level of support by a humane society when old .
Similarly , the mandated purchase of insurance in the Obama administration ’ s health-care bill is an attempt to prevent the young and the healthy from remaining uninsured and turning to the government for support only when they discover that they need it .
So , if paternalism has benefits as well as costs , how do we get the former without the latter ?
My colleague , Richard Thaler , along with Cass Sunstein , who currently serves in the Obama administration , wrote a best-selling book , Nudge , in which they suggest a way to reduce our uneasiness with paternalism .
Essentially , by exploiting behavioral quirks , they would nudge people into making decisions that are good for them , even while individuals have complete freedom to change their mind .
So libertarian paternalism , in their view , eliminates one of the main objections to paternalism – that it constrains individual choice .
For example , in deciding how their pension savings will be allocated , most people simply choose the default option in their employer-offered plan .
Often , the default option is unsuitable for most individuals – for instance , it typically allocates all savings to low-return money-market funds .
Sunstein and Thaler would have the employer choose a default option that works for most people , such as 60 % in equities , 30 % in bonds , and 10 % in money-market funds .
That is the paternalistic part .
The libertarian part is that the employee has the right to opt out of the default option .
Because people rarely move away from the default option , the employer ’ s paternalistic choice prevails , and we get libertarian paternalism .
What is not to like ?
The problem is that the semblance of choice in libertarian paternalism is an illusion .
Choice remains unexercised , because individuals do not consciously think through their decision .
If their choices can be directed , is this not paternalism plain and simple , rendered more sinister because individuals are unaware that they are being nudged , and cannot raise their guard ?
One response is to point out that most plans already have a default option that determines savings allocations .
Sunstein and Thaler merely say that the default option should be set in a way that is good for people , and clearly they have an idea of what is good .
This , then , is the nub of the problem . In choosing the default option , the government or the employer nudges all employees into prevailing fads such as “ buy equity for the long run . ”
This , they believe , is better than the current typical default option of putting individuals ’ money into money-market funds .
But it may be worse : coordinating everyone into risky asset investments may be more dangerous than coordinating them into boring investments like money-market funds .
Could there be a better alternative ?
What if there were no default option , and individuals were sent repeated , and increasingly urgent , reminders to choose an allocation if they did not choose one already .
The conventional wisdom could be offered as a recommendation , along with explanations of why it makes sense , but it would not be the default .
This would force people to exercise choice .
Some people would differ from the conventional wisdom , benefiting the system by introducing some variety and resilience .
More generally , the flaw in some forms of libertarian paternalism is that the free choice that it appears to offer leaves the paternalism largely unconstrained .
Would it not be far better to force conscious choice in order to limit the consequences of paternalistic mistakes ?
