Will The US Have A “ Debt Crisis ” ?
WASHINGTON , DC – John Boehner , Speaker of the United States House of Representatives , is leading the Republican Party ’ s charge on fiscal policy , arguing that his side needs to see “ trillions of dollars ” in spending cuts in order for Congress to approve an increase in the US government ’ s debt ceiling .
But framing the issue this way creates a major problem for Boehner : it will directly , completely , and quickly antagonize one of the Republicans ’ most important constituencies – the US corporate sector .
Focusing on the debt ceiling creates a political trap for Boehner and the Republicans .
It is true that the US Treasury ’ s ability to borrow will reach its legally authorized limit in early August .
It is also true that whenever Republicans rattle their sabers about the debt ceiling , and threaten not to raise it , the bond market yawns and there is no significant impact on yields .
If the Republicans ’ threats were credible , any news that increased the likelihood of a problem with the debt ceiling would send Treasury bond prices down and yields up .
This is not happening , because bond traders cannot imagine that the Republicans would be able – or even willing – to follow through .
After all , the consequences of failing to increase the debt ceiling would be catastrophic .
The entire credit system in the US – and in much of the rest of the world – is based on the notion that there are “ risk-free assets , ” namely US government securities .
There is no provision in the US Constitution to guarantee that the US will always pay its debts , but the American Republic has proven itself for 200-plus years to be about as good a credit risk as has ever existed .
US fiscal resolve has been tested at least five times : at independence , in the war of 1812 , during and after the Civil War , and in World War I and World War II .
We can debate the exact fiscal pressures in each case , and precisely how various kinds of bondholders were treated , but the simple fact of the matter is that when the going gets tough , the US pays its debts .
At least in the near term , the chance that the US will not service its debt is vanishingly small – perhaps in the same order of probability as a large meteor striking the earth .
To be sure , there are big fiscal questions to be sorted out – including how much the government should spend and on what , as well as how much tax it should collect and by what means .
There is also the vexing question of how much debt is too much for the modern US .
In a world where international investors ( from both the private and official sectors ) routinely wring their hands about US fiscal deficits – and then go out and buy more US government debt – who knows the answer ?
Countries never default because they can ’ t pay their debts ; there are always ways to decrease expenditures or raise taxes .
Countries default because their political processes bring them to the point where the people in power decide , for whatever reason , not to pay the government ’ s debts .
It is not difficult to identify who would bear what costs if the US did not pay – or if it disrupted markets by not increasing its debt ceiling .
Everyone who borrows or interacts with the credit system in any way would suffer a shock that would make the crisis of 2008 look small .
Among others , the US corporate sector – big and small business – would be livid .
To be sure , executives and entrepreneurs like to shake their heads over the current US fiscal deficit .
And some of them engage constructively in debates about the real issues : how to control health-care costs , prevent future financial crises , and end America ’ s expensive foreign wars .
But these are the issues for the presidential election of 2012 , in which one hopes for debates that will set a more encouraging fiscal agenda for the next 20-30 years .
How and when America ’ s budget problems will be resolved is unknown , but US fiscal history is encouraging – the Republic has managed and survived crisis before .
Simply put , America will not score an own goal over the debt ceiling – and Boehner must know it .
Symbolic gestures are to be expected , as with the threatened government shutdown earlier this year , which merely created fodder for political advertising by both parties .
But any manufactured debt crisis now would deeply antagonize the corporate sector – and most of the electorate .
In the wake of economic disaster , the party held responsible would presumably be exiled from power for a generation ( the Great Depression kept the Republicans from the US presidency for 20 years ) .
The Republican leadership is making threats that are not credible .
If Barack Obama ’ s administration plays its hand well , the result will be a last-minute extension of the debt ceiling with no significant concessions .
It is unclear how Boehner or anyone else would be able to portray that as a political victory .
