Why Fair Trade ?
LONDON – Historically , the term “ fair trade ” has meant many things .
The Fair Trade League was founded in Britain in 1881 to restrict imports from foreign countries .
In the United States , businesses and labor unions use “ fair trade ” laws to construct what economist Joseph Stiglitz calls “ barbed-wire barriers to imports . ”
These so called “ anti-dumping ” laws allow a company that suspects a foreign rival of selling a product below cost to request that the government impose special tariffs to protect it from “ unfair ” competition .
Such dark protectionist thoughts are far from the minds of the benevolent organizers of the United Kingdom ’ s annual “ Fairtrade Fortnight , ” during which I just bought two bars of fair-trade chocolate and a jar of fair-trade chunky peanut butter .
Their worthy aim is to raise the price paid to developing-country farmers for their produce by excluding the inflated profits of the middlemen on whom they depend for getting their goods to distant markets .
Fair-trade products like cocoa , coffee , tea , and bananas do not compete with domestic European production , and therefore do not have a protectionist motive .
This is how it works : In exchange for being paid a guaranteed price and meeting “ agreed labor and environmental standards ” ( minimum wages , no pesticides ) , poor-country farming cooperatives receive a FAIRTRADE mark for their products , issued by the FAIRTRADE Labeling Organization .
This certification enables supermarkets and other retailers to sell the products at a premium .
Third-world farmers get a boost to their income , while first-world consumers get to feel virtuous : a marriage made in heaven .
The fair-trade movement , launched in the 1980 ’ s , has been growing rapidly .
In a notable breakthrough in 1997 , the British House of Commons decided to serve only fair-trade coffee .
By the end of 2007 , more than 600 producers ’ organizations , representing 1.4 million farmers in 58 countries , were selling fair-trade products .
Today , a quarter of all bananas in UK supermarkets are sold under a FAIRTRADE mark .
But FAIRTRADE-labeled products still represent a very small share – typically less than 1 % – of global sales of cocoa , tea , coffee , etc .
The economic rationale for guaranteed prices is well known : stabilizing the prices of primary products , which are subject to sharp fluctuations , stabilizes their producers ’ incomes .
This argument inspired proposals – most famously by John Maynard Keynes in 1942 – to create “ buffer stocks ” for the main commodities , which would take supply off the market when prices fell , and add to supply when prices rose .
Keynes ’ s proposal never made it into the Bretton Woods Agreement of 1944 , and , while buffer-stock schemes re-surfaced in the 1970 ’ s , they , too , went nowhere .
Left-wing economists like Raúl Prebisch , moreover , later advanced the theory of “ declining terms of trade ” for primary products : their prices ’ long-run tendency to fall relative to the prices of manufactured goods .
This tendency seemed to be at work from the mid-1980 ’ s , as commodity producers experienced a persistent decline in prices .
In addition , price fluctuations throughout that decade were huge , with dire effects on sub-Saharan African and other developing countries that were largely dependent on commodities for export earnings .
Since then , however , the price decline has been reversed .
Food commodity prices have increased by 150 % since 2001 .
This has raised farm producers ’ income independently of the fair-trade movement ’ s efforts .
The “ declining terms of trade ” argument has collapsed .
But primary-product prices remain much more volatile than the prices of manufactured goods and services , causing large fluctuations in producers ’ incomes .
This exaggerates the effects of booms and busts .
So the issue of price stabilization has not gone away .
It is difficult to see how the fair-trade movement can contribute much to solving this problem , because the only serious policy for stabilizing producers ’ incomes is to control supply .
But that is beyond the scope of fair trade .
The target of all versions of fair trade is “ free trade , ” and the most damaging attacks on FAIRTRADE have come from free traders .
In Unfair Trade , a pamphlet published in 2008 by the Adam Smith Institute , Mark Sidwell argues that FAIRTRADE keeps uncompetitive farmers on the land , holding back diversification and mechanization .
According to Sidwell , the FAIRTRADE scheme turns developing countries into low-profit , labor-intensive agrarian ghettos , denying future generations the chance of a better life .
This is without considering the effect that FAIRTRADE has on the poorest people in these countries – not farmers but casual laborers – who are excluded from the scheme by its expensive regulations and labor standards .
In other words , FAIRTRADE protects farmers against their rivals and against agricultural laborers .
Consumers , Sidwell argues , are also being duped .
Only a tiny proportion – as little as 1 % – of the premium that we pay for a FAIRTRADE chocolate bar will ever make it to cocoa producers .
Nor is FAIRTRADE necessarily a guarantee of quality : because producers get a minimum price for fair-trade goods , they sell the best of their crop on the open market .
But , despite its shaky economics , the fair-trade movement should not be despised .
While cynics say that its only achievement is to make consumers feel better about their purchases – rather like buying indulgences in the old Catholic Church – this is to sell fair trade short .
In fact , the movement represents a spark of protest against mindless consumerism , grass-roots resistance against an impersonal logic , and an expression of communal activism .
That justification will not convince economists , who prefer a dryer sort of reasoning .
But it is not out of place to remind ourselves that economists and bureaucrats need not always have things their own way .
