What Does Japan Want from America ?
OSAKA – Three months after the Democratic Party of Japan ’ s landslide general-election victory , the new administration ’ s foreign and security policy appears to be increasingly at odds with that of the United States .
Indeed , there is growing concern on both sides of the Pacific that Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama intends to turn away from the declining US hegemon and reach out to a rising China .
Indeed , Hatoyama has announced his rudimentary vision of building an East Asian community that excludes the US .
Hatoyama has hastily attempted to fulfill the DPJ ’ s party manifesto and his own public pledges .
This includes terminating replenishment support for the US-led interdiction operation in the Indian Ocean , reducing host-nation support to US forces based in Japan , and revising the bilateral status-of-force agreement .
Moreover , Hatoyama is set to expose a secret Cold War nuclear agreement that opened Japanese ports to US naval vessels carrying nuclear weapons , in contravention of Japan ’ s Three Non-Nuclear Principles , which have guided official policy since the late 1960 ’ s .
Last but not least , Hatoyama is postponing implementation of a bilateral agreement with the US to relocate a Marine Corps base on the island of Okinawa , from Futenma to Henoko , thereby causing confusion for America ’ s plan to relocate part of its forces on Okinawa to Guam .
The significance of these moves has , however , been poorly understood .
Hatoyama ’ s assertiveness vis-à-vis the US is in accord with Japan ’ s position as the world ’ s largest creditor with the least damaged banking sector .
But a decisive foreign-policy shift has not occurred – nor will one occur in the near future .
Instead , Hatoyama has simply stressed Japan ’ s need to be on an equal footing in alliance management with the US .
Likewise , his proposed regional community would be open in nature , and would welcome strong US involvement , although without formal US membership , on geographic grounds .
Thus , the current US-Japanese estrangement is being driven by a spiral of mistrust that does not stem from geo-strategic concerns .
Rather , Japan has initiated a series of abrupt policy changes , while the US , only dimly aware of the significance of its relative decline , assumes that Japan ’ s decades-long docility will continue .
Flaws in the transition between Japanese governments are also to blame .
Hatoyama ’ s ministers did not ask their counterparts in the departing administration of former Prime Minister Taro Aso to inform them fully about existing and potential foreign-policy problems . Nor did the Aso government ’ s members , stupefied by their crushing electoral defeat , offer to do so .
The relocation of the Marine Corps base – an issue burdened by the competing imperatives of Hatoyama ’ s coalition government , American military strategy , and local anti-base politics on the island of Okinawa – is now a focal point of tensions with the US .
The base agreement – reached after ten years of bilateral negotiations – is the most practical option for avoiding potentially disastrous aerial accidents in a heavily populated area , and for reducing crimes committed by US soldiers against local Japanese , including , most notoriously , several rapes .
The base agreement is essential for maintaining the political and strategic viability of the bilateral alliance .
Yet , during the DPJ ’ s election campaign , Hatoyama vowed to eliminate the Marines ’ presence on Okinawa .
To make matters worse , the Social Democratic Party ( SDP ) has threatened to leave the government coalition if Hatoyama breaks his promise – a move that would deny the DPJ a simple majority in the Diet ’ s upper house .
Nor does it hold the two-thirds majority in the lower house needed to override upper-house resolutions .
Thus , Hatoyama is forced to subordinate Japan ’ s alliance with the US to his government ’ s survival , at least until next summer ’ s upper-house elections .
By then , the government will have enacted more of its legislative program , potentially enabling the DPJ to gain seats .
Hatoyama cannot please everyone all the time , least of all the US .
While he has repeatedly emphasized Japan ’ s equal footing with the US in alliance management , this does not extend to Japan ’ s military capability and defense burden .
Obviously , he intends to keep asymmetrical reciprocity embedded in the bilateral mutual security treaty : the US defends Japan , and Japan leases to the US many large bases that are essential to its global military posture .
Moreover , he evidently believes that the geo-strategic value of the bases enable him to bargain for a major US compromise .
If this approach does not work , and if the existing Marine base on Okinawa remains , Hatoyama can pass the buck to the US , thereby deflecting anti-base pressure from local residents .
He would also retain the current Marine Corps presence as a tripwire for US military intervention in the case of a flare-up across the Taiwan Strait , whereas Guam is beyond the effective range of Chinese ballistic missiles .
Hatoyama is certainly a clever political tactician , but that is not sufficient to make him a wise leader .
Above all , he must not play with fire : the US-Japan alliance is a public good that is indispensable for the peace and security of the Asia-Pacific region .
