The Seven-Year Ditch
PRINCETON – There are historical precedents for sovereign-debt defaults by the countries of Europe ’ s southern periphery , but they are not instantly attractive ones .
Dealing with seemingly intractable problems often takes time .
And it is difficult – especially in a democracy – to be patient .
The most obvious parallel to Europe ’ s current woes is the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980 ’ s .
In August 1982 , Mexico threatened to default , and was quickly followed by other large borrowers , notably Argentina and Brazil .
A default contagion would have brought down the banking systems of all the major industrial countries , and caused the world to relive something like the financial crisis of the Great Depression .
What followed was a seven-year play for extra time .
The initial approach was to link policy improvements in the borrowing countries not only with help from international institutions , but also with additional lending from the banks – which seemed to defy the most elementary canons of sensible bank behavior .
Three years after the outbreak of the Latin American crisis , United States Treasury Secretary James Baker announced a systematization of the initial response .
It was not very imaginative : Banks and multilateral development institutions should all lend more , and the debtors should continue their efforts to improve their macroeconomic policies .
The Baker Plan was a universal disappointment .
Growth faltered again , and the International Monetary Fund actually reduced its lending .
More than three years passed before new US Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady set out a more satisfactory program , in which banks would be given a menu of options that included lower interest rates on the debt and a hefty discount on the principal .
If creditor banks were unwilling to accept some form of restructuring , they would have to put in new money .
The lending of the international institutions might also be used for buying back discounted debt .
Brady ’ s plan looked like a great success .
Confidence returned , capital flight from Latin America was reversed , and capital markets became willing to provide financing again .
Inevitably , the Brady Plan looks like a good model for southern Europe .
Why not avoid seven years of misery , and begin some similar rescue operation now that could lead to a return to economic vigor and dynamism ?
The most obvious answer is that at an earlier stage in the Latin American saga , the banks simply could not have afforded to take such losses on their capital .
They needed to fake it for seven years in order to build up adequate reserves against losses .
The initiative for the Brady Plan did not come from the official sector at all .
It was the willingness of some large financial institutions to trade in discounted debt that established a market that could clear out the legacy of past mistakes .
Two institutions , in particular , took the lead : Citicorp in the US and Deutsche Bank in Europe .
Their CEOs at the time presented their actions as being motivated by far-sighted benevolence and a concern for the well-being of the world as a whole .
That may have been plausible , but the two banks also wanted to demonstrate publicly that they had better balance sheets than their weaker rivals .
In Germany , the Dresdner Bank and the Landesbanken could not afford to take such a hit .
Moreover , despite the obvious “ reform fatigue ” of Latin American electorates , the debtor countries had engaged in a substantial measure of reform .
Before the Brady Plan was announced , Mexico had accepted a wide-ranging Pact of Economic Solidarity and Growth , which immediately improve investor confidence and reduced sky-high domestic interest rates .
The final move to solve the debt problem came in the aftermath of international currency adjustment .
One of the problems that had made the crisis more difficult after 1982 was the US dollar ’ s appreciation .
Likewise , today ’ s euro crisis is harder to resolve because of the euro ’ s strength in currency markets .
The dollar ’ s slide after 1985 made the real burden of Latin America ’ s dollar debt much lighter .
Calling for a European Brady plan today does not guarantee the necessary conditions for such a plan to succeed .
On all fronts , there has not been much progress .
There is certainly plenty of frustration about the implementation of austerity , and no real indication of the long-term sustainability of reform efforts in southern Europe .
The problems of Europe ’ s banks are also far from being resolved .
A truly competitive European banking system would provide incentives for the larger and stronger banks to take more risks in the hope of growing even larger and stronger .
But , in the aftermath of the financial crisis , policymakers are too pre-occupied by the real problems posed by too-big-to-fail banks , and too terrified by the potential collapse of weaker banks , to allow such a solution .
Recapitalization has not yet reached the point where there are enough strong banks .
Finally , global uncertainty about currencies stands in the way of a solution .
The euro ’ s strength , despite the magnitude of the eurozone ’ s difficulties , makes an export-led recovery strategy harder to realize .
The common currency ’ s strength reflects problems elsewhere in the world , but a euro exchange rate that would enable the return of confidence and growth is no less elusive for that .
Without the preconditions that made the Brady Plan work , simply transplanting a debt write-off would only augment uncertainty and fuel the political revulsion that already threatens to undermine European integration .
And it may be that Europe – because of its relative prosperity – is less in a mood for the biblical seven lean years than was a much poorer Latin America in the 1980 ’ s .
