The US Still Runs the World
WASHINGTON , DC – Reports of the death of American power have often been greatly exaggerated .
In the 1950s the Soviet Union was thought to have surpassed the United States ; today , the Soviet Union no longer exists .
In the 1980s , Japan was widely regarded as on the verge of overtaking the US ; today , after more than two decades of Japanese stagnation , no one would take this scenario seriously .
And in the 1990s , monetary union was considered likely to propel Europe to greater global prominence ; today , the European economy is frequently in the world ’ s headlines , but not in a good way .
Now it is China ’ s turn .
Until recently , China , in many people ’ s view , was poised to assume global leadership , if it hadn ’ t done so already .
Today , doubts about the Chinese economy ’ s long-term prospects are rattling stock markets worldwide ( including in the US ) .
China matters , and its economic policy , including how the exchange rate is managed , must be taken seriously .
But China does not run the world , and it is unlikely to do so anytime soon .
The potential for global leadership still rests , believe it or not , with the US .
The best case for taking China seriously as a world power is made in Arvind Subramanian ’ s best-selling book Eclipse : Living in the Shadow of China ’ s Economic Dominance , published in 2011 .
( The author , now Chief Economic Adviser at India ’ s finance ministry , and I were colleagues and sometimes co-authors at the International Monetary Fund and the Peterson Institute for International Economics . )
One hopes that the Indian government will heed Subramanian ’ s account of how China grew through exports of manufactured goods and associated productivity improvements .
China also became integrated into global supply chains – producing things for companies elsewhere – on a previously unimaginable scale , and Chinese managers learned how to make better products .
But other parts of China ’ s experience have served it less well over time .
China ran a very large current-account surplus during the early 2000s and accumulated a vast stock of foreign reserves – including at least several trillion dollars ’ worth of US Treasury debt .
Although this looks impressive on paper , reserves of this magnitude are essentially useless .
If China were to sell its US assets , the dollar would weaken , and US companies would find it easier to export and to compete against imports .
But Americans ’ anxiety about being overtaken is not new .
There was great angst in the late 1980s when a Japanese company bought New York City ’ s Rockefeller Center .
In retrospect , that was one of the great non-events of the twentieth century .
Similarly , Americans will most likely look back on China ’ s accumulation of US government debt and simply shrug .
The bigger issue is China ’ s exchange-rate policy .
For a long time , China prevented the renminbi from becoming overvalued – and this was good policy , as Subramanian ’ s research confirms .
But in the early 2000s , China went too far .
For reasons that are still debated , the renminbi became massively undervalued ; exports were much higher than imports , and the current-account surplus reached more than 10 % of GDP .
Instead of letting the renminbi appreciate and gradually reducing their reliance on export markets , the Chinese authorities preferred to accumulate foreign reserves ( US Treasury debt ) .
Now China has to figure out a way to sustain growth when demand in the rest of the world is sluggish .
A return to a substantially undervalued exchange rate would almost certainly provoke an international response , including from the US Congress .
But switching suddenly to domestic-led growth is not easy .
China will not collapse ( it is not the Soviet Union ) , and Japanese-style stagnation is also unlikely .
But China is aging fast – and could become old before it becomes rich .
Every decade , important people predict the end of American power .
And there are reasons to be concerned – particularly when some US politicians refuse to acknowledge the nature of America ’ s global role .
For example , the US built the world ’ s trading and monetary system 70 years ago , but now Republicans in Congress refuse to support change at the IMF – including sensible reforms that almost all other countries favor .
Still , it is the US that is currently leading the push for freer trade across the Pacific and a substantial reduction in barriers to trade with Europe .
If America gets the rules right – favoring ordinary citizens , rather than footloose corporations – its trade initiatives will make a major contribution to global growth and its own prosperity .
Likewise , in terms of monetary policy , the major issue for the world over the next year is when and how much the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates .
As US monetary officials gather for their annual Jackson Hole conclave , they will consider myriad relevant dimensions of the global economy .
But the policy-setting Federal Open Market Committee will move interest rates based almost entirely on its collective read of US economic circumstances .
Once again , the rest of the world will react to what the US does .
