Trading up Global Trade Talks
In the year since the breakdown of the trade talks in Cancun , sentiment has increasingly grown in the developing world that no agreement is better than a bad agreement .
But what would a good agreement look like ?
The British Commonwealth recently posed this question to me and the Initiative for Policy Dialogue , an international network of economists committed to helping developing countries .
Our first message was that the current round of trade negotiations , especially as it has evolved , does not deserve even to be called a Development Round .
Well before the riots that marked the World Trade Organization talks in Seattle in 1999 , I called for a true " development round " of trade talks to redress the inequities of previous rounds .
The advanced countries , with their dominant corporate and financial interests , had set the agenda for those negotiations .
Whether or not developing countries benefited was of little concern .
Indeed , in the last round of trade negotiations , the Uruguay Round , the world 's poorest region , sub-Saharan Africa , was actually made worse off .
Our second message was optimistic : if the agenda of the current round is reoriented towards development , and if assistance is provided to manage implementation and adjustment costs , developing countries can gain much .
We analyzed which reforms in the international trade regime would most benefit those in the developing world , and we presented an alternative agenda based on our findings .
The results were perhaps obvious : more people live from agriculture in the developing world than from manufacturing , so agricultural liberalization must be high on the agenda .
But genuinely beneficial agricultural reform would need to go further than merely transforming export subsidies into other types of subsidies , because many supposedly non-distorting subsidies lead to more output , which hurts producers in developing countries by lowering prices .
Trade reforms must be sensitive to the effects on developing countries , many of which are net importers of subsidized agricultural commodities .
But some subsidies , like cotton subsidies in the United States , are rightly emblematic of America 's bad faith .
Eliminating this subsidy would help 10 million poor cotton farmers in sub-Saharan Africa .
American taxpayers would also benefit .
The only losers would be the 25,000 rich farmers who currently divvy up $ 3-4 billion in government handouts each year .
Developing countries also need access for the unskilled labor-intensive services in which they have a comparative advantage .
These were off the agenda in earlier trade rounds , as the US pushed for liberalization of financial services - thus serving its own comparative advantage .
Today , unskilled services remain largely off the agenda .
Developing countries ' alleged gains from capital market liberalization have been widely discussed ( although recent studies raise some doubts about these benefits ) .
Nevertheless , the global gains from allowing freer flows of unskilled labor ( even temporarily ) , let alone the benefits to developing countries , far outweigh the benefits from capital market liberalization .
But this issue too is not on the agenda .
The trade talks in Cancun raised new subjects - the so-called Singapore issues .
But even a cursory look at these items reveals that they primarily reflect the interests of developed countries .
Indeed , poor countries ' development would arguably have been set back if they had acquiesced in some of the demands .
Consider the issue of government procurement .
The single largest area of US government procurement is defense , a sector in which even the European Union has found it difficult to make inroads .
Are developing countries really targeting this area in the next few years ?
Clearly , this issue is not high on their agenda .
Competition is another example .
Without competition , lowering tariffs may merely be reflected in higher profit margins for a monopoly importer .
The most important competition issue for developing countries , however , is reform of dumping duties .
The US and EU keep out products from developing countries , alleging that they charge less than the cost of production .
But why would anyone knowingly sell at a loss ?
This could only be rational if the seller can hope to establish a monopoly position and extract large profits in the future .
But few developing countries are in a position to establish such monopoly positions , so the dumping charges are mostly bogus .
As tariff barriers have come down , the unfair " fair trade " laws are increasingly being used as America 's favored protectionist tool .
Treating foreign and domestic firms the same with respect to competitive practices would stop these abuses .
This , too , should be a high priority of a true development round .
The breakdown of the Cancun talks may yet provide an opportunity for deeper reflection .
Now that rich countries no longer need to worry about losing the developing world to Communism , they have an opportunity to redefine the global economic order according to the same principles on which they built successful national economies : fair competition and social justice .
Unfortunately , this opportunity was squandered in the Uruguay Round , as developed countries advanced their own interests at the expense of less developed countries .
The round of trade negotiations begun in Doha in November 2001 was launched in a different spirit .
It aspired to promote trade as a vehicle of partnership between developed and developing countries .
Regrettably , in spite of its name , the Development Round has offered far less to developing countries than one would have hoped .
