Through the Lookism Glass
NEW YORK – Do women suffer from a double standard in the workplace in relation to how they look ?
Have we gotten past the subtle ( and sometimes not-so-subtle ) shade of sexism in hiring and promotion – disproportionately affecting women – that I identified in 1991 as “ the professional beauty quotient ” ?
It is hard to believe that we are still talking about this 20 years later – but we must .
When anti-feminists make the case that there is now a “ level playing field ” for women , and that any gender gap in achievement and pay reflects women ’ s own choices , they should consider what used to be called “ lookism . ”
In a recent commentary , the sociologist Michael Kimmel described an Iowa case in which a 33-year-old dental technician , Melissa Nelson , was fired by her male boss , not for issues related to her job performance , but because he found her too sexually attractive to work beside without fear of jeopardizing his marital vows .
When Nelson sued , the court issued a heinous ruling – upheld by the Iowa Supreme Court – affirming his right to dismiss her for this reason .
One could argue that men , too , are promoted or penalized on the basis of their appearance ; indeed , economists have found that those with an “ above-average ” appearance earn 5 % more than their “ less attractive ” counterparts , and that workers with a “ below-average ” appearance earn 7-9 % less than their “ average ” counterparts .
To be fair , there is now a professional premium on male looks as well .
We all know that there is a reason that politicians spend $ 400 on haircuts and CEOs boast about working out at dawn with personal trainers .
Looking healthy , fit , youthful , and professional are now signs that male elites use to signal their status to one another in an advanced consumer and corporate economy .
But , as the Nelson case shows , women are not just subjected to the straightforward – equally onerous – lookism that men , too , might face on the job .
Young women , especially , suffer from discrimination in the workplace when they are seen as “ too ” aesthetically appealing .
Many workplaces channel conventionally attractive young women into out-front support , or subordinate , jobs , in which their appearance – as they bring coffee to high-status men in meetings – can add value to the corporate “ brand , ” though no value is being added to their own careers .
Young women are put into these visible , cheerleader roles even when their professional development might be better suited to their being unseen in a lab , or slogging away over copy late at night , or addressing a room from a position of authority .
Potentially worse is the beating their confidence takes as they spend their twenties worrying , as their male peers – however attractive – almost never do , that their ( generally minimal ) advancement reflects an evaluation of their looks , and is not tied to their accomplishments .
Even more insidious is the reflex even today in major Western media whereby attention is regularly directed to the appearance and sexuality of powerful women , especially those in politics .
The Huffington Post , an otherwise rational publication , ran a report about German Chancellor Angela Merkel under the headline “ Merkel ’ s cleavage takes center stage in German elections , ” while anti-Merkel bloggers have called attention to Merkel ’ s “ attractiveness gap . ”
Germany ’ s Die Partei , established by the editors of the satirical magazine Titanic , made light of the offensive trope , running a campaign under the slogan : “ A woman – yes !
But attractive . ”
The late Christopher Hitchens , by contrast , was not joking when he parsed Margaret Thatcher ’ s sex appeal .
This continual , rather fetishistic sexualizing of powerful women confirms the argument I made more than two decades ago in my book The Beauty Myth : Women ’ s appearance is used against them most rigorously – as a diversionary tactic – when real social , economic , or political power is at stake and almost within their grasp .
It is doubtless demoralizing and distracting to an influential woman to be continually treated like a bimbo , or else told by major news outlets how unattractive , old , fat , or badly dressed she is .
This gauntlet of scrutiny is why young women with great leadership qualities are often reluctant to enter the public eye : they see this abuse , whether “ positive ” or negative , as a no-win proposition , one that powerful men simply do not face .
Does the business press ever call JPMorgan CEO Jamie Dimon cute , or describe him as “ pouty , ” or remark on his good hair and nice abs , as though he were a male stripper ?
Do they ever ask Ben Bernanke , “ What ’ s with the facial hair ?
It ’ s not 1979 . ”
Do political reporters ever take Newt Gingrich to task for , say , being overweight , unfit , and a poor dresser ?
No media outlet would ever print such observations , which , when aimed at men , would appear insulting , inappropriately personal , and irrelevant .
So why is it still acceptable to run public commentary about the state of Merkel ’ s cleavage , or Hillary Clinton ’ s ankles ?
We should try to imagine a world in which the Jamie Dimons and Newt Gingriches struggle daily to stay focused on their high-pressure jobs , while torrents of comment and attention are devoted to how “ hot ” and well-dressed they are , or alternatively , how out of shape , middle-aged , and sexually unappealing they are .
Many countries have government agencies whose job is to ensure that women – and men – do not face workplace discrimination on the basis of their appearance .
Unfortunately , that task has not been completed .
But , because the media play a major role in perpetuating this double standard against women in the public eye , legislating or litigating against this kind of workplace harassment will not help .
Sexist commentators have to scrutinize themselves ; if they do so honestly , they will not like what they see in the mirror .
