Who Will Pay the Price of Enlargement ?
LONDON : The glow of optimism at the European Union 's Helsinki summit last month , when EU leaders decided to extend membership negotiations to all ten candidate countries from Central and Eastern Europe , plus Malta and Cyprus , is fading fast .
It has now become crystal clear that enlargement is going to be a very difficult process : difficult to negotiate , and just as difficult , perhaps , to sell to the voters .
The predicament can be expressed in stark terms : Who Will Pay the Price of Enlargement ?
Enlargement will not be cost-free : there will be losers , as well as winners .
But the common dilemma facing all sides in this negotiation , the ins as well as the outs , is to make sure that there are not too many losers in any one country .
Otherwise , enlargement simply will not get past the voters .
The most immediate manifestation of this predicament is the European Union 's Common Agricultural Policy .
This policy has long been a burden , both on EU consumers , because it has kept food prices high , and on EU taxpayers , because the subsidy to farmers ' incomes costs the Union some e ( Euro ) 41bn every year ( about $ 40bn ) , or around half of the total EU budget .
But it has been part of the core bargain which has kept the union together .
On purely economic grounds , subsidising EU farmers has no justification , and it is an increasing anomaly in a world of global markets and international competition .
At the start of the Common Market , it was the political price insisted on by France , a major agricultural country , as the condition for opening the French market to German industrial goods .
Today , that bargain has lost most of its original justification .
France is now an immensely rich and powerful industrial country ; and though it is still one of the world 's great food producers , its farm population has shrivelled from around 30 % of the total population after World War II to around 5 % today .
Most EU governments , including the French , now recognise that the CAP must be reformed , if only because of international pressure from other food-exporting countries .
And in recent years , the EU has at least started to reduce the market support prices of some foods , while compensating farmers by making direct income supplement payments instead .
The trouble is that the candidate countries now seeking membership are keen to get their share of the CAP gravy .
The six front-running countries ( Czech Republic , Estonia , Hungary , Poland , Slovenia and Cyprus ) recently submitted position papers to the EU demanding that their farm sectors should participate fully in the CAP from Day 1 , and that their farmers should get all the benefits , including income support payments .
It is not clear that this opening position is wise , in economic terms .
One social justification for the CAP is to prevent too large a gap between rural and industrial incomes in the existing EU .
But all incomes in the candidate countries are much lower than those in the EU , and if EU membership were to give a sudden upward shove to rural incomes in Central Europe , it could be quite destabilising for social relations there .
Moreover , it might also seriously distort economic development , by attracting excessive investment into agriculture .
Nor is it clear that this opening position is prudent in negotiating terms .
If all the benefits of the CAP were paid in full in all the six front runners , the cost to the EU budget could be an extra e6bn a year , and virtually all of that would have to be paid by existing member states , because they are so much richer .
But they have made no provision for this kind of spending , and are unlikely to agree to it .
One solution mooted by the Commission as a way of finessing the problem is to have a long transition period between membership of the EU , and full participation in the CAP .
But the position papers of the candidate countries explicitly rule out this delaying tactic .
The farm policy puzzle will be followed by a similar predicament over EU regional and social policies .
By definition these funds now go mainly to the poorer parts of the EU .
Candidate countries , however , are poorer still , so the full application of these regional policies would call for large extra budgetary transfers to Central and Eastern Europe .
At issue here is not mainly justice and morality .
Of course , justice and morality come into it , and these emotive banners will no doubt be waved by candidate countries during the negotiations .
But these are not likely to be the decisive considerations .
The first decisive consideration will be the operational feasibility of the negotiation process , which means striking a politically acceptable balance between winners and losers throughout the enlarged Union .
It is difficult to over-state what a difficult task that may turn out to be . Remember , it only needs the voters of one member state to say No , and the whole process fails .
The second consideration is the future architecture of the enlarged EU .
Postponing access to the CAP may seem a partial solution to this problem ; but it is also a partial step towards creating a two-tier Union .
Given the immense disparities in economic and other development , between the EU and the candidate countries , it may be debatable whether it will be possible to create a unitary or one-tier Union with 27-plus countries .
But if not , what will be the architecture of this enlarged EU ?
Unfortunately , this is a question which the member states have not thought about , and apparently do not wish to think about .
