The Two Faces of Berlusconi
Silvio Berlusconi has endured a bumpy first month of his six-month presidency of the EU .
Much of Europe is getting its first close look at Italy 's billionaire Prime Minister , and many do not like what they see .
But Europe should look beyond Berlusconi 's careless tongue when gauging the nature of his regime .
They may still not like what he stands for and how he governs , but they will see that he is not the unchallenged " strong man " that some Europeans imagine .
Berlusconi 's center-right coalition won election in 2001 by claiming to be the sole political force capable of launching--and completing--an ambitious reform program .
Sadly for Italy , Premier Berlusconi turned out to have two reform agendas .
One is focused on his own judicial and economic interests ( call this his " personal reform " program ) , much of which he has pursued and implemented ruthlessly .
The other , " general reform " agenda , has attracted scarcely any of his energy , and seems unlikely to do so .
Italy 's Parliament , where Berlusconi 's ruling coalition holds an overwhelming majority , has passed four laws designed to safeguard the Prime Minister against prosecution and conviction .
One legal " reform " almost abolishes the crime of false accounting ; another makes it difficult , if not impossible , to collect evidence of a crime from abroad .
A third new law allows trials to be transferred to courts in other jurisdictions if there is " legitimate suspicion " that the judges are " biased " --a claim Berlusconi repeatedly makes against the Milan magistrates ( he calls them " red magistrates " ) investigating him .
Finally , a law grants immunity from prosecution to the five highest state officials , including , obviously , the Prime Minister .
Berlusconi has been equally active in pushing reforms that serve his economic interests .
The Chamber of Deputies is poised to enact a law only the White Queen in Alice in Wonderland could love .
This law defines " conflicts of interest " in such a way that , although the Chief Executive Officer ( CEO ) of a media empire cannot be Prime Minister , the man who actually owns that empire can .
More worrying is a proposed law that strengthens the oligopolistic power of Berlusconi 's television and advertising corporations while weakening the public television service .
Where such personally beneficial laws are concerned , Premier Berlusconi is bull-headed , almost wrecking his coalition recently when one junior minister threatened to resign after the justice ministry sought to stop all investigations into Berlusconi 's affairs .
But such energy and commitment is utterly lacking where Berlusconi 's wider reform agenda is concerned .
For example , the government sought to amend Article 18 of the " Workers ' Statute , " which compels big firms to reinstate workers dismissed without " just cause . "
It sought this change because it believed firms would not hire people they could never fire .
Massive industrial action forced the government to back down .
Now it says that such a reform is neither urgent nor necessary .
Similarly , the government proclaims bold intentions to tackle reform of Italy 's deeply indebted pension system , but lacks the political leverage to realize change .
Indeed , a powerful component of the Berlusconi coalition , the Northern League , staunchly opposes a core component of the proposed reform--abolition of early retirement--because ending early retirement is contrary to workers ' interests in the North , where the party has its electoral base .
The government pledged to reduce the tax burden by about 10 % of GDP .
But reaching this figure will not be possible--even if scaled back--because the government seems unable to curb public spending and because the European Commission will not accept new budgetary subterfuges from Finance Minister Giulio Tremonti aimed at evading the constraints imposed by the Euro-zone 's Growth and Stability Pact .
On the contrary , state and local taxes actually increased over the past year .
From the Economic and Financial Policy Forecast Document ( 2003-2008 ) , now being scrutinized by Parliament , one deduces that taxes will fall by a mere 1 % of GDP in the period between 2001 ( when Berlusconi took office ) and 2008 .
Finally , the Northern League demands that fiscal federalism should be the main goal of reform .
Umberto Bossi , the League 's leader , made three promises before the last elections : to reduce the tax burden ; to halt clandestine immigration ; and to devolve powers from the central government in Rome to regional administrations .
Bossi now knows that the first two promises cannot be kept .
So he must deliver on the third , or the League will be gravely wounded .
But two other government parties , the National Alliance ( a nationalist party ) and the UDC ( a Catholic one ) have their electoral bases mainly in the South and oppose Bossi 's project because it conflicts with their interests .
The schisms within the ruling coalition could be overcome if Berlusconi had the strength to distribute the costs and benefits of reform among its member parties .
But Berlusconi 's leadership is based on his skill as a communicator ( which declines as expectations go unfulfilled ) more than on his skill as a mediator among squabbling allies .
Unless a robust international economic boom ( unlikely ) unexpectedly aids Berlusconi 's government , we will hear more talk about reform but see even less action .
So by the time Italy 's six-month presidency of the EU concludes , the rude reception Berlusconi received at the European Parliament may find an echo at home .
