The Transatlantic Muslim Divide
Compared with the tension that exists in Muslim communities across Europe , America ’ s Muslims are a more contented lot .
A recent Pew Forum study found Europe ’ s Muslims to be “ markedly less well off than the general population , frustrated with economic opportunities and socially isolated , ” while most American Muslims say that “ their communities are excellent or good places ” to live ; 71 % say they can succeed in the US if they work .
Both income and college graduation levels match the national norms .
63 % of American Muslims report no conflict between religious devotion and living in modern society .
Although 53 % of US Muslims think that life is more difficult since the terrorist attacks of 2001 , most think that this is the fault of the government , not their neighbors .
Indeed , 73 % said they had never experienced discrimination while living in America .
Moreover , 85 % said suicide bombing is rarely or never justified , and only 1 % said violence to defend Islam was “ often ” permissible .
In Europe , significantly higher percentages of Muslims believe that suicide bombings are “ often ” or “ sometimes ” justified .
“ What emerges , ” according to Amaney Jamal , an adviser to Pew , “ is the great success of the Muslim American population in its socioeconomic assimilation . ” Yet “ assimilation ” is not what succeeds .
America ’ s Muslims do not so much assimilate as participate in economic , political , educational , and social life .
This might reflect a self-selection process : only the most educated Muslims immigrate to America , as poor social services allow only the best-prepared to survive .
Yet even middle-class Muslims in Britain become alienated , and , unlike the Muslim poor in Europe , poor Muslims in America don ’ t express alienation or sympathy with al-Qaeda .
It can be argued that only those poor eager for the harsh but open possibilities of American life immigrate to the US .
Yet this doesn ’ t explain why these poorer immigrants remain religious ; wanting to succeed US-style , they should want to be quick to “ assimilate . ”
Why do US Muslims do well while remaining devout and distinctive-looking ?
Why can they participate without assimilating ?
Two factors seem significant : first , relatively porous economic , political and educational arenas that allow immigrants entry to these key areas of American life .
Despite the discrimination and poverty that immigrants often suffer initially , barriers to economic and political participation are relatively low .
The second factor is America ’ s pluralistic public sphere , an arena not without religion but with many religions , which are visible and active in civil life as the basis for institutions , publications , and symbols that influence values and conduct .
The US is not a secular society ; it is a religiously pluralistic one with secular legal and political structures .
Indeed , America ’ s secular institutions were designed to support pluralism .
They allow people of many creeds to work in them — a workplace of multiple faiths .
The prohibition against a state religion together with freedom of conscience preserves the plurality of religion in civil life .
This design was crafted not only from enlightened principle but from necessity : America needed to persuade people to cross the ocean and endure the hardships of the frontier and , later , industrialization .
Freedom to practice one ’ s religion was an advertisement for America .
The benefit of that accidental generosity was the American deal : immigrants have to participate in the economic and political fracas of the nation , but without much of a social service safety “ net . ”
On the other hand , they can get in .
And they can keep not only their private faith but practice it publicly .
Tolerance for other people ’ s religion is the price paid for tolerance of one ’ s own .
Prejudice has tended to fall as participation increases . It has been in no one ’ s interest to disturb this live-and let-live pragmatism for very long .
One result of the deal is the paradoxical-sounding “ familiarity with difference . ” Because immigrants participate in America ’ s economic and political arenas , Americans are used to different sorts of people and so distinguish those differences that might damage the country from those that will not .
Americans , indeed , are familiar with difference , or at least they tend not to panic .
Even after 2001 , there were only a few anti-Muslim incidents .
Europe , however , demands greater assimilation and offers a less porous economy and politics .
This means less participation and thus less familiarity with difference on the host country ’ s side .
On the immigrants ’ side , there is more resentment against the host , more lassitude about the economy and politics , possible violence or an insistence on maintaining symbolic differences — ironically , in a society less able to accept them precisely because of its discomfort with difference .
This is Europe ’ s headscarf debate in a nutshell .
It speaks to none of the barriers to participation or to immigrant responses to them , but demands symbolic assimilation .
But such demands are a dead end .
To get out of it , greater entry into the economy and politics is needed , but also less demand for quick-fix assimilation .
All the religions that descend from Abraham have internal mechanisms for change that allow them to reckon with new circumstances in ways that the confessional community can respect .
Both fundamentalism and the demands of assimilation — be like us , now ! — pre-empt these mechanisms .
They should be allowed to work .
But Europe demands assimilation before participation in an economy that immigrants can ’ t get into anyway .
This , sadly , is a road to the ghetto .
