The Old New Financial Risk
WASHINGTON , DC – The main financial risk facing the United States today looks very similar to what caused so much trouble in 2007-2008 : big banks with too much debt and too little equity capital on their balance sheets .
Uneven global regulations , not to mention regulators who fall asleep at the wheel , compound this structural vulnerability .
We already saw this movie , and it ended badly .
Next time could be an even worse horror show .
All booms are different , but every major financial crisis has at its heart the same issue : major banks get into trouble and teeter on the brink of collapse .
Disruption at the core of any banking system leads to tight credit , with major negative effects on the real economy .
In our modern world , in which finance is interwoven throughout the economy , the consequences can be particularly severe – as we saw in 2008 and 2009 .
The most important question to ask of any financial system is how much loss-absorbing equity major banks have on their balance sheets .
When a company suffers losses , its shareholder equity falls in value , and less equity means that the company is more likely to default on its debts .
The capital ratios most frequently highlighted by banks and officials are misleading , because they include items – such as goodwill and deferred tax assets – that are incapable of absorbing losses .
We need to look instead at tangible equity relative to tangible assets .
And we should also be very careful about the accounting used for derivatives .
On this technical but crucial point , US generally accepted accounting principles ( GAAP ) are considerably more generous ( because they understate potential losses ) than International Financial Reporting Standards ( IFRS ) .
Thomas Hoenig , vice chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation , publishes his own calculation of capital levels at the world ’ s largest banks , and these data are now available through the end of 2014 .
The most leveraged big US bank , Morgan Stanley , has less than 4 % equity , meaning that 96 % of its balance sheet is some form of debt .
The average for big US banks is just under 5 % equity .
This is more – but not much more – capital than some troubled banks had in the run-up to the financial crisis in 2008 .
Citigroup , for example , had no more than 4.3 % equity , according to Hoenig ’ s calculation , in November 2008 .
At the end of 2012 , when Hoenig started to publish his US GAAP-IFRS adjustment , the average for the largest US banks was roughly 4 % equity . It is possible to argue that this key measure is moving in the right direction , but the pace of improvement is glacial at best .
More important , 5 % equity is unlikely to be enough to absorb the kinds of losses that a highly volatile world will throw up .
Some major shocks could come from unexpected quarters .
For example , assets may prove less liquid than investors suppose , as happened with money market funds in 2008 ; today , skeptics worry about exchange-traded funds ( ETFs ) .
Or overly complex securities could become hard to price .
It is a red flag when people selling collateralized loan obligations today cannot fully explain the risks involved .
Or perhaps the shock will affect sovereign-debt values in faraway places , as happened in 1982 .
It is striking that no experts – public or private – really have a firm grip on what could happen if there is another round of difficulties with Greek government debt .
But the most dangerous shocks may be those that originate with the big banks themselves .
The latest significant development to surface is what Better Markets , a pro-reform group that has put out a helpful fact sheet , calls “ de facto guaranteed foreign subsidiaries ” that trade derivatives – a murky phenomenon that likely involves all the big players .
The trick here is that a de jure guaranteed foreign subsidiary of a US bank would have to comply with many US rules , including those governing conduct , transparency , and clearing ( how the derivatives are actually traded ) .
A foreign subsidiary that is supposedly independent is exempt from those rules .
But , as Dennis Kelleher of Better Markets points out , when pressure mounts and a crisis seems around the corner , banks will face great pressure to bring such subsidiaries back onto their balance sheet .
This is exactly what happened in the last crisis , with Citigroup being a leading example .
The main reason why such loopholes are left open is that regulators choose not to close them .
Sometimes this may be due to lack of information or awareness .
But , in many cases , the regulators actually believe that there is nothing wrong with the behavior in question – either because they have been persuaded by lobbyists or because they themselves used to work in the industry ( or could go work there soon . )
Sound familiar ?
