Japan ’ s Russian Dilemma
TOKYO – For Japanese leaders and citizens , President Vladimir Putin ’ s brutal annexation of Crimea was an unsurprising return to the normal paradigm of Russian history .
Indeed , most Japanese regard the move as having been determined by some expansionist gene in Russia ’ s political DNA , rather than by Putin himself or the specifics of the Ukraine crisis .
Japan is particularly concerned with Russian expansionism , because it is the only G-7 country that currently has a territorial dispute with Russia , which has occupied its Northern Territories since the waning days of World War II .
That occupation began between August 28 and September 5 , 1945 , when the Soviet Union hurriedly nullified the existing Soviet-Japanese Neutrality Treaty and invaded not only Japanese-occupied Manchuria , but also southern Sakhalin Island and the ancient Japanese territories of Etorofu Island , Kunashiri Island , Shikotan Island , and the Habomai Islands .
Concerned that America ’ s development and use of atomic weapons against Japan would deprive the Soviet Union of any territorial gains in the east , Stalin ordered the Red Army to invade .
But Japan , having already endured the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , had accepted the Potsdam Declaration on August 14 , meaning that the war was already over when the Red Army marched in .
Since then , these islands have been controlled by either the Soviet Union or its successor state , Russia .
And , as elsewhere in Russia , their residents have been impoverished by consistently incompetent and corrupt government , whether run by Communists or today ’ s crony capitalists .
In a strange historical twist , given the Crimean annexation , after the Japanese citizens native to the Northern Territories were killed or expelled , many Ukrainians were brought to the islands during the Soviet years , and still live there .
If an independence referendum were to be held on Etorofu Island , where some 60 % of the inhabitants have roots in Ukraine , I wonder whether Putin would accept the result as readily as he did the ballot in Crimea , undertaken at the barrel of a gun ?
After coming to power at the end of 2012 , Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe had sought to improve relations with Putin in the hope of beginning serious talks on the Northern Territories .
But now that Putin has made his project of imperial restoration crystal clear , those hopes are stillborn .
Recognizing this , Abe condemned the annexation of Crimea , calling it “ a violation of Ukraine ’ s integrity and the integrity of its sovereignty and territory . ”
Abe added that “ attempts to change the status quo by force cannot be overlooked , ” and that Japan would consider further economic sanctions against Russia in cooperation with the G-7 .
Needless to say , these remarks underscored the fact that Japanese territory and territorial waters are being threatened “ by force ” in the East China Sea by China .
The lesson now being drawn is that , where territorial disputes are concerned , Japan must not kowtow to “ attempts to change the status quo backed by force . ”
China ’ s response to the crisis in Ukraine was particularly revealing .
For three decades , China has proclaimed “ non-interference ” in the internal affairs of sovereign states as the most important rule governing international relations .
But when Putin invaded Ukraine , China showed the hollowness of its adherence to this principle .
Instead of condemning Russia for invading and annexing Crimea , it abstained at the United Nations Security Council , and has offered more criticism of Ukraine ’ s new popular government than it has of Putin ’ s thuggish behavior .
Every country in Asia is bound to draw only one conclusion from China ’ s tacit approval of Putin ’ s Crimean land grab : China , too , thinks that might makes right , and if it believes that it can get away with invading disputed territories , whether in the South China Sea or in the Indian Himalayas , it will do so .
As a result , effective deterrence will require Asian countries to strengthen their defenses and unite to demand adherence to international law , so that China understands that any Putin-style land grabs will cost its economy dearly .
In the immediate future , Japan will work with the G-7 to ensure that Putin ’ s reckless ambitions do not endanger other parts of Ukraine .
Already , Japan has decided to provide ¥ 150 billion ( $ 1.5 billion ) in economic aid for Ukraine , the largest pledge by any individual country , including the US , thus far .
Before the Crimea invasion , territorial negotiations between Japan and Russia showed signs of progress .
Moreover , several bilateral economic cooperation efforts , such as projects involving liquefied natural gas , were moving forward .
But it is now clear not only that Putin is returning Russia to the stagnation of the late-Soviet era , but also that he subscribes to former Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev ’ s dictum that “ what we have , we hold . ”
So Putin ’ s talk about reaching an agreement with Japan on the Northern Territories was likely as mendacious as his claims that Russians in Crimea were in peril , and thus in need of protection by Russian troops .
More important , Japan understands that business as usual with an aggressive Russia that undermines the international order could embolden others closer to home to embrace Putin ’ s lawless tactics .
The days of an inward looking Japan are over .
Japan now sees threats elsewhere in the world in the context of its own security , and will react appropriately .
