Did the Bankers Do It ?
NEW DELHI – Few areas of economic activity in the United States are more politicized than housing finance .
Yet the intellectual left has gone to great lengths to absolve regulators , government lending mandates , and agencies like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac of any responsibility for the housing boom and the subsequent bust .
The rationale is clear : if these officials , institutions , and policies were held accountable , the reform agenda would necessarily shift from regulating greedy bankers and their bonuses to asking broader questions .
Might government mandates contribute to bad behavior by private players ?
Can regulators be trusted to make appropriate trade-offs between financial stability and mandates that have wide political support ?
Indeed , can central bankers be truly independent ?
Unquestioning acceptance of a greater government role in taming markets would , in short , give way to asking whether that role can sometimes be part of the problem .
The left has had an easy task in dominating the debate , partly because the intellectual right ’ s attempt to place all the blame for the crisis on government is thoroughly implausible .
It is far more defensible and correct to argue that everyone – bankers , households , regulators , and politicians – contributed to ( and took credit for ) the boom while it lasted , only to point fingers at one another when it collapsed .
But bankers ’ political tin ear in the aftermath of the crisis – first taking public bailouts and then paying themselves huge bonuses as if nothing had changed – ensured that they got the lion ’ s share of the blame , with everyone else willing to pose as their unwitting victims .
As a result , the public-policy response has been dominated by “ the bankers did it ” narrative .
The risk is that this approach is incomplete – and thus unlikely to be effective .
It is therefore refreshing to see a careful econometric study take on an assertion by Paul Krugman , perhaps the most influential left-leaning US economist , that “ the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 was irrelevant to the subprime boom . ”
The CRA instructs federal financial supervisory agencies to encourage the institutions that they regulate to help the communities in which they are chartered to meet their credit needs , while also conforming to “ safe and sound ” standards .
In practice , regulators measure the volume of lending to CRA target tracts – poor areas with median income less than 80 % of the median income of the local community – as well as to low-income and minority borrowers in non-CRA tracts to verify compliance with the Act .
The left has dismissed any claim that the CRA played a role in the housing boom by pointing out that it was enacted in 1977 , while the subprime boom played out in the early 2000 ’ s .
But this ignores the possibility that regulators may have started to enforce the CRA rigorously only later .
To enforce the statute , regulators periodically examine banks for CRA compliance .
To hone in on the “ regulatory enforcement ” effect , the recent study compares the behavior of banks that are undergoing examination ( which takes place over several quarters ) to that of banks that are not undergoing examination in a particular tract in a particular month .
The findings are clear .
Compared to banks that are not undergoing examination , the volume of loans by banks in the six quarters surrounding a CRA examination is 5 % higher , and these loans are 15 % more likely to be delinquent one year after origination .
In other words , banks undergoing examination lend more and make riskier loans – and these findings are even more pronounced in CRA-eligible tracts .
Good econometric studies examine secondary effects to persuade readers that the main effect is what it is .
Regulators ’ primary tool to enforce compliance was their authority to reject non-CRA-compliant banks ’ requests for new branches or mergers .
During the subprime boom , large banks were more likely to want to expand , and thus had greater incentive to comply .
The study finds that CRA lending by larger banks does indeed respond more to a CRA examination .
At the height of the lending frenzy ( 2004-2006 ) , the study finds that banks loaned even more in response to an examination , and that the outcomes were even worse .
The authors speculate that easier loan securitization may have made risky CRA-compliant loans seem less costly .
Finally , like all good studies , this one explains why the authors more careful analysis produces results that differ from those in previous studies .
Because of the way it is structured , the study only suggests a lower bound on the effects of CRA compliance .
It focuses on the differential impact of the CRA on banks undergoing examination and those not undergoing examination .
In fact , all banks are likely to have upped their CRA-compliant lending .
The study cannot measure this increase .
There is room in economics for grand speculation – some part intuition , some part common sense , and some part ideology .
If economists were to wait for careful studies before offering opinions about policy , we would never have anything timely to say .
And it is certainly better to have some economic intuition guiding policy than none at all .
But there is a danger that the public mistakes speculation for truth , only because of the speculator ’ s credentials and assertiveness .
Studies like this one are useful in setting the record straight .
More broadly , the study suggests that we should move beyond blaming the bankers .
We must recognize that in the desire to broaden home ownership , essential checks and balances broke down .
Households , politicians , and regulators were also complicit .
As we go about the process of reform , we should bear in mind that the only thing worse than fighting the last war is fighting the wrong last war .
