What ’ s Wrong with Transformational Leadership ?
CAMBRIDGE – This year ’ s presidential campaign in the United States has been marked by calls from Barack Obama ’ s would-be Republican challengers for a radical transformation of American foreign policy .
Campaigns are always more extreme than the eventual reality , but countries should be wary of calls for transformational change .
Things do not always work out as intended .
Foreign policy played almost no role in the 2000 US presidential election .
In 2001 , George W. Bush started his first term with little interest in foreign policy , but adopted transformational objectives after the September 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks .
Like Woodrow Wilson , Franklin Roosevelt , and Harry Truman before him , Bush turned to the rhetoric of democracy to rally his followers in a time of crisis .
Bill Clinton had also talked about enlarging the role of human rights and democracy in US foreign policy , but most Americans in the 1990 ’ s sought normality and a post-Cold War peace dividend rather than change .
By contrast , Bush ’ s 2002 National Security Strategy , which came to be called the Bush Doctrine , proclaimed that the US would “ identify and eliminate terrorists wherever they are , together with the regimes that sustain them . ”
The solution to the terrorist problem was to spread democracy everywhere .
Bush invaded Iraq ostensibly to remove Saddam Hussein ’ s capacity to use weapons of mass destruction and , in the process , to change the regime .
Bush cannot be blamed for the intelligence failures that attributed such weapons to Saddam , given that many other countries shared such estimates .
But inadequate understanding of the Iraqi and regional context , together with poor planning and management , undercut Bush ’ s transformational objectives .
Although some of Bush ’ s defenders try to credit him with the “ Arab Spring ” revolutions , the primary Arab participants reject such arguments .
Bush was described by The Economist as “ obsessed by the idea of being a transformational president ; not just a status-quo operator like Bill Clinton . ”
Then-Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice praised the virtues of “ transformational diplomacy . ”
But , while leadership theorists and editorial writers tend to think that transformational foreign-policy officials are better in either ethics or effectiveness , the evidence does not support this view .
Other leadership skills are more important than the usual distinction between transformational and “ transactional ” leaders .
Consider President George H.W. Bush , who did not do “ the vision thing , ” but whose sound management and execution underpinned one of the most successful US foreign-policy agendas of the past half-century .
Perhaps genetic engineers will one day be able to produce leaders equally endowed with both vision and management skills ; comparing the two Bushes ( who shared half their genes ) , it is clear that nature has not yet solved the problem .
This is not an argument against transformational leaders .
Mohandas Gandhi , Nelson Mandela , and Martin Luther King , Jr . , played crucial roles in transforming people ’ s identity and aspirations .
Nor is this an argument against transformational leaders in US foreign policy .
Franklin Roosevelt and Truman made crucial contributions .
But , in judging leaders , we need to pay attention to acts of both omission and commission , to what happened and to what was avoided , to the dogs that barked and to those that did not .
A big problem in foreign policy is the complexity of the context .
We live in a world of diverse cultures , and we know very little about social engineering and how to “ build nations . ”
When we cannot be sure how to improve the world , prudence becomes an important virtue , and grandiose visions can pose grave dangers .
In foreign policy , as in medicine , it is important to remember the Hippocratic Oath : first , do no harm .
For these reasons , the virtues of transactional leaders with good contextual intelligence are very important .
Someone like George H. W. Bush , unable to articulate a vision but able to steer successfully through crises , turns out to be a better leader than someone like his son , possessed of a powerful vision but with little contextual intelligence or management skill .
Former Secretary of State George Shultz , who served under Ronald Reagan , once compared his role to gardening – “ the constant nurturing of a complex array of actors , interests , and goals . ”
But Shultz ’ s Stanford colleague , Condoleezza Rice , wanted a more transformational diplomacy that did not accept the world as it was , but tried to change it .
As one observer put it , “ Rice ’ s ambition is not just to be a gardener – she wants to be a landscape architect . ” There is a role for both , depending on the context , but we should avoid the common mistake of automatically thinking that the transformational landscape architect is a better leader than the careful gardener .
We should keep this in mind as we assess the current US presidential debates , with their constant reference to American decline .
Decline is a misleading metaphor .
America is not in absolute decline , and , in relative terms , there is a reasonable probability that it will remain more powerful than any other country in the coming decades .
We do not live in a “ post-American world , ” but we also do not live in the American era of the late twentieth century .
The US will be faced with a rise in the power resources of many others – both states and non-state actors .
It will also confront a growing number of issues that require power with others as much as power over others in order to obtain the country ’ s preferred outcomes .
America ’ s capacity to maintain alliances and create cooperative networks will be an important dimension of its hard and soft power .
The problem of America ’ s role in the twenty-first century is not one of ( poorly specified ) “ decline , ” but rather of developing the contextual intelligence to understand that even the largest country cannot achieve what it wants without others ’ help .
Educating the public to understand this complex globalized information age , and what is required to operate successfully in it , will be the real transformational leadership task .
Thus far , we are not hearing much about it from the Republican candidates .
