No Pain , No Gain for Britain ?
LONDON – The economic historian Niall Ferguson reminds me of the late Oxford historian A.J.P. Taylor .
Though Taylor maintained that he tried to tell the truth in his historical writing , he was quite ready to spin the facts for a good cause .
Ferguson , too , is a wonderful historian – but equally ready to spin when he shifts into political gear .
Ferguson ’ s cause is American neo-conservatism , coupled with a relentless aversion to Keynes and Keynesians .
His latest defense of fiscal austerity came immediately after the United Kingdom ’ s recent election , when he wrote in the Financial Times that , “ Labour should blame Keynes for their defeat . ”
Ferguson ’ s argument amounts to that of a brutal disciplinarian who claims vindication for his methods by pointing out that the victim is still alive .
In pleading on behalf of British Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne , he points out that the UK economy grew by 2.6 % last year ( the “ best performing of the G-7 economies ” ) , but ignores the damage that Osborne inflicted on the economy en route to this recovery .
There is now much agreement about this damage .
The Office of Budget Responsibility , the independent agency set up by Osborne to assess the government ’ s macroeconomic performance , has just concluded that austerity reduced GDP growth by 2 % from 2010 to 2012 , bringing the cumulative cost of austerity since 2010 to 5 % of GDP .
Simon Wren-Lewis of Oxford University estimates that the damage might be as high as 15 % of GDP .
In a recent poll of British economists by the Centre for Macroeconomics , two-thirds agreed that austerity had harmed the UK economy .
Moreover , Britain is not alone .
In its October 2012 World Economic Outlook , the IMF admitted that , “ fiscal multipliers were underestimated across the world . ” In plain English : the forecasters underestimated the extent of spare capacity and hence the scope for fiscal expansion to raise output .
Was it an honest mistake ?
Or was it because the forecasters were in thrall to economic models that implied that economies were at full employment , in which case the only result of fiscal expansion would be inflation ?
They now know better , and Ferguson should now know better as well .
A depressing aspect of Ferguson ’ s interpretation is his failure to acknowledge the impact of the Great Recession on government performance and business expectations .
Thus , he compares 2.6 % growth in 2014 with the 4.3 % contraction in 2009 , which he describes as “ the last full year of Labour government ” – as though Labour policy produced the collapse in growth .
Similarly , “ At no point after May 2010 did [ confidence ] sink back to where it had been throughout the last two years of Gordon Brown ’ s catastrophic premiership ” – as though the Brown government ’ s performance caused business confidence to collapse .
The claim that “ Keynes is to blame ” for Labour ’ s election defeat is peculiarly odd .
After all , the one thing Labour ’ s leadership tried hardest to do in the campaign was to distance the party from any “ taint ” of Keynesianism .
Perhaps Ferguson meant that it was Labour ’ s past association with Keynes that had damned them – “ their disastrous stewardship before and during the financial crisis , ” as he puts it .
In fact , Labour ’ s most recent governments were determinedly non-Keynesian ; monetary policy was geared to hitting a 2 % inflation target , and fiscal policy aimed at balancing the budget over the business cycle : standard macro-economic fare before the recession struck .
The most damning charge against their stewardship is that they embraced the idea that financial markets are optimally self-regulating – a view that Keynes rejected .
Keynes was not to blame for Labour ’ s defeat ; in large part , Scotland was .
The Scottish National Party ’ s crushing victory left Labour with only one seat in the country .
There are no doubt many reasons for the SNP ’ s overwhelming triumph , but support for austerity is not one of them .
( The Conservatives did as badly as Labour . )
Nicola Sturgeon , First Minister of Scotland and leader of the SNP , attacked the “ cozy consensus ” around fiscal consolidation in Westminster .
The deficit , she rightly said , was “ a symptom of economic difficulties , not just the cause of them . ”
The SNP manifesto promised “ at least an additional £ 140 billion ( $ 220 billion ) across the UK to invest in skills and infrastructure . ”
So if the SNP did so well with a “ Keynesian ” program of fiscal expansion , is it not arguable that Labour would have done better had it mounted a more vigorous defense of its own record in office and a more aggressive attack on Osborne ’ s austerity policy ?
This is what leaders of the Labour party like Alistair Darling , Gordon Brown ’ s Chancellor of the Exchequer , are now saying .
But they seem to have had no influence on the two architects of Labour ’ s election strategy , Ed Miliband and Ed Balls , both now removed from front-line politics .
What the Conservatives did succeed in doing , and doing brilliantly , was to persuade English people that they were only “ cleaning up Labour ’ s mess , ” and that , but for austerity , Britain would have “ gone the way of Greece ” – exactly Ferguson ’ s view .
One might conclude that all of this is history : the voters have spoken .
But it would be a mistake to accept the Conservative narrative as the last word .
It is basically a tissue of propaganda , with little support in theory and destructive effects in practice .
This might not matter so much had there been a change of government .
But Osborne is back as Chancellor , promising even tougher cuts over the next five years .
And fiscal austerity is still the reigning doctrine in the eurozone , thanks to Germany .
So the damage is set to continue .
In the absence of a compelling counter-narrative , we may be fated to find out just how much pain the victims can withstand .
