Bin Laden Made News , Not History
LONDON – Ten years after 9 / 11 , the instant history is being written .
In the French newspaper Le Monde , a highly intelligent commemorative supplement dubbed the period “ The Decade of Bin Laden . ”
But is that right ?
In the ten years since 9 / 11 , the combined GDP of Brazil , Russia , India , and China ( the BRICs ) rose from 8.4 % of the global economy to 18.3 % .
Anglo-Saxon-style capitalism crashed .
Moreover , it was the decade when Internet access went global – from 360 million people in 2000 to more than two billion people today .
It was a time when the war in Iraq divided the world , but also when a civilian surge for freedom finally hit the Middle East , as millions of Muslims turned for inspiration to democratic governance , not global jihad .
None of this was the doing of Osama bin Laden .
To be sure , Al Qaeda was ( and is ) a new and serious kind of threat .
Born of 30 years of tumult in the Muslim world , Al Qaeda has a worldview , not just a local view .
It aspires not just to change , but to revolution .
Indeed , the notion of a “ war on terror ” in reply was misguided in part because it allowed people to think that Al Qaeda was just another terrorist group like the IRA , the Baader-Meinhof Gang , or the Red Brigades .
It wasn ’ t – and isn ’ t .
But it also aggrandized Bin Laden ’ s claim to be a world historical figure .
The fight – led by the United States , with the rest of the West providing lower-key support – has weakened Al Qaeda ’ s influence and capacity .
But it has also been an enforced detour from the vital diplomatic task of building new rules and institutions for an interdependent world .
I don ’ t see any alternative to our determination , in 2001 , to drive the Taliban from control of Afghanistan .
The tragedy is that , once that battle was won , the peace was lost .
The Bonn Conference of December 2001 , which was called to draft a new Afghan constitution , excluded the vanquished .
Whereas America built its own democracy from below , on federalist principles , Afghanistan had imposed upon it one of the most centralized states in the world – despite being one of the world ’ s most decentralized societies .
Tragically , the signals from former Taliban in their southern Afghan stronghold of Kandahar were misread .
The Taliban , who demanded to be left alone in exchange for staying out of politics , were driven into Pakistan , where they reconvened .
The new security threat called for a military response , though the struggle should have been predominantly political and diplomatic .
The best way to understand the current situation comes from an analogy offered by former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright .
Foreign policy during the Cold War , she says , was like steering within the Panama Canal ; after the fall of the Berlin Wall , it was like steering within the English Channel – plenty of water on all sides , but land visible , too .
Today , foreign policy is like being on the open seas , with no rules beyond countries ’ 200-mile maritime borders , and no land in sight .
If that is right , we face urgent tasks – the first being to reassert diplomacy ’ s place in international politics .
The late US statesman Richard Holbrooke once said to me that America since 9 / 11 had suffered a “ militarization of diplomacy . ”
We now need the opposite .
In a world of asymmetric threats , we should follow the US defense department ’ s field manual : in counterinsurgency , politics require primacy .
Second , we must rethink our notions of a balance of power , because they no longer concern just states , but also peoples .
As the Arab Spring has shown , the ubiquity of information means that future coalitions need to be formed at the micro level , in the villages and valleys of places like Afghanistan and Pakistan , rather than only at the macro level of managing the global system .
Third , we are entering an era of resource scarcity .
Aside from the atomic bomb , this is the most dangerous security development in two centuries .
If you think the blame game in Europe over Greece is bad , just wait for arguments about who is causing drought and food-price inflation .
These are not just “ environmental ” questions .
They are questions of justice and responsibility , and stronger regional and international institutions are needed to address them .
Finally , the West must rediscover the joys of multilateralism and shared sovereignty .
That is tough when , in Europe , nobody wants to pay Greece ’ s bills .
But multilateralism is a global insurance policy against abuse of power by any state .
The problem is not that the European Union and other multilateral institutions are too strong ; it is that they are too weak .
Indeed , regional institutions in the Arab world , Africa , Latin America , and East Asia are still in their infancy – and need to grow up fast .
Over the past few centuries , there have been three systems of international order : economic and military domination ; a balance of power ; and shared sovereignty .
They can coexist , as they more or less did in the years after 1945 in various parts of the world .
But America today is on the back foot , economically and militarily .
New powers like China and India are rising , not risen , mixing assertiveness with emphasis on their continued “ developing ” status .
Europe , where shared sovereignty has been embraced , is struggling to solve its own problems , never mind becoming a global player .
So no one is in charge .
This is all the more problematic at a time when the world ’ s states and people are more intertwined than ever , as ideas , information , finance , migrants , and problems flow ever more seamlessly across borders .
A century ago , the Nobel Peace Prize laureate Norman Angell argued in The Great Illusion that economic security enables military expansion , not vice versa .
In fact , neither is achievable without political vision .
That is the most important lesson of the post-9 / 11 decade .
