Bringing Europe ’ s Last Dictator in From the Cold
Strasbourg – The European Union recently embarked on a policy of “ constructive engagement ” with Belarus .
None too soon .
Previously , EU policy was to isolate Belarus , which itself was seeking isolation .
That policy achieved almost nothing , save for bolstering the country ’ s authoritarian leader , President Aleksander Lukashenko .
Belatedly and somewhat reluctantly , EU leaders have now accepted that they need to deal pragmatically with Lukashenko if they want to promote reform in Belarus and shift the country from its tight orbit around Russia .
This realization does not mean that Europe should turn a blind eye to the nature of Lukashenko ’ s regime .
EU members are rightfully concerned about human rights in a place dubbed by some “ the Cuba of the east . ”
Political repression and press restrictions remain common in Belarus .
But the same – and perhaps worse – can be said about China , yet the EU has invested much political capital in a strategic , multifaceted partnership with its rulers .
Belarus is the missing link in Eastern Europe ’ s post-Soviet democratization and reintegration .
European officials have been at pains to prevent the EU ’ s enlargement from creating new dividing lines between Belarus and its neighbors to the west and north – Poland , Lithuania , and Latvia – that joined the Union in 2004 .
In fact , these countries are the biggest advocates of improving relations with Belarus , because of their shared historical , commercial , and familial links .
The EU has also suddenly awakened to the need for a common external energy-security policy , not least to diversify away from Russian supplies .
Given that 20 % of Russian gas destined for Europe passes through Belarus , a stable and structured relationship with its government has become a priority .
In turn , Lukashenko has decided for economic reasons that his country needs EU support and can no longer depend exclusively on Russia without paying a heavy political price .
But the thaw in EU-Belarus relations needs to be based on reciprocal , permanent steps .
After all , no EU strategic partnership is unconditional .
But the EU must be ready to respond to the perceptible momentum in Belarus in favor of domestic reform , greater openness , and respect for fundamental democratic rights .
For example , the recent release of political prisoners in Belarus removed at a stroke one of the key reasons for the EU ’ s hostility towards Lukashenko .
This gesture , together with the free publication of an opposition newspaper , is precisely the kind of move that will entice EU interest in an enhanced relationship .
Similarly , Belarus must , in turn , respond positively to the EU ’ s steps to normalize relations , one of which should be rescinding travel restrictions against Lukashenko and other senior officials .
Of course , releasing political prisoners does not excuse Lukashenko ’ s past excesses .
But the political opposition to Lukashenko is hopelessly divided , plagued by infighting , and incapable of mounting any serious challenge to his rule .
Moreover , Lukashenko appears to be genuinely popular .
The country ’ s rural and elderly population – like those in other former Soviet countries – appears to prize economic stability and social order over democratic development .
Some observers believe that Lukashenko is making cynical overtures to the West in order to elicit more support from Russia , particularly at a time of economic crisis .
But , although Lukashenko is probably playing a divide-and-rule game , he must eventually make a choice .
The closer he moves to the EU , the greater the alarm in the Kremlin .
Russia is hypersensitive about challenges to its influence in what it calls its “ near abroad ” of former Soviet satellites .
Last summer ’ s war in Georgia , and the Kremlin ’ s habitual efforts to destabilize Ukraine ’ s pro-Western government , serve as warnings for what Lukashenko can expect if he moves precipitately .
With Belarus ’ s economy crumbling and its export markets withering , Russia could exploit Lukashenko ’ s vulnerability .
The Kremlin is considering a request from Belarus for $ 2 billion of credit , but , if this money is forthcoming , Belarus can expect to pay a heavy political price .
Lukashenko may have to adopt the Russian ruble , at least as a reserve currency .
Russia could also insist on greater military cooperation , including the deployment of Russian missiles in Belarus in response to America ’ s planned missile shield in Poland and the Czech Republic .
Prime Minister Vladimir Putin and President Dmitry Medvedev may also insist on Belarus recognizing the independence , declared following last summer ’ s war , of Georgia ’ s Abkhazia and South Ossetia regions , knowing that this would make the EU shrink from further commitments to Belarus .
Belarus ’ s reliance on cheap energy supplies from Russia could also be used as leverage .
But , with Russia ’ s economy contracting , Belarus is perhaps in a stronger position than it realizes .
The country needs greater access to global markets and eventual support for admission to the World Trade Organization , which is one of the EU ’ s greatest selling points and one of Russia ’ s fundamental weaknesses .
Now is the time for EU leaders to present Lukashenko with a clear alternative to dependence on Russia .
The first step in this process was the inclusion of Belarus in the EU 's Eastern Partnership , a new framework for relations with six ex-Soviet republics in Eastern Europe and the Caucasus .
It is premature to invite Lukashenko to the opening summit of this initiative in Prague on May 7 .
But , after years of atrophy , EU-Belarus relations finally offer some promise for the future .
Much responsibility rests with Lukashenko , but the EU must make every effort to coax Belarus into the family of European nations , where it belongs .
