Brazil ’ s Institutional Limbo
SÃO PAULO – International investors are watching closely as Brazilians prepare to vote in the second round of the presidential election on October 26 .
Their vote will not only decide who will be the country ’ s next president ; it may also determine the future of the Central Bank of Brazil ( BCB ) , and therefore the country ’ s macroeconomic trajectory .
While the incumbent president , Dilma Rousseff , supports the BCB ’ s existing institutional framework , her opponents contend that monetary policy is plagued by political interference , which would best be addressed by giving the BCB greater autonomy .
But no candidate has yet advanced a proposal for reform that would reduce the scope for political interference while ensuring greater accountability and promoting financial stability .
If Brazil is to sustain strong and stable economic growth , the central bank will need an overhaul .
Monetary policy has long played an important role in Brazilian politics .
During the democratization process of the 1980s and 1990s , successive governments tried to tame hyperinflation , which reached 2,477 % in 1993 .
The introduction of the “ Real plan , ” launched in 1994 , managed to suppress annual price growth to an “ acceptable ” 22 % by the following year .
Riding on the plan ’ s success , its architect , Fernando Henrique Cardoso , a former economy minister , was twice elected President ( in 1994 and 1998 ) , underscoring voter concern about price stability .
Today , as central bankers in developed countries fret about the threat of deflation , Brazilian politicians are once again forced to respond to widespread fears about slowing growth and a return to high inflation .
Unfortunately , the presidential candidates ’ plans for the BCB fall short of what is required .
Historically , Rousseff ’ s Workers ’ Party ( PT ) has resisted giving the bank formal autonomy , and she has played a distinctly populist card during the campaign , arguing that BCB autonomy would hand too much control to private bankers .
Marina Silva , the Socialist Party ’ s candidate , demanded formal bank independence – an argument subsequently adopted by the Social Democratic Party ( PSDB ) candidate , Aécio Neves , who now faces Rousseff in the election run-off .
But Neves wants de facto , rather than formal , operational autonomy for the BCB .
Like Cardoso , Neves is committed to inflation targeting , creating a primary surplus , and maintaining a floating exchange rate .
While such policies may promote price stability , his proposal neglects the two most important issues for the BCB : legal autonomy and institutional reforms that ensure accountability to citizens .
A legal commitment to BCB autonomy would contribute to currency confidence in a way that informal autonomy cannot .
Legal structures have a direct impact on inflation expectations , because law can provide institutional protection to public goods , such as price and financial stability .
Properly designed and executed , institutional reform could also increase BCB accountability to society at large while guarding against undue political influence and lobbying by the big banks .
The BCB is ripe for reform .
It is a 50-year-old technocratic bureaucracy established under a military dictatorship , with few legal instruments for political and social accountability .
Institutional reform must therefore move beyond the BCB ’ s inadequate price-stability target , which is set according to a narrow inflation index that fails to reflect the experiences of ordinary Brazilian consumers .
For example , the reported 2013 inflation rate was 5.9 % ( compared to a 4.5 % target ) ; but prices for food , a major share of most households ’ budgets , rose by 8.4 % , hitting the poor especially hard . The Rousseff administration has kept the reported inflation rate artificially low by suppressing prices for state-run services .
Price stability should be accompanied by other targets , especially financial stability , but also , possibly , employment .
Rousseff thwarted Congress ’ s attempts to introduce such targets in 2011 , and they would , of course , need to be carefully designed to avoid past mistakes .
But , done right , an expanded range of criteria by which to assess BCB policies , by enhancing accountability , would strengthen the legitimacy of granting policymakers legal autonomy .
There is also scope for institutional reform to promote greater financial stability .
The 2008 financial crisis and its aftermath highlighted the consequences of the BCB ’ s outdated institutional design . The Bank had insufficient legal backing for action needed to stabilize the financial system .
This left then-President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva , to resort to a series of dramatic measures , including the use of the deposit-insurance fund and state-owned banks to bail out failed financial institutions .
Lula claimed that this ad hoc approach gave Brazil a degree of flexibility lacking in other countries ; but it was not cost-free , as he claimed , and the results did not endure .
Rapid expansion of private debt raises other , larger concerns .
Other central banks have recognized the need for new instruments to ensure financial stability ; so must the BCB .
Institutional clarity on the BCB ’ s mandate for financial stability and the instruments at its disposal could help Brazil avoid future crises – or at least weather them more effectively .
Brazil ’ s presidential election appears to offer two unsatisfying choices : a continuation of the status quo , with the BCB subject to political influence , under Rousseff ; or an informally autonomous BCB with an outdated institutional apparatus , under Neves .
Only Silva ’ s initial proposal included calls for institutional reform of monetary policy and financial regulation ; and it is far from certain that her endorsement of Neves in the run-off will sway his view should he win .
