Break to Avoid a Breakup
The Franco-German axis is proving a nightmare for European unity .
Within a single month , Gerhard Schroeder 's Germany and Jacques Chirac 's France first destroyed the EU 's Stability Pact and endangered European monetary union by demanding--and receiving--special status for French and German fiscal deficits .
Now the axis has crushed hopes of passing a new European constitution in Brussels by demanding the so-called " double majority " rule , which would seriously weaken medium-size and smaller countries ' voting power by comparison to what was agreed three years ago in Nice .
European integration can 't afford further defeats . Trust has been decimated .
Anger overflows . Small and medium-sized EU countries feel tricked .
Will these countries continue to sacrifice for the common European good when , time after time , the big countries tell them to go to the back of the bus and be grateful for the ride ?
It 's time for a pause in European integration efforts if only to avoid a complete , irreparable rupture of relations between nations that are supposed to be uniting .
The Germans , in particular , need a time out to reflect upon the wisdom of their recent bullyboy tactics .
Gerhard Schroeder is providing disastrous leadership for Germany .
The country 's " new nationalism " will end in tears for both Germany and Europe .
Have today 's Germans really forgotten that Europeanism is not the best alternative for Germany--it is the only alternative ?
Yet , after last week 's Brussels summit ended in failure , the Germans and their French allies are talking up a " two-speed " Europe , with the so-called " pioneer group " of Germany , France , Italy , and the Benelux countries--Belgium , the Netherlands , and Luxembourg--going faster and pursuing deeper integration projects than the others .
A " two-speed " Europe is , however , a euphemism for abandoning or opting out of European integration by Europe 's big three .
It would decisively split Europe by allowing the big countries and their satellites to go their own way .
( The Dutch never would go along with this . )
A " two-speed " Europe means the end of the EU as we know it .
Of course , if the big countries are not willing to sacrifice any measure of national sovereignty for the overall European good , then a united Europe is doomed .
That is why the debate over the Stability Pact was so important--and why its demise is so disconcerting : the Germans and the French proved willing to sacrifice little , if anything , for the common European interest .
Now , after the failure to endorse the draft EU constitution , Schroeder bitterly complains that " some nations are representing their national interests and have left the European idea behind . "
Take a good look in the mirror , Gerhard .
But , notwithstanding recent defeats , it is far too early to give up on an integrated Europe .
Chirac and Schroeder--and the current weaknesses in France and Germany that created them--will not last forever .
Perhaps improved economic growth will give these countries the strength to throw off their present leaders .
Until France and Germany do change , Europe 's game must be a waiting game .
Time can solve Europe 's problem .
That 's why a pause now makes good sense .
The smaller EU countries also could benefit from a time out .
Even though the big countries are trying to marginalize them at almost every turn , the small countries cannot unite to fight the common enemy .
This is because they often see themselves having more in common with the big countries than the other small ones .
Belgium , for example , is virtually a satellite of France .
The same is true of Luxembourg .
Austria is closer to Germany than Finland , and so on . Unless the small countries unite on a common front , they will continue to prove easy targets of the big nationalistic players .
On the issue of big versus small countries , Europe has a lot to learn from the United States .
Big states comfortably co-exist with small states in the US because America has a bicameral system in which the House of Representatives is based on population , but each state elects two members of the Senate .
The system is very elastic , and has shown itself able to accommodate an increasing number of states .
The coming accession of ten new members to the EU would be made much simpler were Europe to find its own equally flexible system .
