The Boehner Shock
WASHINGTON , DC – Ever since the financial crisis erupted in 2008 , media outlets and specialists alike have devoted much attention to anticipating negative shocks to the global economy .
Today the focus is on the state of the Chinese economy , the timing of the US Federal Reserve ’ s normalization of interest rates , and the various policies under discussion in the United States ’ presidential election campaign .
But the most damaging shocks often hide in plain sight – and then hit precisely when and where almost everyone thought stability would prevail .
One such risk is that political partisanship will cause another disruption to the US federal government ’ s finances , weakening the American economy and roiling world financial markets .
This warning may seem strange .
After all , the last big partisan fight ( in 2013 ) over funding the government and raising the debt limit gained little for the Republicans who instigated it – other than significant damage to their reputation for responsibility .
And the current Republican leadership , eager to strengthen their party ’ s electoral chances in 2016 , very much wants to project an image of sober good sense .
Yet a major and destabilizing confrontation over public finance now seems unavoidable , particularly following House Speaker John Boehner ’ s surprise announcement that he will resign his position and his seat in Congress at the end of October .
To see why , one need look no further than the House Ways and Means Committee , whose current chairman , Paul Ryan , is a leader of the hardline Republican insurgents who had scorned Boehner for being too willing to compromise with President Barack Obama and House Democrats .
Ryan ’ s committee plays an important role in setting America ’ s fiscal agenda , reflecting both the constitutional requirement that revenue bills originate in the House of Representatives and political realities ( the House is traditionally less fractious than the Senate ) .
Unlike in 2013 , the strategy of Ryan and his allies this time around is unlikely to include a threat to default directly on federal government debt .
And Republicans on the committee claim that social security payments will be made on time .
So what other bills do they plan not to pay as part of a showdown over legislation to keep the government funded ?
In fact , it is difficult to say exactly what the threat is – and that is part of the problem .
Uncertainty about government contracts and various kinds of payments can have a broad impact on the economy .
The difficulty of working through the full economic implications is precisely what discourages consumers from making purchases and causes firms to postpone investment .
The US Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) published a helpful report in July that spelled out some of the consequences of the 2013 confrontation over the debt ceiling – including how it pushed up the government ’ s borrowing costs and the negative impact this had on the economy .
But the Republican majority in Congress simply ignores this type of sensible analysis .
As a result , a partial government shutdown is entirely possible , with the Republicans imposing a form of prioritization on government payments : some people will be paid what they are owed , and others will not .
This will fuel uncertainty , sap economic confidence , and almost certainly hurt the Republicans at the polls in 2016 .
So why is it likely to happen ?
One reason is to be found in the decentralized nature of American politics , which leaves elected officials relatively unbeholden to party leaders .
Some Republican supporters and donors have obviously moved to the right in recent decades .
But , as James Kwak and I explained in our book on US fiscal policy , White House Burning , the time when the Republican right favored responsible budgets and financial stability has long since passed .
Now the right – increasingly catering to a Southern , rural , and white constituency – cares much more about shrinking the federal government , and in recent years has viewed shutting it down or threatening nonpayment of debts as a way to “ starve the beast . ”
Moreover , the Republicans ’ uncompromising stance has been reinforced by the extreme position taken by many within its congressional delegation that Planned Parenthood – a health-care provider that primarily serves women – must be defunded as a condition of any budget deal .
Boehner ’ s resignation , though viewed by some as clearing the way for a short-term deal to fund the government , merely underscores the limited ability of any “ responsible ” Republican leader to control the party ’ s increasingly fundamentalist caucus .
In the US , as elsewhere , debates about fiscal policy should be open , with clear statements of alternative goals and balanced assessments of how best to pay for what government does .
Unfortunately , a debate and the compromises that follow are not what the Republicans have in mind .
Boehner ’ s forced departure makes it likelier than ever that the US – and the world – will soon face the prospect of another self-inflicted economic shock , caused entirely by the Republicans ’ scorched-earth budget tactics .
