The Bloom Is off the BRICS
STANFORD – A few years ago , pundits and policymakers were predicting that the BRICS countries – Brazil , Russia , India , China , and South Africa – would be the new engines of global growth .
Naive extrapolation of rapid growth led many people to imagine an ever-brighter future for these economies – and , thanks to them , for the rest of the world as well .
But now the bloom is off the rose .
The economies of Brazil and Russia are contracting , while those of China and South Africa have slowed substantially .
Only India ’ s growth rate has stayed up , now slightly exceeding China ’ s .
Will the BRICS fulfill their former promise ?
Or are continued problems inevitable ?
Given that low-income economies typically have little fixed capital ( computers , factories , infrastructure ) and human capital ( education and training ) per worker , they tend to have higher potential returns to capital investment .
That means they can grow more rapidly than wealthier economies , until their per capita income catches up .
While China , India , and Brazil still have very large rural populations , they have made great strides in reducing poverty , with several hundred million people ( the largest proportion in China ) , escaping it in the last few decades .
And these countries ’ middle classes are growing fast as well .
Rapid progress in the emerging economies has contributed to economic pessimism in Europe and North America .
After all , the developing economies ’ combined GDP now exceeds that of the advanced economies – a situation that would have been unimaginable a generation ago .
Moreover , the hundreds of millions of low-cost workers who joined the global labor force when China , India , and Eastern Europe opened their economies are still putting pressure on the wages of all but the most skilled workers in the advanced economies .
As the Nobel laureate economist Paul Samuelson observed in 1948 , international trade leads to factor-price equalization , with wages , adjusted for skill levels , equilibrating across countries .
But , for the BRICS , continued rapid progress may become more difficult .
Experience shows that there is a point – usually when per capita income levels reach about $ 15,000-20,000 ( roughly one-third the level in the United States ) – when growth tends to slow .
In recent decades , only a few economies – notably , South Korea , Taiwan , and Singapore – have managed to escape the so-called “ middle-income trap ” and continue to increase their prosperity .
Beyond the problems that almost all developing economies confront – for example , weak institutions and poor governance – each of the BRICS countries faces a unique set of challenges .
For example , Brazil must contend with a recession , low oil prices , and an unprecedented corruption scandal at Petrobras , the state oil company .
Given this , freer trade , such as with the NAFTA countries ( Canada , the US , and Mexico ) , and more hospitable terms for foreign investment , especially in energy , should top President Dilma Rouseff ’ s agenda .
Russia , too , is feeling the pressure of lower oil prices , both on its current budget and in terms of its ability to pursue further energy-sector development .
Compounding the challenge are the economic sanctions imposed by the US and Europe in response to President Vladimir Putin ’ s aggressive policies toward Russia ’ s immediate neighborhood .
Finally , Russia has a staggering demographic problem , characterized by a shrinking population , life expectancy far below the advanced-country average , and a growing brain drain .
India , at least for the moment , has the best short-run economic conditions .
Inflation , a major threat to the economy until recently , is down under the guidance of the Reserve Bank of India ’ s governor , Raghuram Rajan .
And growth is projected at 7.5 % for this year .
But India ’ s fiscal position remains challenging , and the country ’ s population , which will soon overtake China ’ s , remains mostly rural and impoverished .
Despite the looming challenges , Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been slow to implement the promised economic reforms .
Indeed , although he has made some small improvements in regulation , privatization , and cash transfers to the poor , bolder land and labor-market reforms remain elusive .
China , for its part , is attempting a difficult economic rebalancing , from an export-led to a consumption-based growth model .
In poker terms , Chinese President Xi Jinping is attempting to pull an inside straight , gambling that a growing middle class will demand enough manufactured goods to prevent the economy ’ s immense excess capacity in basic industries from leading to widespread unemployment .
At under 40 % of GDP – compared to at least 60 % in advanced economies – Chinese household consumption certainly has space to grow .
But China ’ s economy remains prone to considerable risks .
As occurred in Japan decades ago , China is starting to face lower-cost competition , such as from Vietnam ; its stock market is frothy ; and Xi ’ s anti-corruption program , though popular with ordinary citizens , has led to widespread uncertainty about the “ rules of the game . ”
Finally , South Africa ’ s problems reflect a loss of confidence in the government , endemic corruption , massive infrastructure needs , and restrictive labor-market and foreign-investment regulation .
And , in terms of reform , President Jacob Zuma is not headed in the right direction .
The BRICS are – and always have been – subject to the same forces as other economies . But , although they have increased their dependence on market forces , their governments continue to dictate too many major economic decisions , increasing the risk of imbalances or even crises .
Their ability to develop institutions that support greater economic freedom , with more reliance on market competition and less on government , will likely be the main determinant of their long-term success .
