Why Stimulus Has Failed
NEW DELHI – Two fundamental beliefs have driven economic policy around the world in recent years .
The first is that the world suffers from a shortage of aggregate demand relative to supply ; the second is that monetary and fiscal stimulus will close the gap .
Is it possible that the diagnosis is right , but that the remedy is wrong ?
That would explain why we have made little headway so far in restoring growth to pre-crisis levels .
And it would also indicate that we must rethink our remedies .
High levels of involuntary unemployment throughout the advanced economies suggest that demand lags behind potential supply .
While unemployment is significantly higher in sectors that were booming before the crisis , such as construction in the United States , it is more widespread , underpinning the view that greater demand is necessary to restore full employment .
Policymakers initially resorted to government spending and low interest rates to boost demand .
As government debt has ballooned and policy interest rates have hit rock bottom , central banks have focused on increasingly innovative policy to boost demand .
Yet growth continues to be painfully slow .
Why ?
What if the problem is the assumption that all demand is created equal ?
We know that pre-crisis demand was boosted by massive amounts of borrowing .
When borrowing becomes easier , it is not the well-to-do , whose spending is not constrained by their incomes , who increase their consumption ; rather , the increase comes from poorer and younger families whose needs and dreams far outpace their incomes .
Their needs can be different from those of the rich .
Moreover , the goods that are easiest to buy are those that are easy to post as collateral – houses and cars , rather than perishables .
And rising house prices in some regions make it easier to borrow even more to spend on other daily needs such as diapers and baby food .
The point is that debt-fueled demand emanates from particular households in particular regions for particular goods .
While it catalyzes a more generalized demand – the elderly plumber who works longer hours in the boom spends more on his stamp collection – it is not unreasonable to believe that much of debt-fueled demand is more focused .
So , as lending dries up , borrowing households can no longer spend , and demand for certain goods changes disproportionately , especially in areas that boomed earlier .
Of course , the effects spread through the economy – as demand for cars falls , demand for steel also falls , and steel workers are laid off .
But unemployment is most pronounced in the construction and automobile sectors , or in regions where house prices rose particularly rapidly .
It is easy to see why a general stimulus to demand , such as a cut in payroll taxes , may be ineffective in restoring the economy to full employment .
The general stimulus goes to everyone , not just the former borrowers .
And everyone ’ s spending patterns differ – the older , wealthier household buys jewelry from Tiffany , rather than a car from General Motors .
And even the former borrowers are unlikely to use their stimulus money to pay for more housing – they have soured on the dreams that housing held out .
Indeed , because the pattern of demand that is expressible has shifted with the change in access to borrowing , the pace at which the economy can grow without inflation may also fall .
With too many construction workers and too few jewelers , greater demand may result in higher jewelry prices rather than more output .
Put differently , the bust that follows years of a debt-fueled boom leaves behind an economy that supplies too much of the wrong kind of good relative to the changed demand .
Unlike a normal cyclical recession , in which demand falls across the board and recovery requires merely rehiring laid-off workers to resume their old jobs , economic recovery following a lending bust typically requires workers to move across industries and to new locations .
There is thus a subtle but important difference between my debt-driven demand view and the neo-Keynesian explanation that deleveraging ( saving by chastened borrowers ) or debt overhang ( the inability of debt-laden borrowers to spend ) is responsible for slow post-crisis growth .
Both views accept that the central source of weak aggregate demand is the disappearance of demand from former borrowers .
But they differ on solutions .
The neo-Keynesian economist wants to boost demand generally .
But if we believe that debt-driven demand is different , demand stimulus will at best be a palliative .
Writing down former borrowers ’ debt may be slightly more effective in producing the old pattern of demand , but it will probably not restore it to the pre-crisis level .
In any case , do we really want the former borrowers to borrow themselves into trouble again ?
The only sustainable solution is to allow the supply side to adjust to more normal and sustainable sources of demand – to ease the way for construction workers and autoworkers to retrain for faster-growing industries .
The worst thing that governments can do is to stand in the way by propping up unviable firms or by sustaining demand in unviable industries through easy credit .
Supply-side adjustments take time , and , after five years of recession , economies have made some headway .
But continued misdiagnosis will have lasting effects .
The advanced countries will spend decades working off high public-debt loads , while their central banks will have to unwind bloated balance sheets and back off from promises of support that markets have come to rely on .
Frighteningly , the new Japanese government is still trying to deal with the aftermath of the country ’ s two-decade-old property bust .
One can only hope that it will not indulge in more of the kind of spending that already has proven so ineffective – and that has left Japan with the highest debt burden ( around 230 % of GDP ) in the OECD .
