America ’ s Never-Ending War
NEW DELHI – It is official : US President and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Barack Obama is at war again .
After toppling Libyan ruler Muammar el-Qaddafi and bombing targets in Somalia and Yemen , Obama has initiated airstrikes in the Syria-Iraq belt , effectively declaring war on the Islamic State – a decision that will involve infringing on the sovereign , if disintegrating , state of Syria .
In his zeal to intervene , Obama is again disregarding US and international law by seeking approval from neither the US Congress nor the United Nations Security Council .
Obama ’ s predecessor , George W. Bush , launched America ’ s so-called “ war on terror ” to defeat groups that he insisted wanted to “ establish a radical Islamic empire that spans from Spain to Indonesia . ” But Bush ’ s invasion and occupation of Iraq was so controversial that it fractured the global consensus to fight terror , with the Guantánamo Bay detention center and the rendition and torture of suspects coming to symbolize the war ’ s excesses .
After Obama took office , he sought to introduce a gentler , subtler tone .
Contending in a 2009 interview that “ the language we use matters , ” he rebranded the war on terror as a “ struggle ” and a “ strategic challenge . ”
But the rhetorical shift did not translate into a change in strategy , with the Obama administration moving beyond security concerns to use its anti-terrorism activities to advance America ’ s broader geopolitical interests .
Thus , instead of viewing the elimination of Osama bin Laden in 2011 as the culmination of the anti-terror “ struggle ” that Bush launched , the Obama administration increased aid to “ good ” rebels ( such as those in Libya ) , while pursuing “ bad ” terrorists more vehemently , including through a “ targeted killing ” program .
When it comes to terrorist activity , however , such lines are difficult to draw .
For example , Obama initially placed the Islamic State in the “ good ” category , as it undermined Syrian President Bashar al-Assad ’ s rule and Iran ’ s interests in Syria and Iraq .
His position changed only after the Islamic State threatened to overrun Iraq ’ s Kurdish regional capital , Erbil – home to US military , intelligence , diplomatic , and business facilities . Add to that the beheadings of two American journalists , and suddenly Obama ’ s team was using Bush ’ s war rhetoric , declaring that the US is at war with the Islamic State “ in the same way that we are at war with Al Qaeda and its affiliates all around the globe . ”
America ’ s war on terror now risks becoming a permanent war against an expanding list of enemies – often inadvertently created by its own policies .
Just as covert aid to Afghanistan ’ s anti-Soviet rebels in the 1980s contributed to Al Qaeda ’ s emergence – something that Hillary Clinton acknowledged when she was Obama ’ s secretary of state – the help that the US and its allies provided to Syrian insurgents after they emerged in 2011 contributed to the rise of the Islamic State .
The US returned to Afghanistan in 2001 to wage an as-yet-unfinished war on the jihadists whom its actions had spawned .
Likewise , it is now launching a war in Iraq and Syria against the offspring of Bush ’ s forced regime change in Baghdad and Obama ’ s ill-conceived plan to topple Assad .
It is time for the US to recognize that since it launched its war on terror , the scourge has only spread .
The Afghanistan-Pakistan belt has remained “ ground zero ” for transnational terrorism , and once-stable countries like Libya , Iraq , and Syria have emerged as new hubs .
Obama ’ s effort to strike a Faustian bargain with the Afghan Taliban , whose top leaders enjoy sanctuary in Pakistan , indicates that he is more interested in confining terrorism to the Middle East than defeating it – even if it means leaving India to bear the brunt of terrorist activity .
( In fact , Pakistan ’ s ongoing war of terror against India also sprang from America ’ s anti-Soviet operation in Afghanistan – the largest in the CIA ’ s history – as the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence siphoned off a large share of the billions of dollars in military aid for the Afghan rebels . )
Similarly , Obama ’ s strategy toward the Islamic State seeks merely to limit the reach of a barbaric medieval order .
Moments after declaring his intention to “ degrade and destroy ” the group , Obama responded to a reporter ’ s request for clarification by stating that his real goal is to turn the Islamic State into a “ manageable problem . ”
Making matters worse , Obama plans to use the same tactics to fight the Islamic State that led to its emergence : authorizing the CIA , aided by some of the region ’ s oil sheikhdoms , to train and arm thousands of Syrian rebels .
The US may have some of the world ’ s top think tanks and most highly educated minds .
But it consistently ignores the lessons of its past blunders – and so repeats them .
US-led policies toward the Islamic world have prevented a clash between civilizations only by fueling a clash within a civilization that has fundamentally weakened regional and international security .
An endless war waged on America ’ s terms against the enemies that it helped to create is unlikely to secure either steady international support or lasting results .
Nowhere is this more apparent than in the tepid Arab and Turkish response to America ’ s effort to assemble an international coalition in support of what the Obama administration admits will be a multiyear military offensive against the Islamic State .
The risk that imperial hubris accelerates , rather than stems , Islamist terror is all too real – yet again .
