Blair ’ s European Dilemma
Tony Blair has achieved a remarkable third successive electoral victory .
But his sharply reduced majority in the House of Commons , and his damaged personal reputation , mean that his political position is seriously weakened .
As a result , he will be poorly placed to handle the challenges ahead , the most intractable of which will be the European Union ’ s new Constitution .
The Constitution , adopted by the 25 member states last year , is not , in itself , a big deal .
It introduces some significant improvements for majority voting in the Council of Ministers . It gives some more powers to the European Parliament .
It includes a Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It might help harmonize the foreign policies of the member states .
But it is no revolutionary document .
According to normal British constitutional practice , the government would be expected to ratify this Constitution by a vote in the House of Commons ; and , until the recent general election , the government ’ s huge majority should have been more than sufficient .
But Blair , beset by controversy over the unpopular and possibly illegal war in Iraq , thought he could avoid trouble at Westminster by postponing ratification until 2006 ( that is , a comfortably long time in the future ) , and proposing that it be carried out by popular referendum .
Unfortunately , as things stand , this is a referendum that Blair will not win , because all polls show a large and solid majority against the European Constitution .
Blair ’ s government may hope to be rescued by outside events .
France will hold a referendum on the Constitution for the end of this month , and a French “ No , ” the British seem to think , might make their problem go away .
For the general expectation is that if France rejects the Constitution , the Constitution would be dead , and no British referendum would be needed .
If this is Blair ’ s calculation , he is mistaken .
Moreover , it is the kind of mistake that the British have been making in relations with Europe for the past half-century .
Some recent French polls now show a majority in favor of the Constitution .
But even if the French do vote “ No , ” that will not solve the British problem : on the contrary , it will precipitate a major political crisis , in France and across Europe , concerning the future of the EU – the type of crisis that the British have spent fifty years trying to evade .
For if the Constitution is indeed dead , what happens next ?
None of the leading members of the Union will be interested in Britain ’ s views on this question .
When Tony Blair swept to power in 1997 , he was widely welcomed throughout Europe as the most pro-European British Prime Minister since Edward Heath a quarter of a century earlier .
He spoke French and seemed at ease with Britain ’ s neighbors across the Channel ; more importantly , he seemed to sympathize with European integration .
Eight years on , Europe knows better .
It is now clear to all that Blair is fundamentally opposed to the idea of a more politically integrated Europe .
Not only has he kept Britain out of the single European currency over the past four years , he made it clear during the election campaign that he does not expect the UK to join the Euro during the next five years either .
Occasionally Blair flirts with the idea of more European cooperation on foreign policy and defense .
But the past three years proved in practice that he prefers subservience to the war policy of President Bush to any sense of community with Europe .
In short , Blair is as opposed to the European project as all his predecessors .
One fundamental difference between France and Britain is that most of the mainstream political elite in France has long been broadly pro-European .
If the French electorate votes “ No , ” it will be much less a vote against the Constitution than a protest vote against President Jacques Chirac , or an expression of anxiety about the implications of the EU ’ s enlargement to Central Europe .
By contrast , Blair cannot win a referendum on the Constitution , not only because it is opposed by virtually all the popular press , but also because neither he nor any major political leader in Britain has ever had a good word to say about European integration .
The crisis over the Union ’ s future direction triggered by a French “ No ” vote could last for some time .
But if the British imagine that the Constitution will just die , and that that will be the end of the story , they are deceiving themselves .
On the contrary , they will find themselves embroiled , like the rest of Europe , in a fundamental debate about the objectives of the Union .
They will then be forced to make public and explicit choices about the sort of Europe that they want , and this will put them at odds with their neighbors .
In the end , the French and other leading member states are likely to explore alternative ways of working towards a more politically integrated Europe .
The most plausible institutional mechanism for this alternative way forward will be the existing grouping of those member states that have wanted to belong to a more united Europe by joining , or seeking to join , the euro zone .
If the Constitution is rejected , the British , having chosen to stay out of that grouping , may find that they have maneuvered themselves into an even more remote outer circle of Europe .
