Blowback in Mexico ’ s Drug Wars
MEXICO – Drug trafficking has existed in Mexico for decades .
But trade in illegal narcotics did not seriously threaten Mexico ’ s stability or provoke conflict with the United States until the mid-1980 ’ s , when Colombian cocaine began to flood across Mexico to the US .
By that time , Mexican police institutions were in a state of decomposition , making them fertile ground for the drug traffickers to corrupt . And so they have .
The dismantling of Colombia ’ s Cali and Medellin cartels in the 1990 ’ s created a vacuum that Mexico ’ s cartels were able to fill , ultimately consolidating their position in the drug trade .
Still , the levels of drug-related violence in Mexico remained relatively low .
This “ dealers ’ peace ” can be explained by the Mexican government ’ s policy of tolerance , which sought a degree of equilibrium between the drug cartels and the state in terms of trafficking routes and the territories that the cartels infiltrated .
This secret truce was maintained even after Mexico ’ s first open democratic presidential election in 2000 , when the long-ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party was ousted from power .
Then former President Vicente Fox ordered a crackdown .
As drug lords were arrested , the equilibrium between gangs was destroyed , paving the way to a war between the Sinaloa and Gulf cartels – the two largest – which has generated enormous violence , as well as sharp US protests because of the impact of the fighting along the border .
When President Felipe Calderón took office in 2006 , he inherited rising violence , with drug traffickers controlling parts of the country .
He responded by quickly launching a frontal assault on the cartels , with the support of the army .
Calderón ’ s offensive increased his popularity , but it also provoked a new rise in violence , as the drug gangs not only battled government forces , but also settled accounts among themselves .
The US government complained again , but at the same time the Bush administration delivered a $ 1.4 billion aid package , the so-called “ Merida Initiative , ” to fight the traffickers .
In 2008 , Mexico ’ s government decided to attack the drug cartels ’ operational nerve centers .
But this only accelerated the gangs ’ fragmentation , provoking a new and extraordinary increase in violence .
Indeed , over 5,000 people were killed by organized drug criminals last year , more than double the death toll in 2007 .
The violence has also become crueler .
Since 2007 , many of the cartels ’ victims have been decapitated – a tactic clearly aimed at intimidating their enemies .
And , as the grotesqueness of the violence has grown , so has pressure for a more effective strategy .
Some critics of Calderón ’ s government now say that it is time to change strategy , perhaps even returning to the pre-Fox policy of tolerance .
Nevertheless , public-opinion polls still show broad backing for Calderón ’ s strategy .
But the question is how long this support will last .
The government insists that drug-related violence is concentrated in just three of the country ’ s 32 states , but the problem has spread to most of the country .
Of course , most victims are traffickers .
But the country ’ s rampant violence has created an environment of insecurity that complicates everyday life for many Mexicans .
Ultimately , this may turn public opinion against Calderón ’ s policy – a development that some drug trafficking groups are encouraging with anonymous posters , and by sponsoring popular protests in northern Mexico that demand the army ’ s return to its barracks .
But , at least in the short term , there seems to be no alternative to Calderón ’ s strategy .
After all , while his policy of confrontation has generated high levels of violence , tolerance of the drug cartels corrupted state institutions , sowing the ground for the problem in the first place .
So it seems that the government ’ s only option is to continue the war , hoping that its longer-term effort to strengthen state institutions ’ capacity and integrity will eventually prove effective .
But corruption remains a profound and persistent threat to this effort , and if the government cannot reduce it significantly – especially among its anti-drug forces – a return to tolerance is inevitable .
