The Battle for Britain
LONDON – The Islamic State ’ s attack in Paris in November was the latest crisis to delay Britain ’ s bid to renegotiate its membership in the European Union , ahead of a planned referendum on whether to maintain the relationship .
First Greece , then refugees , and now terrorism have dominated the diplomatic agenda instead .
On December 3 , Conservative Prime Minister David Cameron officially abandoned hopes of clinching a deal with other EU leaders at their summit on December 17-18 .
He is now aiming for an agreement in February .
The delay amounts to a serious blow : While the deal itself is unlikely to persuade many undecided Britons to vote to stay in the EU , it is a prerequisite for Cameron to begin campaigning for that outcome .
Well-funded anti-EU campaigners , who have plenty of allies in the media , thus have at least two more months , virtually unopposed , to win over wavering Conservatives .
With polls showing the two sides in a dead heat , the risk of Brexit is rising by the day .
To be sure , security fears in the wake of the Paris attacks could swing some voters toward deciding to stay in the EU .
When people are fearful , they tend to be more risk-averse and thus more likely to stick with the status quo .
Combating cross-border terrorism is also an area where the value of EU cooperation ought to be self-evident .
In a November 10 speech at Chatham House , Cameron emphasized the benefits of EU membership for Britain ’ s national security .
But the conflation of terrorism , immigration , and EU membership could also push British voters to reject Europe .
Polls suggest that immigration is the top concern among British voters , and the fact that at least one of the Paris terrorists may have entered the EU through Greece posing as a Syrian refugee has accentuated the public ’ s fears .
That is scarcely a logical reason to leave the EU .
The United Kingdom is outside the Schengen Area , so it retains control over its border , and it has opted out of EU asylum policy , so it will not participate in the Union ’ s resettlement of Syrian refugees .
But fear can drive people to pull up the drawbridge .
Ominously , in a referendum this month , Danish voters , swayed by similar concerns about refugees and terrorism , rejected proposals for closer cross-border policing cooperation with the EU .
Amid this groundswell of confused emotions , Cameron ’ s limited objectives for renegotiation , outlined in a letter to European Council President Donald Tusk on November 10 , seem almost moot .
Cameron wants to keep Britain in the EU , and so do his EU counterparts , but not at any cost .
Recognizing the limits of his leverage , Cameron has decided to seek relatively modest changes in four areas : competitiveness , sovereignty , safeguards for non-euro members , and migration .
The first demand – for a Europe that enhances “ competitiveness ” and reduces business regulation – will be the easiest to secure .
His proposal goes with the grain of thinking among EU officials ( to the point , regrettably , of echoing their mercantilist language ) .
Nor should his requests for sovereignty safeguards pose too much of a problem .
Some of them are merely symbolic .
For example , the EU Treaty commitment to “ ever closer union ” clearly does not apply to Britain , which has a permanent opt-out from the euro and much else ; putting this down in writing should be achievable .
Substantive safeguards , such as giving groups of national parliaments the power to veto unwanted EU proposals , are trickier ; but here , too , negotiators should be able to finesse a solution .
Cameron ’ s most important objective is ensuring that euro members cannot gang up on the UK and other non-euro countries .
On vital issues where EU decisions do not require unanimity – notably , the single market – the 19 eurozone countries could forge the qualified majority needed to outvote the nine non-euro members .
This has not yet happened – not least because countries such as Germany and Greece hardly see eye to eye .
But if the eurozone were to become further integrated , with common institutions , it might seek to impose its will on non-euro members .
One solution would be a double-majority voting system requiring the consent of both euro and non-euro members , like the one adopted during the creation of the eurozone ’ s banking union .
Cameron ’ s most controversial demands regard immigration .
Britain wants to deny EU migrants access to welfare benefits – including tax credits for low-paid workers – for four years .
But Germany and others object in principle to discriminating against EU citizens , and countries such as Poland and the Czech Republic are vehemently opposed to measures that would disproportionately harm their citizens .
One solution may be to deny Britons access to in-work benefits such as tax credits for four years as well .
A deal is feasible .
But even if Cameron achieves all of his goals , critics looking for big changes , such as quotas for EU migrants , will remain unsatisfied .
And technical issues , such as safeguards for non-euro countries , are unlikely to swing many votes .
Given this , Cameron ’ s priority should be to complete the renegotiation as quickly as possible , declare victory , and start campaigning vigorously on the broader reasons why Britain should stay in the EU .
Other EU leaders cannot afford to be complacent , either .
The EU is already disintegrating , and the risk of Brexit is very real .
They need to strike a convincing deal by February .
