A Europe of Women ?
PARIS – Are women in Europe on the verge of becoming an engine for political change ?
In economic-development circles , experience and common sense suggest that progress , accountability , and hard work start with and depend on women .
Micro-credits , for example , are much more efficient when women receive and repay them .
Perhaps because they bear children and must find the means to feed them , women are now perceived as the best and most determined “ agents of change . ”
That seems to be as true now of European politics as it has been of economics in parts of Africa and Asia .
The results of Italy ’ s recent municipal elections could be a signal of an incipient electoral dynamic : it was women who voted Silvio Berlusconi ’ s party out of power in Milan , a city that he has long controlled ( and the original seat of his power ) .
No direct link exists between that result and the dramatic Dominique Strauss-Kahn scandal in New York , but in the immediate aftermath of DSK ’ s arrest , Italian women and young voters decisively mobilized to defeat Berlusconi ’ s party ( led in Milan , ironically , by a woman ) .
These voters could no longer stand the combination of machismo and vulgarity that had once served so well the man Italian humorists now call “ Berlus-Kahn . ”
When Berlusconi first came to power 17 years ago , he had the support of a majority of women .
They were not discouraged by his ambivalent perception of them ( by turns celebrating their traditional domesticity and glorifying their sexual objectification ) .
But Italian society has changed : most women are now working , and they are no longer willing to accept Belusconi ’ s anachronistic and outrageous chauvinism .
Italian men may pity the aging , isolated leader , who looks increasingly like his wax effigy at Madame Tussaud ’ s .
But Italian women ( indeed , women everywhere , it seems ) feel only anger and humiliation over a man so obsessed with himself , his various criminal trials , and his vulgar pleasures that he appears to them to have no purpose left except to remain in power as long as possible .
Women , of course , are not alone in their opposition to Berlusconi , but they made the difference in Milan .
They are the incarnation of modernity , animated by a yearning for simple dignity and respect .
They are not alone in the vanguard of a new Europe of women .
As Iceland spiraled into bankruptcy , owing the irresponsible behavior of its mostly male political and financial elites , the people of Iceland decided that only a strong and responsible woman could redress the country ’ s problems .
So they elected one as President .
The depth and gravity of the current economic and social crisis in countries like Greece , Portugal , and Spain present women with a new opportunity .
Confronted with what many of them perceive as the equivalent of an “ economic war , ” women are playing an increasingly important role in maintaining their families ’ financial security .
And the more widespread this becomes , the more women will seek a political role that reflects their economic clout .
Of course , women ’ s changing status may not translate immediately into growing political influence .
And the rest of Europe might never follow the example of Scandinavia , where gender equality has advanced much further than anywhere else .
But such a dynamic does now seem to be in motion .
Similarly , regardless of the outcome of DSK ’ s trial in New York , the case might represent a turning point in the treatment of women in Europe .
Public and private displays of atavistic machismo , one hopes , will no longer be considered acceptable .
In the Arab world , too , from Tunis to Cairo , young women have played an important role in the revolutionary process .
Their appetite for change – understandable , given the treatment of women in traditional Muslim societies – appears to be one of the main causes underlying the force of the revolutionary impulse in Tunisia and Egypt .
None of this is to argue that “ women ” are a universal force for positive change in Europe and around the world .
Consider , for example , Marine Le Pen , the new head of France ’ s National Front , Elena Ceaucescu , the sordid wife of the former Romanian dictator , or , more recently , Tunisian ex-President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali ’ s wife , Leila Trabelsi , who fled to Dubai with 1.5 tons of gold plundered from the central bank .
The point , simply , is that with so many people in so many countries demanding far-reaching change , the politics of gender is very much in play – in Europe and beyond .
The main question is whether the growing number of women in politics will deliver the different perspectives and modes of leadership that many voters ( or protesters ) now seem to crave .
