The BRICS Fallacy
MADRID – The recent downgrade of Brazil ’ s credit rating to junk status was followed by a raft of articles heralding the crumbling of the BRICS ( Brazil , Russia , India , China , and South Africa ) .
How predictable : schadenfreude almost always follows bad news about the BRICS , whose members were once hailed as the world ’ s up-and-coming economic powerhouses and next major political force .
There is something deeper going on here . The world ’ s seeming obsession with the BRICS ’ perceived rise and fall reflects a desire to identify the country or group of countries that would take over from the United States as global leader .
But , in searching for the “ next big thing , ” the world ignores the fact that the US remains the only power capable of providing global leadership and ensuring some semblance of international order .
The story of the BRICS is a familiar one .
It began as a technical grouping in 2001 , when the British economist Jim O ’ Neill lumped them together ( without South Africa ) and gave them their catchy name for the sole reason that they were all large , rapidly growing emerging economies .
But , recognizing that economic power could translate into political influence , the BRICS held their first informal meeting in 2006 , and their first leaders ’ summit in 2009 .
The bloc was going places – or so it seemed .
But seven years , seven summits , and one new member ( South Africa joined in 2010 ) later , the significance of the BRICS remains hotly debated .
The disparities among the BRICS are well known .
China ’ s economic output is nearly twice that of the rest of the BRICS combined , and roughly 30 times that of South Africa .
Their governance models are vastly different , from India ’ s robust democracy to Russia ’ s illiberal model to China ’ s one-party system .
Russia and China , both permanent members of the UN Security Council , have offered , at best , lukewarm support for the other BRICS ’ aspirations to join them .
And then there are its members ’ bilateral disagreements , including a heated territorial dispute between India and China .
Nonetheless , the BRICS have acted in concert on more than one occasion .
Last March , amid near-universal condemnation of Russia ’ s annexation of Crimea , the country ’ s BRICS counterparts – even those that had long supported the inviolability of borders and non-intervention – abstained from a UN General Assembly resolution affirming Ukraine ’ s unity and territorial integrity .
Three months later , the BRICS released their “ Leaders ’ Summit Declaration ” condemning the imposition of economic sanctions on Russia by the European Union and the US .
Most concretely , the long-anticipated New Development Bank , run jointly and equally by the five BRICS countries , opened its doors in Shanghai in July .
Clearly , the BRICS are a thing . They are just not the thing .
The BRICS arose at a time when much of the world , especially the advanced economies , was mired in crisis .
The “ fall of the West ” narrative ran alongside that of the “ rise of the rest . ”
But the story has not played out quite as anticipated .
Economically , the BRICS are facing serious challenges .
In addition to a well-documented growth slowdown , China has lately experienced considerable stock-market turmoil and currency devaluation .
The Brazilian and Russian economies are contracting ; South Africa ’ s growth has slowed ; and India , though maintaining relatively strong growth , must undertake important reforms .
The BRICS have also failed to fulfill their promise of international leadership .
At the beginning of the decade , Brazil showed a certain aspiration , along with Turkey , to press ahead with an alternative nuclear deal with Iran .
But that proposal fell apart , and , amid pressure from corruption scandals and falling commodity prices , Brazil left the global stage .
South Africa and India also continue to punch below their apparent weight internationally ( notwithstanding Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi ’ s visibility ) .
As for Russia , the only traditional world leader of the bunch , the Kremlin ’ s Ukraine policy has done severe damage to the country ’ s international profile – damage that not even its possible diplomatic coup in Syria can undo .
Only China has displayed an inclination to lead , as exemplified by President Xi Jinping ’ s visit to Washington , DC last week , which produced major announcements on climate action , cyber security , and international development .
China has also been pursuing initiatives like the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the revitalization of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization .
But China ’ s growing assertiveness , particularly in the South China Sea , has fueled the perception that it is more of a threat than a leader .
All in all , the BRICS no longer seem to be rising .
At the same time , the core of the West no longer seems to be declining .
Although Europe remains mired in crisis and existential self-doubt , and Japan is still finding its feet after two decades of economic stagnation , the US is as relevant as ever .
Indeed , no major global challenge – from conflict in the Middle East to climate change to global financial regulation – can be confronted without American engagement .
America ’ s enduring dominance will rile many , and with good reason .
A quarter-century after the Cold War ’ s end , the world should have arrived at a more equitable and balanced way of getting things done .
But it has not , and no other single power is in a position to take America ’ s place . Europe is too inward looking ;
China inspires too much suspicion ; and India , despite showing signs that it is preparing for a greater global role , lacks enough international authority on its own .
As a result , nearly 20 years after former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright dubbed her country “ indispensable , ” it remains so .
The imperative now is for the US and the world to recognize this .
Rather than focusing our attention on alternatives to US leadership , we should be emphasizing its importance – an approach that would help to spur the US to rededicate itself to its international responsibilities .
There have been hints that this impulse still exists – notably , the Iranian nuclear deal – but they remain inadequate to the challenges confronting the world .
The international order is at a crossroads .
It needs the US to guide it – with ingenuity , initiative , and stamina – in the direction of peace and prosperity .
Obsessing about who might eventually replace America is bound to get us all lost .
