Can Good Emerge From the BP Oil Spill ?
CAMBRIDGE – Perhaps it is a pipe dream , but it is just possible that the ongoing BP oil-spill catastrophe in the Gulf of Mexico will finally catalyze support for an American environmental policy with teeth .
Yes , the culprits should be punished , both to maintain citizens ’ belief that justice prevails , and to make other oil producers think twice about taking outsized risks .
But if that is all that comes out of the BP calamity , it will be a tragic lost opportunity to restore some sanity to the United States ’ national environmental and energy policy , which has increasingly gone off track in recent years .
Why should there be any reason for hope , especially given that US environmental policy has been predicated on the unrealistic belief that relatively small subsidies to new energy technologies can substitute for tax-induced price incentives for producers and consumers ?
The fact is , the BP oil spill is on the cusp of becoming a political game-changer of historic proportions .
If summer hurricanes push huge quantities of oil onto Florida ’ s beaches and up the Eastern seaboard , the resulting political explosion will make the reaction to the financial crisis seem muted .
Anger is especially rife among young people .
Already stressed by extraordinarily high rates of unemployment , twenty-somethings are now awakening to the fact that their country ’ s growth model – the one they are dreaming to be a part of – is , in fact , completely unsustainable , whatever their political leaders tell them .
For now , it may only be black humor ( e.g. , the New Orleans waiter who asks diners whether they want their shrimp leaded or unleaded ) .
But an explosion is coming .
Might a reawakening of voter anger be the ticket to rekindling interest in a carbon tax ?
A carbon tax , long advocated by a broad spectrum of economists , is a generalized version of a gas tax that hits all forms of carbon emissions , including from coal and natural gas .
In principle , one can create a “ cap-and-trade ” system of quantitative restrictions that accomplishes much the same thing – and this seems to be more palatable to politicians , who will jump through hoops to avoid using the word “ tax . ”
But a carbon tax is far more transparent and potentially less prone to the pitfalls seen in international carbon-quota trading .
A carbon tax can help preserve the atmosphere while also discouraging some of the most exotic and risky energy-exploration activities by making them unprofitable .
Of course , there must be better ( far better ) and stricter regulation of offshore and out-of-bounds energy extraction , and severe penalties for mistakes .
But putting a price on carbon emissions , more than any other approach , provides an integrated framework for discouraging old carbon-era energy technologies and incentivizing new ones by making it easier to compete .
Advocating a carbon tax in response to the oil spill does not have to be just a way of exploiting tragedy in the Gulf to help finance outsized government spending .
In principle , one could cut other taxes to offset the effects of a carbon tax , neutralizing the revenue effects .
Or , to be precise , a carbon tax could substitute for the huge array of taxes that is eventually coming anyway in the wake of massive government budget deficits .
Why might a carbon tax be viable now , when it never has been before ?
The point is that , when people can visualize a problem , they are far less able to discount or ignore it .
Gradual global warming is hard enough to notice , much less get worked up about .
But , as high-definition images of oil spewing from the bottom of the ocean are matched up with those of blackened coastline and devastated wildlife , a very different story could emerge .
Some say that young people in the rich countries are just too well off to mobilize politically , at least en masse .
But they might be radicalized by the prospect of inheriting a badly damaged ecosystem .
Indeed , there is volatility just beneath the surface .
Modern-day record unemployment and extreme inequality may seem far less tolerable as young people realize that some of the most cherished “ free ” things in life – palatable weather , clean air , and nice beaches , for example – cannot be taken for granted .
Of course , I may be far too optimistic in thinking that the tragedy in the Gulf will spur a more sensible energy policy that attempts to moderate consumption rather than constantly seeking new ways to fuel it .
A great deal of the US political reaction has centered on demonizing BP and its leaders , rather than thinking of better ways to balance regulation and innovation .
Politicians understandably want to deflect attention from their own misguided policies .
But it would be far better if they made an effort to fix them .
A prolonged moratorium on offshore and other out-of-bounds energy exploration makes sense , but the real tragedy of the BP oil spill will be if the changes stop there .
How many wake-up calls do we need ?
