Britain in the Wilderness
LONDON – Europe is once again divided between East and West – only this time the fault line runs through the European Union .
The eastern members – most notably Poland and the Baltic states – are clinging fast to the EU in the face of Russian aggression .
At the other geographic and political extreme , the United Kingdom is threatening to walk out on Europe for good .
Decisions being taken today on Europe 's eastern and western peripheries are likely to shape a new balance of power .
It is not difficult to imagine Europe after a British withdrawal : a French-German axis in control , Russia empowered , America bypassing a now-weakened Britain , pro-EU Scotland threatening once again to leave the UK , and England turning inward as Euroskeptics convince themselves that Britain always is strongest when alone .
And , given the effects of UK Euroskepticism so far , no crystal ball is needed to foresee the impact on Britain of withdrawal from the EU .
As former European Commission President José Manuel Barroso put it in December , “ I have never seen in all my years in the European Council … a big country as isolated as Britain . "
Indeed , the UK is now a fringe player in deciding a European growth strategy ; marginal to trade debates that it used to lead ; and , despite being a big lender , almost irrelevant to the future of Greece .
And now , though Britain was a signatory of the 1994 Budapest Memorandum guaranteeing Ukrainian independence , only France and Germany attend any serious negotiations .
British ministers want it both ways : “ Russia must be countered by even greater European unity , " they say .
Dean Acheson , the US secretary of state who was an architect of NATO and the Marshall Plan , famously noted that Britain in the twentieth century lost an empire and never found a new international role .
In the twenty-first century , Britain could lose Europe and find itself once again without a role in the world .
The price of exit would be enormous , putting at risk three million jobs , 25,000 companies , annual exports worth £ 200 billion ( $ 301.4 billion ) , and £ 450 billion of inward investment .
Moreover , London 's unique role in bringing together the full range of financial services that serve the continent – the City is home to 250 global banks with 160,000 employees and accounts for 80 % of Europe 's hedge funds , 78 % of its foreign-exchange trades , 74 % of its derivatives , and 57 % of its private equity – would be jeopardized as well .
There is little evidence to support the anti-Europeans ' argument that EU regulations hobble British trade outside of Europe ; on the contrary , substantial extra-EU trade and investment opportunities would be lost were Britain to leave .
And their claim that a non-European Britain could effortlessly retain the EU 's benefits while ditching its burdens is simply not credible .
Consider the Euroskeptics ' favorite examples , Norway and Switzerland .
The Norwegians must pay € 2 billion ( $ 2.1 billion ) a year for access to European markets .
Switzerland , like Norway , must take a back seat to the EU Commission when trade and investment decisions are made .
The world 's largest economy , the United States , needs the North American Free Trade Agreement , and Southeast Asia 's rising economies need ASEAN .
Likewise , Britain – which at its peak generated nearly 20 % of world economic activity but soon will account for no more than 2.5 % – is much stronger as a part of Europe .
EU membership strengthens the UK 's competitiveness by enabling it to negotiate the best deals on trade , tax rules , patents , money laundering , corruption , and security with China , India , and the rest of the world .
But economic arguments alone will likely not be enough to persuade a Britain that , in the late journalist and political columnist Hugo Young 's words , is caught between the past it cannot forget and the future it cannot avoid .
According to this view , British ambivalence toward Europe may reflect a persistent inability to leave behind the days of imperial grandeur .
Nonetheless , economic insecurity – owing to the rapid pace and , at times , destructiveness of the global economy – evidently is driving much of the public 's nostalgia for British sovereignty .
Millions of Britons long for someone or something to protect them from the seemingly alien forces that threaten to steal their livelihoods .
This fear has found its voice in the anti-European UK Independence Party , which has risen in opinion polls by converting economic discontent into a culture war in which foreigners and immigrants – and , indeed , Europe as a whole – are the enemy .
Britain , UKIP 's leaders and supporters believe , is not the Britain they once knew .
Though economic statistics must be part of the argument for Europe , such data will not convince those who fear that Britain is becoming a foreign country .
Nor will it be enough to recall the historic benefits of engagement and Britain 's distinguished centuries-old role in ensuring that no country ever gained sole mastery of Europe .
What needs to be said is this : Britain is at its best when it sees itself as a leader in Europe .
Just as Britain once led Europe in fighting fascism , supporting democratic aspirations , and charting the continent 's response to the global recession of 2008 , it should be inside Europe leading from the front ranks .
The Britain that has always championed liberty , tolerance , and social responsibility should be ready once again to lead a progressive movement , spearheading action to fight climate change , resist protectionism , and encourage sustainable growth .
It must lead in mobilizing Europe to make the global economy work for people , protecting them from injustice and inequity .
Globalization needs a human face , and the face of modern Britain can provide it .
Some say that the best way to secure European reform is to threaten to leave .
My experience is that Britain does best when it works to bring people together , set the agenda , promote its values , and champion change .
It is then that Britain can channel its unforgettable past while embracing its unavoidable future .
