The Battle for Britain
BRUSSELS – The outcome of the United Kingdom ’ s general election this week will set the direction the country will take in its long-term relations with the European Union .
And yet , with the unfortunate exception of the UK Independence Party , the question went mostly unaddressed during the campaign .
But voters know that it could soon move to the center of British politics , regardless of whether the Conservatives are returned to power or are replaced by Labour .
Britain is not quite certain about its role in Europe .
It had hoped that a larger EU would be less integrated .
But the EU ’ s enlargement in 2004 failed to stop the momentum toward “ ever-closer union . ”
Of the ten countries that joined then , seven are now in the eurozone .
Whatever problems the UK faces now pale in comparison to those that would emerge if it were to withdraw from the EU .
Indeed , the British people would likely realize only after the fact that the problems they attributed to the EU actually originate at home .
The problem now is that the British stance is strengthening the centrifugal forces now at work in the EU .
Prime Minister David Cameron ’ s promise to hold a referendum on membership by 2017 if he is re-elected is not helpful in solving the problems that Britain and the rest of Europe face together : the need for higher growth and greater social inclusion amid unprecedented foreign-policy challenges .
Thus there is a certain paradox in Britain ’ s acting as it does .
The very possibility of “ Brexit ” contradicts everything that the British had sought to build over the years in Europe , particularly the common market .
Britons of all political stripes should recognize their country ’ s indispensability in the further development of the common market and in mapping out economic governance in a way that serves everyone ’ s interests .
At the same time , we must confront the fact that the UK ’ s deep divisions on Europe will not disappear , regardless of the election ’ s outcome .
The debate about the EU is too ingrained in British discourse .
That is why it is important to reiterate that the EU member states are not about to agree to any “ re-nationalization ” negotiations on the Union ’ s powers that require treaty-level changes affecting the common market ’ s core components , such as the free movement of people .
Likewise , it must be made clear that the EU will not revise the UK ’ s terms of membership at the cost of further progress on urgently needed reforms .
But EU-British relations need not be antagonistic .
In fact , the European Commission has been sounding distinctly British in recent months , with promises to limit – and even repeal – parts of European legislation deemed too intrusive or impediments to economic growth .
Indeed , the preparations for negotiations on a new agreement among the EU institutions are less focused on the nature of the output of the legislation than on the sheer number of laws now on the books .
This approach can be promising in terms of the dialogue with the new British government .
And yet , although a new European Treaty might not emerge in the coming years , limiting further integration , the makeshift response to Europe ’ s economic crisis has fueled calls for a new legal basis for continuing the necessary eurozone reforms .
As a result , work on a new treaty , initiated by the European Parliament Committee on Constitutional Affairs , will soon be taken up by other European institutions .
What will most likely emerge is a eurozone pact that member states can sign and ratify at will , making it impossible to veto .
One step in preparing for a possible withdrawal has been the British government ’ s decision to undertake a wide-ranging review of the EU ’ s powers and their impact on the UK .
The purpose of the review was to determine whether the division of competences between the EU and UK was , broadly speaking , appropriate .
The outcome , it must be said , was substantive and objective – which is promising in terms of moving from populist pronouncements to serious dialogue .
Interestingly , the British government ’ s review does not mention the need to transfer to the national level any of the competences defined by the Treaty of Lisbon , which would require the unanimous consent of the member states ( and thus can be ruled out as a possibility ) .
But some powers could be renationalized at a level lower than primary law , without treaty changes , primarily through a shift in the roles of the EU and the British government in the case of shared powers .
So perhaps achieving the Cameron government ’ s objective – to remain in a reformed EU after renegotiating the UK ’ s membership and renationalizing certain European competences – does not actually require treaty modification .
I hope the new British government will view matters this way , because the economic , legal , and political consequences of Brexit would be severe .
Exchanging EU membership for membership in the European Economic Area – along with Norway , Iceland , and Liechtenstein – would mean losing all influence over the shape of the internal market and the EU budget .
So would the Swiss option of concluding bilateral agreements with the EU ( which member states , moreover , would be unlikely to accept ) .
A better governed , more growth-oriented Europe is in the fundamental interest of the UK and the EU alike .
