Britain ’ s Retreat from Free Speech
NEW YORK – The ordeal of David Miranda – the partner of Guardian columnist Glenn Greenwald detained at London ’ s Heathrow Airport , interrogated for nine hours , and forced to surrender his electronic devices ( some of which allegedly contained documents leaked to Greenwald by the former US intelligence contractor Edward Snowden ) – is a shocking demonstration of the changed climate surrounding the press .
So is the fact that state officials threatened Guardian editor Alan Rusbridger with criminal charges and forced Guardian employees to destroy computer equipment at the newspaper ’ s offices .
But what is most shocking is that all of this happened in the United Kingdom .
As the head of the government that carried out these acts , British Prime Minister David Cameron has betrayed his country ’ s most noble cultural legacy .
Indeed , Britain essentially invented and gave the rest of the world the idea of free speech .
As far back as the seventeenth century , whenever monarchs or parliamentarians would try to control Britain ’ s press , British pamphleteers and polemicists would fight back – and often win .
In the face of anti-monarchist revolutionary fervor , Parliament – as Cameron should recall – passed the Licensing Order of 1643 , which imposed pre-publication censorship on the British press .
Booksellers protested , and the following year John Milton published “ Areopagitica , ” a foundational statement of our modern philosophy of the right to free expression .
Returning to British first principles , the House of Commons rescinded legislation suppressing press freedom in 1776 .
After that return to sanity , it was hard to convict someone for political speech or writing in Britain .
No law specifically censored political speech , leaving only the much higher legal threshold of “ disturbing the King ’ s peace . ”
Despite a flood of Jacobin propaganda from revolutionary France , British parliamentarians remained committed to the idea that freedom of speech and the exposure of ideas to open debate would serve Britain best .
Efforts in 1823 and 1856 to pass laws constraining free speech were shouted down by members of Parliament using very modern-sounding objections : any curtailment of press freedom constituted a “ slippery slope , ” while one man ’ s sedition or blasphemy was another man ’ s common-sense opinion .
British citizens , too , routinely rose up against efforts to curtail press freedom .
Indeed , when the rising power of groups like the Society for the Suppression of Vice began to initiate prosecutions of publishers and booksellers , MPs attacked this behavior for its anti-British nature .
Of course , it is precisely this tradition of free speech and debate that has so often led the British press to “ go too far ” for the comfort of state officials and citizens alike .
Parliamentarians were offended by press coverage of Queen Caroline ’ s divorce in 1820 , and by newspapers ’ mockery of King George IV .
In the 1860 ’ s and 1870 ’ s , they were appalled at how publishers boosted newspaper circulation by reporting on divorce courts ( and the scandalous behavior of individual politicians ) .
Political elites called again and again for curtailment of press freedom .
But Parliament and courts always returned over time to the core British value of free speech and expression .
Will today ’ s constrictions on journalism in the UK be similarly transient ?
In the wake of the hacking scandal at Rupert Murdoch ’ s News Corp , Parliament pressured the British press into agreeing to a terrifying system of fines of up to a £ 1 million ( $ 1.6 million ) for news “ errors . ”
The same system ( recently put in place in Australia as well ) has often been used by less democratically inclined governments to suppress independent , vigorous journalism ; in Ecuador , for example , newspapers are regularly fined large sums for criticizing the government .
The establishment of “ national security ” and “ fighting terrorism ” as stalking horses for intimidation of journalists who are doing their jobs – exposing government abuses to the light of day – gives the state an even more effective tool to suppress investigative reporting .
Dictators everywhere silence journalists in the name of “ national security ” by charging those who would investigate their regimes with treason , subversion , or espionage .
The same tactic is now appearing in democracies , too – with the same chilling effect .
Indeed , perhaps the most dismaying aspect of the Snowden story has been the relative silence of other news outlets , in Britain and America , as the national-security state literally comes to the Guardian ’ s door .
Instead , we have Michael Grunwald , a senior correspondent at Time magazine , posting on Twitter ( and then deleting ) : “ I can ’ t wait to write a defense of the drone strike that takes out Julian Assange . ”
Do other British publishers really believe that silence will protect them from the slippery slope ?
If the Guardian must stand alone now , next it will be the Daily Telegraph or the Financial Times that will face menacing calls from Whitehall and demands to spike a story or hand over the documents involved in an investigative report .
Britain needs to reestablish the primacy of free speech .
It needs to dismantle the new system of fines that is being developed ( a system that , paradoxically , the Guardian ’ s Rusbridger and the Labour Party – but not Cameron – have eagerly supported ) , exempt journalists from detention under the Terrorism Act , and forbid prior restraint of publication .
Unfortunately , there is little movement in this direction .
Some MPs signed a letter to Cameron from the Committee to Protect Journalists protesting Miranda ’ s detention .
But much more needs to be done .
Above all , Cameron ’ s political future – and that of all UK politicians – should depend on whether he upholds Britain ’ s tradition of free speech and public debate or continues to betray it .
For their own sake – and for that of Britain – other UK media organizations should stop flirting with censorship and lead this campaign .
