Bush the Negligent Neighbor
After ignoring Latin America for years , President George W. Bush is desperately trying to improve hemispheric relations .
But his just completed trip to Brazil , Uruguay , Colombia , Guatemala , and Mexico came too late .
Years of neglect could not possibly be erased by a trip long in photo opportunities and short in substance .
In the capitals of Latin America , Bush ’ s visit has been interpreted as a reaction to Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez ’ s increasing influence and popularity in the region .
Certainly , Chávez seems to have seen it that way , as he consistently heckled Bush from afar .
Before flying to Brazil , Bush said that his administration doesn ’ t get enough credit for its Latin American policy .
But , in 2007 , the United States will provide economic assistance to Latin American and the Caribbean worth $ 1.8 billion , which is $ 200 million less than in 2006 .
Moreover , almost half of the total comes in the form of military aid , while $ 716 million will go to one country , Colombia .
In an effort to increase its low popularity in Latin America , the Bush administration recently announced an additional $ 75 million for education , and $ 385 million to help finance mortgages for the poor .
Also , the US Navy hospital ship USNS Comfort will make port calls in a number of Latin countries .
But these aid figures are absurdly low from a historical perspective .
During the 1960 ’ s – the years of President John F. Kennedy ’ s Alliance for Progress – annual aid to the region exceeded $ 10 billion in today ’ s dollars .
The first sign that the Bush administration didn ’ t take Latin America seriously came on January 1 , 2002 , when Luiz Inácio “ Lula ” Da Silva was sworn in as Brazil ’ s president .
The occasion was solemn and charged with symbolism .
After all , Lula was the first trade union leader ever elected to the presidency of a Latin American country .
Numerous heads of state and dignitaries from around the world attended the ceremony .
But Bush was not among them ; nor was Vice President Dick Cheney , Secretary of State Colin Powell , or any other prominent member of the US cabinet .
The US delegation , instead , was headed by Robert Zoellick , the US Trade Representative , who , despite being a member of the cabinet , lacked the political stature for which the occasion called .
With his traditional sense of humor , Lula dismissed the slight .
Other Latin American heads of state , however , were not so casual ; in fact , they were deeply offended .
According to them , this was a reminder that , with only a few exceptions – Cuba and possibly Mexico – Latin America was not a political priority for the US .
During the years that followed , the US administration ’ s attitude towards Hispanic undocumented immigrants alienated an increasing number of Latin American voters .
As a result , in country after country they have elected presidents that are openly critical of the US and its policies .
Six years after Lula ’ s inauguration , and despite Bush ’ s trip , Latin American politicians continue to believe that their region is being neglected .
It is true , they say , that the Bush administration launched the Free Trade Area of the Americas , but hemispheric free trade looks as distant today as ever .
Moreover , the handful of free-trade agreements signed with individual countries , or groups of countries , are lopsided and overwhelmingly favor US interests .
In order to regain Latin America ’ s support – and to dent Chávez ’ s popularity – the Bush administration will need much more than a short trip .
Passing a comprehensive Immigration Bill that normalizes the legal status of millions of Latin American workers in the US may help .
Reducing US agricultural protectionism significantly would be an equally positive measure in drawing the poison out of diplomatic relations .
