Bursting the Bubble
ROME : " Get-rich-quick " : for thousands of people around the world , that is what investing in the stock market means nowadays .
Old people invest their savings and pensions from home computers ; young men and women give up working for salaries to seek a big pay-off in the stock options on offer from dot.com firms .
Given the global market tumult of the past ten days , examining the historical data about the performance of stock markets is a mandatory sobering experience for investors old and new and everywhere .
In the United States over the past 100 years , investments in stocks delivered an average 6 % more than safe investments in short-term government securities .
This differential has been quite stable over time , although between 1947 and 1994 it was slightly higher at 8 % .
The numbers are similar in other countries . In Italy between 1961 and 1994 , for example , stock investments brought an average return of around 6 % more than investments in treasury securities .
Certainly , there have been extraordinary periods , such as the 1950s , when the differential between investing in the stock exchange in Milan and treasury securities climbed to over 22 % .
But there were also unlucky periods ; in the next decade ( 1961-1970 ) , when the average differential was -2 % .
Higher returns mean higher risks . It is as simple as that .
If , instead of investing in the Standard & Poor index of 500 largest companies quoted on Wall Street , an investor put his savings in small , and often more innovative , companies ( the so-called " small caps " ) , his return would have gone up in the last 50 years by 6 % – i.e. by a mere15 % over the return on ultra-safe government securities .
But the risks that investor faced would also have doubled , for the volatility of returns on short-term government securities was 3 % during the same 50 years , but a whopping 17 % for the S & P index , and 30 % for small cap stocks .
This 30 % figure means that , in any one year , the probability that the return on one 's investment was going to be 30 % higher than the return on government securities was equal to the probability that it would be 30 % lower .
Given that in the same period American government securities brought , net of inflation , a little less than 2 % return , this means that the return on small cap stocks had the probability , in any given year of delivering a + 32 % or -28 % return .
In other words , long-term investments in stocks do yield more than investments in government securities , but the heightened volatility means that decades must pass before we can safely conclude that an average stock investment has indeed brought higher returns .
The history of " new economy " stocks is too short to allow anyone to say whether the extraordinary performance of the stock exchanges in more or less all countries over the last few years is a temporary speculative boom , or an irreversible result of the new economy .
Until now , even considering recent gyrations , almost all stock exchanges have been rising at breakneck speed .
Annuals return in Italy , for example , between Christmas and the end of the first quarter of this year was 120 % .
But the greater volatility of the last few weeks saw the index of new European stocks lose at least 30 % of its value .
Here is a powerful signal that the old relationship between returns and volatility is reasserting itself .
The fear now , however , is that a new generation of investors , including those who invest from their computers at home and who never experienced a negative performance of the market , is underestimating the risks .
In the United States , where the boom has lasted the longest , many observers have no doubt that the market is in a bubble .
Looking at price earning ratios on Wall Street , Robert Shiller , an economist at Yale University and one of the most convinced believers in the bull market , observed recently that stocks have never been more overvalued , not even in the summer of 1929 , before the Great Crash .
The data , at least for the American economy , certainly shows that the new economy is generating extraordinary productivity increases .
But in light of historical experience , this may not be all that convincing .
Ours is not the first experience of a technological leap ; at the previous turn of the century , the world saw the introduction of the electric engine and of the telegraph – clearly both inventions of comparable significance to the Internet .
Yet , during that period , the differential in returns between stocks and treasury securities was on the order of 6 % .
In sum , the lesson of the new economy is not that one becomes rich without any effort , simply by speculating on the stock market .
The new economy teaches us that research , technological innovation , and entrepreneurial spirit in a competitive market – all things that are not plentiful in Europe – have a high payoff .
Europe has imported from the United States some of the negative aspects of the market , such as casino-like speculation .
But it has not yet moved toward the more important features of the American economy , such as deregulation of labor and product markets , and a reduction in the weight of the public sector on the economy .
Market falls in America might quickly be overcome because of the underlying strength of the American economy ;
Europe holds no such underlying strength in reserve .
For individual investors , stocks remain personal risks ; for Europe as a whole , bursting any speculative bubble may risk economic stability .
