Brittle Britain
LONDON – Which European country faces the greatest risk of political instability and financial turmoil in the year ahead ?
With less than a week to go before the British general election on May 7 , the answer is both obvious and surprising .
Once a haven of political and economic stability amid the turmoil of the euro crisis , the United Kingdom is about to become the European Union ’ s most politically unpredictable member .
Indeed , continuity is the one election outcome that can almost certainly be excluded .
Unless opinion polls are inaccurate to a degree unprecedented in British history , the two parties comprising the government coalition , Prime Minister David Cameron ’ s Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats , have almost no chance of winning a combined parliamentary majority .
One possibility – with a probability slightly above 50 % according to the polls – is that Britain , the birthplace of Thatcherism and the EU ’ s standard-bearer of neoliberal economics , will soon have a Labour-led government committed to the biggest tax-raising program since the 1970s .
Moreover , because of the peculiarities of the British electoral system and the rise of Scottish and Welsh nationalism , a Labour government ’ s survival would depend on the support of parties with even more radical economic agendas and dedicated to dismantling the UK .
Another scenario – almost as probable as a Labour-led coalition – is a weak and unstable Conservative government .
To judge by the opinion polls , Cameron ’ s best hope is to win more parliamentary seats than Labour and try to form a minority government , which could survive as long as the other parties failed to unite against it .
This might be possible , because the Liberal Democrats and Scottish Nationalist Party may see benefits in allowing a weak Conservative government to remain in power , at least for a while .
But a minority Conservative government would create additional uncertainties and risks .
Cameron would be more vulnerable than any leader in postwar British history to blackmail by his own party ’ s dissidents and extremists , who see it as their historic mission to pull Britain out of the EU .
And a minority government would be unable to pass any controversial legislation that the Scottish Nationalists opposed .
Moreover , Britain ’ s political institutions might be unable to cope .
The UK ’ s unwritten constitution is based entirely on tradition and precedent .
That arrangement has always presupposed strong governments with clear mandates .
The constitution is so poorly adapted to coalitions and minority governments that some legal scholars question whether the Queen should address Parliament on behalf of “ her ” new government if there is a risk that it will be toppled within a few weeks or months .
And yet , although the electoral arithmetic makes a stable centrist government – one that could maintain Britain ’ s current policies on taxes , economic management , and Europe – almost impossible to imagine , continuity is the outcome that most international business leaders and politicians seem to expect .
The clearest evidence of this can be seen in financial markets .
Although the pound has declined by about 10 % from its peak of $ 1.70 last September , sterling weakness has simply reflected the dollar ’ s strength .
In the same period , sterling has risen almost 10 % against the euro , while British share prices have hit all-time highs and government bonds have generated better returns in Britain than in the United States , Germany , or Japan .
What accounts for this apparent indifference – also evident among European politicians – to the looming political risks in Britain ?
Many international observers believe that politics simply no longer matters much in Britain , because the economy is fundamentally sound and growing at a fairly healthy pace .
But this is a dangerously complacent argument .
Yes , Britain recorded the fastest economic growth among the major OECD countries in 2014 and has an unemployment rate of only half the EU average .
But these favorable indicators obscure a source of enormous risk : one of the world ’ s largest external deficits , financed last year by foreign-capital inflows totaling $ 160 billion .
The current-account gap , at 5.5 % of GDP , is by far the highest among the major OECD countries and is at a level long associated – both in the UK and elsewhere – with the onset of financial crises .
As long as Britain was a haven of political stability and tax policies favorable to foreign investors , it had no problem attracting capital inflows .
But the impending shifts in Britain ’ s politics and its EU relations are bound to draw attention to the economy ’ s extreme dependence on foreign finance .
A Labour government , wielding tax proposals specifically designed to hit private foreign investors , would certainly discourage inflows .
But international investors might be equally put off by a weak Conservative government dominated by the party ’ s Europhobe wing .
In either case , GDP growth is likely to slow as business confidence , consumption , and house prices suffer – either from new taxes under Labour or from uncertainties about EU membership under the Conservatives .
Another reason why international observers may be ignoring such obvious risks is that they have been preoccupied with more dramatic events in Greece and Ukraine .
Politicians , financial analysts , and political commentators have limited time and attention .
They tend to focus on whatever seems to be the biggest and most urgent story , and British politics has not been it .
Then again , many apparently sophisticated analysts may simply be in a state of psychological denial .
Surveys of business and financial opinion in Britain show clear majorities in these groups expecting a sudden swing toward the Conservatives in the closing days of the election campaign , resulting in a stable coalition government and continuity in economic and political conditions .
Such a last-minute shift in voting intentions is possible , but the time for it is running out .
In fact , British public opinion has remained uncannily stable , not only during the official election campaign , but throughout the past 12 months .
There are simply no rational grounds for expecting either the Conservatives or Labour to achieve the decisive victory needed to form a stable government .
The upcoming election will therefore mark the beginning , not the end , of a period of uncertainty for British politics , economics , and finance .
