Britain ’ s No-Win Election ?
LONDON – With Labour trailing the Conservatives slightly in opinion polls , the British election on May 6 could well produce a “ hung ” parliament , in which neither major party obtains a majority and the Liberal Democrats hold the balance of power . Depending on which party wins more seats , either Labour ’ s Gordon Brown or the Conservatives ’ David Cameron will become prime minister with the Liberal Democrats ’ support .
The surprise is that the Conservatives are not polling far ahead of Labour .
After 13 years in power , Labour started the election with a huge disadvantage : the legacy of Tony Blair .
From being Labour ’ s most potent asset in 1997 , Blair turned into the party ’ s greatest liability after the Iraq war , and had to be practically forced out in 2006 .
His successor , Chancellor of the Exchequer ( finance minister ) Gordon Brown , was well described by Blair as “ clunking . ”
A man of charm and humor in private life , he is relentlessly dour in public .
In Britain ’ s first ever “ presidential ” television debate the youthful Nick Clegg stole the show for the Liberal Democrats with his freshness and directness .
David Cameron was polished but vague , and the jowly Brown came across as gun loaded with statistics .
But the statistics were not as good as they should have been .
Brown ’ s reputation for fiscal prudence evaporated with the Great Recession .
Nevertheless , it is the Great Recession that keeps Labour in contention , particularly in the light of the Conservatives ’ pledge to start cutting public spending the moment they take power .
This makes people anxious for their jobs .
Most people – bankers and many “ experts ” excepted – are instinctive Keynesians , even if they have never heard of John Maynard Keynes .
At some level , they understand what Keynes called the “ paradox of thrift ” : if households and firms are forced to reduce their expenses , and the government simultaneously cuts spending , unemployment will rise , because one person ’ s spending is another ’ s income , and the outcome will be less spending and less income all around .
Although there is no real British equivalent of the American revolving door between Washington and Wall Street , the Conservatives are widely considered to be friends of the City of London and soft on rich tax evaders like Lord Ashcroft and Zak Goldsmith . Although the MPs ’ expenses scandal – parliamentarians claiming reimbursement for dubious expenses – hit both main parties , the most egregious cases involved wealthy Conservative MPs .
And even though inequality of wealth and income in Britain increased in the 13 years Labour has been in power , this is thought to be something that a left-wing party might seek to correct , whereas there is no similar expectation for a party of the right .
In short , when the power of money is under attack , a party that represents money will have a harder time .
Labour has an obvious interest in fighting the election on their handling of the economic crisis . The Conservatives would have done better to support them on this , while focusing their attack on the government ’ s economic record as a whole – especially Labour ’ s addiction to centralization and over-regulation . But this is going to be difficult to do because their naïve Shadow Chancellor , George Osborne , seems determined to put “ cutting the deficit ” at the heart of the Conservative program .
Spending cuts , he argues , would restore credibility to Britain ’ s public finances , thereby quelling the anxieties of businesses , investors , and consumers about future tax increases and inflation .
A more certain future would restore confidence , boosting private investment and ensuring a robust recovery .
Public spending cuts come more naturally to Conservatives , and they have – despite their lack of candor – attempted to make a virtue out of this necessity .
The Conservative manifesto ‘ An Invitation to Join the Government of Britain ’ is merely a grandiloquent way of saying that under a Conservative government the people will have to look after themselves .
Labour , by contrast , argues that immediate spending cuts would wreck the recovery – that the hole in the economy , not the government budget deficit , is the problem needing most attention .
In practice , both parties are afraid of their convictions .
The Conservatives ’ pledge to start cutting the deficit immediately amounts to only a 1 % reduction in the coming year .
Any promise of deeper cuts would , they feel , be electoral suicide , even though their model of the economy tells them that the government should be smaller , and that the deficit is unnecessary and even damaging .
Labour ’ s model of the economy implies maintaining the deficit for as long as needed , and even increasing government spending if the recovery appears to be flagging .
But Labour is too afraid of the markets to say so openly .
So , like St. Augustine , they promise virtue , but not until next year .
In other words , neither major party can afford to blurt out the awkward truth : how much deficit reduction any government can achieve will depend on what happens to the economy over the next five years , and no one can say anything for certain about that .
So the main parties vie with each other in their promises not to cut public services .
Labour will not cut spending on unspecified “ front-line services . ” The Conservatives will not cut spending on health , international aid , and defense , similarly leaving unclear just where the cuts will be made .
Only the Liberal Democrats are committed to a big cut : scrapping Britain ’ s nuclear submarines .
Finally , all the parties promise big constitutional changes .
The Conservatives want to reduce the size of the House of Commons by 10 % .
Labour wants to reduce the House of Lords ’ membership by half and hold referenda on making it wholly elected and on changing the voting system .
The Liberal Democrats want MPs to be elected by proportional representation .
In a hung parliament , Britain ’ s ancient constitution would become a pawn among the parties as they haggle for a share of power .
In that case , voters would get both more and less than they bargained for .
