Rouhani ’ s Lost Chance
ISTANBUL – Iranian President Hassan Rouhani ’ s charm offensive has stalled .
It worked well in the United Nations General Assembly last September , when he had something solid to offer – a deal on his country ’ s nuclear program – raising hopes that Iran ’ s hardline foreign-policy stance would finally soften .
But UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon ’ s withdrawal of Iran ’ s invitation to the Geneva II conference on Syria suggests that Rouhani will need more than charm – or even a visit by Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to Tehran – to end his country ’ s isolation .
Rouhani has been largely successful in putting his predecessor Mahmoud Ahmadinejad ’ s tone-deaf leadership firmly in the past .
The Iranian establishment has supported his attempts to open the country up to its regional neighbors , court foreign investment , call for moderation in religious and cultural matters , and even pursue the nuclear deal with the West .
In fact , the nuclear agreement – which seems close to completion – is likely to be Iran ’ s most important diplomatic achievement since the Islamic Revolution in 1979 , providing it with considerable relief both domestically and internationally .
The fact that Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei personally backed the effort makes it all the more promising .
Nonetheless , the regime ’ s possible rapprochement with the United States remains a source of concern in the Middle East , because it would empower Iran at a time when the US is gradually disengaging from the region .
The question now is whether Rouhani ’ s moderation toward the West will be accompanied by a change in Iran ’ s Middle East policy , with all eyes on its policy toward Syria .
Ban rescinded Iran ’ s invitation to Geneva II under pressure from the US and the Syrian opposition .
After all , since the civil war began in 2011 , Iran has provided essential financial and military support for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime , while mobilizing its Lebanese proxy , the powerful Hezbollah militia , to fight against the rebels in Syria .
Whatever concerns the opposition has about Iran ’ s allegiances , the country is undoubtedly part of the Syrian equation ; indeed , its involvement is critical to reaching any accord .
But Rouhani ’ s failure to make a decisive statement on Syria – even after a series of leaked photographs of systematic torture and massacre raised the ire of the international community – has not helped the case for keeping Iran in the fold .
Rouhani recently had an opportunity to discuss Iran ’ s stance .
But , addressing the World Economic Forum in Davos , he squandered it , sticking to platitudes about the need for governments in the region to listen to their citizens and provide young people with “ jobs and hope . ”
On the subject of despotic rulers , Rouhani offered only the benign observation that they lack the ability to connect with and understand their people .
Rouhani ’ s recent rhetoric , however positive , falls far short of the expectations that his diplomacy has raised since his UN address last September .
In Davos , the world expected a decisive statement on Syria and other regional problems – not hackneyed nationalist rhetoric about eliminating “ biases ” against Iran .
Rouhani must have known that his failure to address the humanitarian disaster in Syria would damage his diplomatic strategy , which suggests that he must have had a strong reason .
Two possibilities stand out : either there is no consensus within the Iranian elite for a policy change , or the elite remain united in their determination to continue backing Assad .
Neither alternative is particularly charming , which would explain why he preferred to obscure his country ’ s position .
To be sure , Erdoğan ’ s visit to Tehran this week could help to defuse tensions over Syria – a subject on which Turkey and Iran have diametrically opposing views .
But it is unlikely to smooth the divisions among Iran ’ s elite , much less convince hardliners to stop backing Assad , leaving the visit ’ s significance uncertain , at best .
In refusing to take a strong position on Syria , Rouhani – like so many other world leaders – is placing his own interests above those of the 2.3 million registered Syrian refugees , the millions more who have been internally displaced , the estimated 130,000 people killed , and the rest of Syria ’ s long-suffering population .
Worse , he has refused to acknowledge Iran ’ s own role in the tragedy .
When he said in Davos , “ we cannot be indifferent to the pain and suffering of our fellow brethren in the region , ” he might as well have been referring to the Assad regime and its partners in crime .
What Syria needs is not rhetoric or charisma ; it needs action .
Iran appears incapable of providing it .
That is why Rouhani ’ s charm offensive will not be enough to persuade Iran ’ s adversaries that the Islamic Republic is ready to come in from the cold .
