Bush ’ s New Middle East
President George W. Bush ’ s declaration of “ mission accomplished ” in Iraq five years ago was as hubristic as his current assessment that the “ surge ” has “ delivered a major strategic victory in the broader war on terror ” is a fantasy .
The Iraq adventure is not only the longest and most expensive war in America ’ s history – the Nobel laureate economist Joseph Stiglitz has advanced a staggering estimate of $ 3 trillion – but is also the least conclusive .
The war has pulverized Iraqi society , dissolving it into an ethno-sectarian patchwork .
The “ surge ” will end sooner or later , and the Iraqis , crippled by violence and corruption , will still be incapable of uniting their polity , and , with their military still unable to take over from the Americans , jihadi and inter-ethnic violence is bound to erupt again .
As Iraqi Colonel Omar Ali , the Iraqi battalion commander in Mosul , the main focus of the insurgency today , recently put it , “ Without the Americans , it would be impossible for us to control Iraq . ”
Wars , as Winston Churchill defined them , are always “ a catalogue of blunders . ”
History ’ s judgment of the Iraq war will therefore certainly dwell more on whether it has accomplished its strategic objectives of “ reconstructing ” a highly dysfunctional Middle East in America ’ s democratic image and consolidating America ’ s hegemonic position in the region than on its price in blood and money .
Strategically , the war was an utter failure .
A clear case of imperial overstretch , the war strained America ’ s military , undermined the America ’ s moral standing worldwide and its reputation in the Middle East , severely threatened its economy , and showed to both friends and foes the limits of American power .
The most serious unintended consequence of the war is the emergence of a powerful Shia challenge to the West ’ s Sunni allies in the Middle East .
America ’ s destruction of Iraq as a regional power handed hegemony in the Persian Gulf – whose centrality to Western interests cannot be overstated – to Iran ’ s Shia Islamist regime on a silver platter .
On the rubble of Saddam Hussein ’ s dictatorship , the Americans helped create in Iraq the first Shia-dominated Arab state , which may well become subservient to Iran ’ s regional ambitions – a calamity of historic dimensions for America ’ s Sunni allies .
President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad ’ s recent state visit to Iraq conveyed to the Americans an unequivocal message : the prospects of the United States ever reaching a modicum of stability in Iraq have become dependent on Iran-aligned forces .
America ’ s difficulties in Iraq and beyond contributed decisively to Iran ’ s nuclear ambitions .
The Iranians now see themselves as immune from an American attack on their nuclear installations , for America ’ s troubles in Iraq and the growing opposition to the war in the US are a signal to them that America ’ s strategy of pre-emptive wars has failed .
But , however radical the Iranian regime might be , it is not suicidal .
Hence , the threat of a nuclear Iran might consist less in its propensity to start a nuclear war with Israel than in its capacity to project its regional power effectively .
A nuclear Iran might even threaten America ’ s capacity to project conventional military force in the Gulf in times of crisis .
Nor should the possibility be ruled out that Iran might be tempted to back its regional ambitions by supplying nuclear material to proxy terrorist groups .
If anything , America ’ s debacle in Iraq has only emboldened the challengers of the status quo in the region .
That has also been the result of Bush ’ s ill-conceived democracy crusade in the Arab world .
Bush discovered to his dismay that any exercise in Arab democracy is bound to usher in anti-Western Islamists , be it the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt , Shia parties in Iraq , or Hamas in Palestine .
The US eventually had to abandon its fantasies about Western-style Arab democracy , but it ironically left the Iranians carrying the torch of democracy in the region .
After all , Iran was quick to recognize that free elections are the safest way to undermine the Middle East ’ s pro-American regimes .
The Iraq war also meant that America ignored the Israeli-Palestinian peace process .
The chances that the Bush administration might be able to rally America ’ s Sunni “ moderate ” allies in the region to help salvage an Israeli-Palestinian peace are now hostage to an Iranian-led regional axis that includes Hamas , Hezbollah , and Syria .
All are united in their rejection of a Pax Americana in the Middle East , and all have so far shown remarkable resilience in ignoring America ’ s pre-conditions for a dialogue .
America ’ s inability to inspire the peoples of the Middle East , all ruled by US-backed autocracies , is not exactly stunning news .
What is news is that American power might also be losing its ability to intimidate them .
