Burma ’ s Drug Lord Generals
The news blackout imposed by Burma ’ s military junta on its decision to forego its turn as chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations ( ASEAN ) next year shows that it has received a severe blow to its prestige .
Indeed , the decision was far from voluntary .
Junta leader Senior General Than Shwe “ lost face ” and promptly disappeared from public view so completely that some Burmese thought he had died .
The protagonists that pressured the regime into relinquishing the ASEAN chair were not the usual Western human rights campaigners , but Burma ’ s closest ASEAN neighbors .
This must have made the retreat doubly painful for the generals , as ASEAN was previously one of the junta ’ s strongest shields against international pressure .
For ASEAN , the episode was a lesson in assertiveness .
It showed that persistent pressure works better than the “ constructive engagement ” that it had pursued , to no avail , for the eight years since Burma joined the organization .
This shift has been led by an embryonic grouping of elected regional parliamentarians known as the ASEAN Inter-Parliamentary Caucus on Democracy in Myanmar ( AIPMC ) , of which I am a member .
Established last November to spur progress on democratization in Burma , parliamentarians from Thailand , Indonesia , Malaysia , the Philippines , Singapore , and Cambodia took the unprecedented step of crossing national and party lines to review critically ASEAN policy on Burma , seek the release of Aung San Suu Kyi , and disqualify Burma from chairing .
Now , we will move for the suspension of Burma ’ s membership of ASEAN unless Aung San Suu Kyi and other political prisoners are released and clear progress towards democracy is made through negotiations involving the Aung ’ s National League for Democracy and representatives of the various ethnic groups .
As elected legislators in ASEAN ’ s established and budding democracies , the members of AIPMC feel that our voices have merit and legitimacy .
We know that Burma ’ s political destiny is inextricably linked to that of our own countries .
When Burma joined ASEAN in 1997 , there were only 210,000 Burmese refugees and asylum seekers throughout the region .
Now , nearly one million people have fled Burma ’ s political and economic chaos for neighboring countries , and another million people remain internally displaced .
Our youth are at an all-time high risk of drug addiction from the massive flow of narcotics , particularly amphetamine-type stimulants ( ATS ) , from Burma , while the generals there maintain congenial ties with notorious drug lords .
In mid-September , the UN Office on Drugs and Crime admitted that Burma and China were the world ’ s top producers of ATS .
Amphetamine drugs produced in eastern Burma seem to be transported with such ease that significant quantities have been found in northeast India , on Burma ’ s western border .
That , together with the heroin that is trafficked from Burma to India , China , Thailand , and other countries in the region , poses a serious threat to our political and economic security .
It is both tragic and inevitable that the areas of India and China bordering Burma now suffer from those countries ’ highest concentration of drug addiction and HIV infection . , My own country , Thailand , receives up to 900 million amphetamine pills from Burma every year , and about a third of our regular drug users are below the age of 16 .
If this is the impact on Thailand , what about the young people and children of Burma , who have been restricted from access to education , information , and health care ?
It is scandalous that drug lords enjoy more freedom to operate than aid agencies , while basic access to food , education , and health care suffers many restrictions , with up to 70 % of Burma ’ s children are chronically malnourished in some border areas .
Indeed , in August , World Food Program Executive Director James Morris revealed that the WFP had delivered only 430 tons of the 5,500 tons of rice earmarked for vulnerable people in Burma ’ s northern Arakan State because of restrictions imposed by the regime .
Two weeks later , the Global Fund for HIV / AIDS , Tuberculosis , and Malaria pulled its funding for programs in Burma , citing government restrictions that had created “ an impossibly difficult environment . ”
Preventing aid from reaching those in need is bad enough .
But Burma ’ s regime actually perpetuates conditions that sustain and worsen the HIV / AIDS epidemic by restricting access to counseling , medication , and other support services .
In order for HIV / AIDS programs to be effective and sustainable , affected communities must have the freedom to organize and empower themselves .
Only then can they be assured access to the resources essential for treatment options .
Aung San Suu Kyi ’ s eloquent plea , “ Please use your liberty to promote ours , ” has special resonance for us in AIPMC , who enjoy the benefits of representative democracy .
This is why we feel obligated to call on the highest levels of the international community – including the UN Security Council – to address the question of Burma , for we must show that we are serious about peace , democracy , and human rights .
The courageous people of Burma , like people everywhere around the world , deserve what far too many of us take for granted .
