Celebrating the German Model
If anyone wanted evidence that we are not in the mental and political world of the interwar Great Depression , the German election result and its outcome – a stable government of the center-right - should be a clincher . In interwar Germany , the Depression destroyed German democracy and led to the rise to power of Hitler and the National Socialists ; in today ’ s Germany , the most severe economic crisis since the Second World War produced the reelection of Frau Merkel .
Conventional wisdom claims that incumbent parties and politicians are punished by voters in times of economic distress . Throughout the campaign there was never any doubt about the position or tpopularity of Chancellor Angela Merkel .
The interwar Depression led to the disintegration of liberal economic and political values . In Germany in 2009 not only was there was no swing to political extremism of the right : there was no sign of any support for a radical right . In the elections for regional parliaments , the small radical right parties ( which have never been a feature of national politics ) simply disappeared .
The real victor of the campaign , with a vote that jumped up to 14.5 % and a position in parliament that will determine the shape of the new coalition government , was the heir of classic German liberalism , the FDP . It campaigned on a promise of tax reduction and of deregulation in order to stimulate the economic growth that Germany needs to get out of the economic crisis .
The real losers of the election were the Social Democrats , with a drop in support of 11 % that is without precedent in the very stable history of German electoral behavior . Some on the left claim that the SPD ’ s catastrophic result was the product of too close an engagement with liberalism and deregulation . According to this view , the party is now paying the price for Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder ’ s successful attempts at economic reform in the early 2000 ’ s . It seems more likely that the party was punished for its lackluster electoral campaign , and for the negativity with which it tried to present the outcome of the election ( the center-right coalition ) as a threat to social peace in Germany .
In the interwar crisis of democracy , participation in elections surged as voters tried to protest against what the radical parties denounced as “ the system ” . In Germany in 2009 , electoral participation fell by 5 % , to 72.5 % . Those voters who were disillusioned by politics simply thought that there was no point in voting .
The only point in common with the interwar results seems to be that economic crisis then as now strengthened the radical left .
But what a difference ! Then there was a powerful communist party , closely aligned with the interests and policies of the Soviet Union . Now the party of protest is unambiguously the party of historical losers : in the East , of Germans who are nostalgic for the planned economy and society of state socialism ; in the West , of critics of the SPD who lost a power struggle with Gerhard Schroeder .
It is a party with no coherent program , but rather a compendium of popular and nationalist slogans .
It is a testimony of the responsibility and maturity of the German people that this miscellaneous alliance of the disaffected only attracted 12 % of the vote .
If the election is clearly not a victory for political and economic radicalism , it would be equally misleading to interpret it as the triumph of the free market . Throughout the campaign , there was an eerie degree of consensus about the desirability of central features of a distinctly European and more specifically German system of values .
What are those values ?
A social market economy , rather than unbridled market capitalism ; an export economy built on a large and technically innovative manufacturing base ; a large network of small and medium sized enterprise , often family-owned , that is open to the global economy ; a sense of environmental responsibility ; and a suspicion of financially driven Anglo-Saxon style globalization and corporate capitalism . Indeed the sense that Germany had the opportunity to show off the unique strengths of the “ German model ” was a key to Merkel ’ s appeal , and she repeatedly noted what a tough line she had taken against the position of banks .
In coming years , the German government is likely to be more vocal in European and global debates . It is likely to present the German model as something that corresponds more closely to what the world needs in the aftermath of the financial crisis .
Financial activity was concentrated largely in what the Europeans termed “ Anglo-Saxon ” economies : above all the United States and the United Kingdom , and a few small countries that tried , disastrously , to replicate a model of free-for-all finance such as Iceland and Ireland . But the emerging markets that drive globalization in the early twenty-first century have a similar mix of export orientation and a prominent industrial base of small and medium-sized and frequently family-owned enterprises . They have the problem today of trying to reconcile dynamic growth and social cohesion that was the problem of Germany in the past , and to which the German social model was and is held up as the answer .
Merkel ’ s new coalition will sit neatly alongside the new Japanese government of Yukio Hatoyama , which is also dedicated to finding a new and peculiarly Japanese model of economic growth .
These new national visions of economics in the twenty-first century are not simply turning in on themselves , or embarking on aggressive campaigns driven by xenophobic and racial nationalism – that was the world of the twentieth century . In the world of the twenty-first century , models of social organization have to persuade rather than conquer . The world looks for local or national solutions to global problems . Frau Merkel won the election because she formulated a clear answer .
