China ’ s Not-So-New Not-So-Normal
HONG KONG – I just spent a week in China , where I participated in the Boao Asia Forum , a conference similar to the annual gathering of the World Economic Forum in Davos .
The topic of my panel was what President Xi Jinping has called the Chinese economy ’ s “ new normal ” : an era of relatively slower growth , following three decades of double-digit economic expansion .
But what strikes me most about China ’ s economy is how remarkable it is .
Indeed , its performance continues to astound me .
Though it undoubtedly faces plenty of challenges , the key question is how likely they are to bring down the economy .
Of the four BRIC countries – Brazil , Russia , India , and China – Xi ’ s is the only one that has met my expectations for growth so far this decade .
From 2011 to 2014 , the Chinese economy grew at an average annual rate of 8 % per year .
If it continues to grow by around 7 % for the rest of the decade , as the authorities and many observers expect , it will achieve an average pace of expansion of 7.5 % , in line with my projections .
The phrase “ new normal ” is a clever bit of messaging by China ’ s leaders , who must explain to the country ’ s 1.4 billion citizens why the economy will no longer be growing by 10 % a year .
But there is nothing normal about an economy that is already twice as large as the next largest , Japan , and will possibly outstrip the European Union within the next five years .
I was in China primarily in my role as Chair of the British government ’ s Review on Antimicrobial Resistance ; but I also sought opportunities to speak to people about the challenges facing the economy .
Many international observers have been worried about the country ’ s oversupply of housing and the related credit boom , making me wonder whether I have been overly sanguine about these risks .
But my conversations persuaded me that both problems are likely to be manageable .
To be sure , the housing market is in the doldrums .
But , as many pointed out to me , this is partly the result of deliberate government measures to deflate it ( also comforting is the fact that consumers are in general not overleveraged ) .
Some builders will experience problems with credit , and so might some local authorities .
But spending by the central government is such a small percentage of the country ’ s total GDP that policymakers have a lot of room for maneuver if intervention becomes necessary in these areas .
Foreign observers frequently speculate that the Chinese authorities may be deliberately overstating the economy ’ s strength .
But it is equally possible that the size of some sectors is being understated .
After spending a few days in Beijing , it was abundantly clear that China is undergoing a boom in Internet use , including as a consumer platform .
Online commerce is offsetting some of the other weaker areas of the economy , and its full impact might actually be underreported in official statistics .
I do worry that the government is not moving fast enough to grant the country ’ s millions of migrant workers official residency in the cities where they work and live .
Migrants ’ continued lack of access to public services might prevent a large rise in consumption as a share of GDP .
But , as I was told during my visit , the central government ’ s reluctance to move more quickly reflects its wariness of imposing immense fiscal pressures on local authorities .
Another area of serious concern is health care .
At some stage , the central government will have to address the sector ’ s deficiencies .
I learned about one example when discussing antimicrobial resistance , to which the government has responded by attempting to limit the quantity of antibiotics a patient may take .
The trouble is that many hospitals and doctors rely on drug sales for a large portion of their revenues , which creates a powerful incentive to find ways to circumvent the rules .
Pollution remains a grave challenge as well .
But it must also be noted that China ’ s carbon dioxide emissions declined notably in 2014 , offering what is perhaps the first tangible evidence that the country is making some progress on this front .
Energy efficiency and renewable energy use are both on the rise as well .
Most important , despite the challenges it faces , the Chinese economy ’ s singular importance is now widely recognized .
The country ’ s recent international achievements – particular its ability to secure the backing of the United Kingdom , France , Germany , and Italy for its Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank in the face of opposition from the United States – imply a high degree of confidence that China will address its problems successfully .
China ’ s role within existing international financial institutions could change this year as well .
In December , the International Monetary Fund will consider adding renminbi to the basket of currencies that comprise the Fund ’ s unit of account , known as Special Drawing Rights , alongside the US dollar , the euro , the British pound , and the Japanese yen .
And the world is still waiting for the US to implement a 2010 reform of the IMF that would strengthen the position of China and other large emerging economies in the institution ’ s governance structure .
Given the significance of the Chinese economy , continuing to leave this unaddressed is anything but normal .
