China ’ s International Growth Agenda
MILAN – For most of the past 35 years , China ’ s policymakers have set their focus on the domestic economy , with reforms designed to allow the market to provide efficiency and accurate price signals .
Though they had to be increasingly aware of their country ’ s growing impact on the global economy , they had no strategy to ensure that China ’ s neighbors gained from its economic transformation .
But now China does have such a strategy , or at least is rapidly developing one .
Moreover , it extends well beyond Asia , embracing Eastern Europe and the east coast of Africa .
A key element of China ’ s strategy is the recently established Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank ( AIIB ) , and to some extent the BRICS ’ New Development Bank , established last year by Brazil , Russia , India , China , and South Africa .
Both banks are obvious alternatives – and so rivals – to the Western-dominated World Bank and International Monetary Fund .
Also vital to the new strategy are two prospective modern-day Silk Roads : an overland route through Central Asia to the Black Sea and a “ Maritime Silk Road ” by which shipping will pass from the South China Sea , through the Strait of Malacca , across the Indian Ocean to East Africa , and from there through the Red Sea into the eastern Mediterranean .
Economists sometimes portray the global economy as a huge bazaar .
But it is not .
It is a network , in which the links are built by expanding the flows of goods , services , people , capital , and – importantly – information .
China ’ s goal is to create these links , and it has plenty of assets that will allow it to act as a catalyst of global growth and development .
The most obvious asset is China ’ s large and growing domestic market , to which other economies can gain access via trade and investment .
China will thus be joining the ranks of the advanced countries in providing an export market ( and jobs ) for countries at earlier stages of economic development .
In addition , because China has built up a capacity to invest that is far larger than its domestic economy can now absorb , it will inevitably seek opportunities abroad , both public and private .
Chinese companies , in particular , will increasingly want to establish their brands internationally .
With the involvement of the AIIB and the New Development Bank , China has developed what amounts to a multinational development strategy .
While there are skeptics , broad support for the AIIB suggests that the benefits outweigh the risks , and that China ’ s initiatives may help build a network that is open to everyone .
After all , the trade and investment that will follow could not possibly all flow through China .
Meanwhile , by virtue of more than 30 swap arrangements with other central banks ( the first was with South Korea in December 2008 ) , China is using its foreign-exchange reserves to help its neighbors and others defend themselves against volatile international capital flows .
This is in tandem with the authorities ’ efforts to promote the internationalization of the renminbi , which is rapidly expanding its role in trade settlement .
There are significant efficiency gains to be had by settling transactions in trading partners ’ currencies , without the intermediation of , say , the US dollar .
Of course , there is much more to the internationalization of a currency , not least large and liquid domestic financial markets and the establishment of trust and confidence .
This takes time , but China is already applying to the IMF to have the renminbi included in the basket of currencies that determines the value of the Fund ’ s unit of account , Special Drawing Rights , with a decision likely in late 2015 .
Joining the US dollar , the British pound , the euro , and the Japanese yen in the SDR club would be symbolically significant .
More important , as with China ’ s accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001 , which required substantial reforms , fulfilling the conditions for joining the SDR promises to speed progress toward full capital-account liberalization – and thus toward a fully convertible renminbi .
China ’ s policymakers have long time horizons .
Their strategy will doubtless face obstacles in the coming years .
The question is whether the strategy is worth pursuing now .
The answer almost certainly is yes .
The overland “ silk road , ” for example , will reduce China ’ s reliance on sea-lanes , which can be blocked or disrupted , especially at the Strait of Malacca .
More generally , Chinese investment will ease the constraints on the silk road economies caused partly by slow growth and investment shortfalls in advanced economies .
Ultimately , vibrant growing economies in the region will benefit China ’ s economy and its stature .
Many believe that public-sector investment is a good way ( perhaps the best way ) to use the global economy ’ s productive resources and increase its efficiency and growth potential .
But this requires a multinational effort .
China ’ s leaders surely want international recognition of their country ’ s global stature .
But they also want China ’ s rise to high-income status to occur in a way that is – and that is perceived to be – beneficial to its neighbors and the world .
The new external focus of China ’ s growth and development strategy seems to be intended to make that vision a reality .
