Central Bankers under Siege
CHICAGO – Poor Ben Bernanke !
As Chairman of the United States Federal Reserve Board , he has gone further than any other central banker in recent times in attempting to stimulate the economy through monetary policy .
He has cut short-term interest rates to the bone .
He has adopted innovative new methods of monetary easing .
Again and again , he has repeated that , so long as inflationary pressure remains contained , his main concern is the high level of US unemployment .
Yet progressive economists chastise him for not doing enough .
What more could they possibly want ?
Raise the inflation target , they say , and all will be well .
Of course , this would be a radical departure for the Fed , which has worked hard to convince the public that it will keep inflation around 2 % .
That credibility has allowed the Fed to be aggressive : it is difficult to imagine that it could have expanded its balance sheet to the extent that it has if the public thought that it could not be trusted on inflation .
So why do these economists want the Fed to sacrifice its hard-won gains ?
The answer lies in their view of the root cause of continued high unemployment : excessively high real interest rates .
Their logic is simple .
Before the financial crisis erupted in 2008 , consumers buoyed US demand by borrowing heavily against their rising house prices .
Now these heavily indebted households cannot borrow and spend any more .
An important source of aggregate demand has evaporated .
As consumers stopped buying , real ( inflation-adjusted ) interest rates should have fallen to encourage thrifty households to spend .
But real interest rates did not fall enough , because nominal interest rates cannot go below zero .
By increasing inflation , the Fed would turn real interest rates seriously negative , thereby coercing thrifty households into spending instead of saving .
With rising demand , firms would hire , and all would be well .
This is a different logic from the one that calls for inflation as a way of reducing long-term debt ( at the expense of investors ) , but it has equally serious weaknesses .
First , while low rates might encourage spending if credit were easy , it is not at all clear that traditional savers today would go out and spend .
Think of the soon-to-retire office worker .
She saved because she wanted enough money to retire .
Given the terrible returns on savings since 2007 , the prospect of continuing low interest rates might make her put even more money aside .
Alternatively , low interest rates could push her ( or her pension fund ) to buy risky long-maturity bonds .
Given that these bonds are already aggressively priced , such a move might thus set her up for a fall when interest rates eventually rise .
Indeed , America may well be in the process of adding a pension crisis to the unemployment problem .
Second , household over-indebtedness in the US , as well as the fall in demand , is localized , as my colleague Amir Sufi and his co-author , Atif Mian , have shown .
Hairdressers in Las Vegas lost their jobs partly because households there have too much debt stemming from the housing boom , and partly because many local construction workers and real-estate brokers were laid off .
Even if we can coerce traditional debt-free savers to spend , it is unlikely that there are enough of them in Las Vegas .
If these debt-free savers are in New York City , which did not experience as much of a boom and a bust , cutting real interest rates will encourage spending on haircuts in New York City , which already has plenty of demand , but not in Las Vegas , which has too little .
Put differently , real interest rates are too blunt a stimulus tool , even if they work .
Third , we have little idea about how the public forms expectations about the central bank ’ s future actions .
If the Fed announces that it will tolerate 4 % inflation , could the public think that the Fed is bluffing , or that , if an implicit inflation target can be broken once , it can be broken again ?
Would expectations shift to a much higher inflation rate ?
How would the added risk premium affect long-term interest rates ?
What kind of recession would the US have to endure to bring inflation back to comfortable levels ?
The answer to all of these questions is : We really don ’ t know .
Given the dubious benefits of still lower real interest rates , placing central-bank credibility at risk would be irresponsible .
Finally , it is not even clear that the zero lower bound is primarily responsible for high US unemployment .
Traditional Keynesian frictions like the difficulty of reducing wages and benefits in some industries , as well as non-traditional frictions like the difficulty of moving when one cannot sell ( or buy ) a house , may share blame .
We cannot ignore high unemployment .
Clearly , improving indebted households ’ ability to refinance at low current interest rates could help to reduce their debt burden , as would writing off some mortgage debt in cases where falling house prices have left borrowers deep underwater ( that is , the outstanding mortgage exceeds the house ’ s value ) .
More could be done here .
The good news is that household debt is coming down through a combination of repayments and write-offs .
But it is also important to recognize that the path to a sustainable recovery does not lie in restoring irresponsible and unaffordable pre-crisis spending , which had the collateral effect of creating unsustainable jobs in construction and finance .
With a savings rate of barely 4 % of GDP , the average US household is unlikely to be over-saving .
Sensible policy lies in improving the capabilities of the workforce across the country , so that they can get sustainable jobs with steady incomes .
