China ’ s New Normal and America ’ s Old Habits
NEW HAVEN – China is generating a lot of confusion nowadays , both at home , where senior officials now tout the economy ’ s “ new normal , ” and abroad , exemplified by America ’ s embrace of Cold War-style tactics to contain China ’ s rise .
On both counts , the disconnects are striking , adding a new dimension of risk to the impact of the “ China factor ” on a fragile world .
The official view in China is that its economy has already arrived in the Promised Land of the “ new normal . ”
Indeed , that was the theme of the just-concluded China Development Forum ( CDF ) – an important platform for debate among China ’ s senior officials and a broad cross-section of international participants that occurs immediately after the annual National People ’ s Congress .
Since the CDF ’ s inception in 2000 , the Chinese government has used the event to signal its policy priorities .
In 2002 , for example , the CDF focused on the impact of China ’ s accession to the World Trade Organization – a precursor to a spectacular surge of export-led growth .
In 2009 , the emphasis was on China ’ s aggressive post-crisis stimulus strategy .
And last year ’ s event addressed implementation of the so-called Third Plenum reforms .
This suggests that China ’ s “ new normal ” will be the government ’ s top priority this year .
But there remains considerable ambiguity as to what exactly the new normal entails – or whether it has even been achieved .
In his keynote speech at the CDF , Zhang Gaoli , one of the seven members of the Politburo Standing Committee ( the Chinese Communist Party ’ s highest decision-making body ) , declared that the senior leadership has rendered the “ strategic judgment that China ’ s economy has entered the stage of the new normal . ” Yet , at the CDF ’ s wrap-up session , Premier Li Keqiang suggested , a bit less decisively , that China is basically following the world economy in its transition to a new normal .
In short , China ’ s government is confusing a path with the final destination – a point that I stressed in my remarks to the CDF , in which I argued that China is in the early stages of rebalancing its economy toward services and consumption .
In fact , China is far from settling in to a new normal .
The best way to measure how far China still has to go is to consider the development of its services sector – the infrastructure of consumer demand in an economy .
The good news is that services are now growing faster than any other sector , having reached 48 % of GDP in 2014 ( thus surpassing the end-2015 target of 47 % well ahead of schedule ) .
The tough news is that this remains significantly lower than the 60-65 % share typical of a more “ normal ” economy .
Given this , it is worrying that China ’ s leaders believe that the new normal is already at hand .
The notion that this critical transition has occurred risks generating complacency at a time when China should be focused on the wrenching , but essential , process of structural adjustment – one that will take at least another decade to complete .
Continuing the shift to a services-led growth model is important for a number of reasons .
With services in China employing 30 % more workers per unit of output than manufacturing and construction , the sector ’ s expansion will help to preserve social stability , even as economic growth slows to 7 % .
Observers in the West , focused largely on the slowdown of headline GDP growth , continue to miss this key point .
Moreover , because the services sector also requires fewer commodities and less energy , this transition will help China address its serious environmental problems .
In the meantime , China faces another , equally daunting challenge : the United States ’ growing determination to contain its growing influence .
At this year ’ s CDF , tensions between the hegemon and the rising power were widely discussed , both in the formal sessions and on the sidelines .
Three developments were especially noteworthy : US resistance to China ’ s efforts to establish the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank – a stance now rejected by most of America ’ s closest allies ;
President Barack Obama ’ s signature trade initiative , the Trans-Pacific Partnership , which excludes China ; and yet another effort by the US Senate to enact legislation on currency manipulation that takes dead aim at China .
Combined with ongoing disputes over cyber security and territorial claims in the East and South China Seas – not to mention questions about America ’ s geostrategic “ pivot ” toward Asia – these issues have chilled the Sino-American relationship .
It fell to Henry Kissinger , who was present at the dawn of the modern US-China relationship , to put it all into context .
At the CDF , he stressed how different the situation is now , compared to 1972 , when he and then-President Richard Nixon first met with Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai .
Unlike the immediate military threats back then , today ’ s challenges – such as climate change , cyber security , and global health – can be addressed only through collaborative strategic engagement .
The imperative to cooperate is an inevitable outgrowth of globalization .
As Kissinger emphasized , the Middle Kingdom of China ’ s dynastic era knew nothing of the Roman Empire , and vice versa .
In today ’ s world , however , no great power can afford to operate in a vacuum .
They receive instantaneous feedback from one another – especially on shared challenges – whether they like it or not .
In a sense , it is no surprise that the US is bristling over China ’ s ascendance .
After all , dominant powers have always struggled to cope with rising ones .
Nonetheless , China , burdened by 150 years of perceived humiliation by the West , does not take kindly to that reaction .
As China confronts the challenges of its economy ’ s shift to a new normal , it will need to find common ground with the US .
And America will need to work to deepen its understanding of China ’ s transition .
Both countries will have to show leadership , vision , and openness to collaborative engagement .
Sadly , there was little sign of that at this year ’ s CDF .
