Puerto Rico in Crisis
WASHINGTON , DC – Puerto Rico ought to be the jewel of the Caribbean .
It is not .
Tourism has been stagnant for decades , even as travelers have flocked to other Caribbean destinations .
European firms doing business in North and South America locate their corporate headquarters in Miami , Panama City , and elsewhere , with almost none choosing Puerto Rico .
And now the island ’ s economy , after a decade of torpor , is declining at an accelerating rate as people leave for the US mainland .
Public debt has soared , and the government says it cannot pay .
Unlike Greece , Puerto Rico is not a country ( which means that it is not eligible for financing from the International Monetary Fund ) .
Nor is it a US state .
Yet it has features of both : Although it has its own constitution , it is a United States territory , Puerto Ricans are US citizens , and the island is subject to US federal law , except as otherwise stipulated .
The advantages of this hybrid status include the security and predictability of America ’ s rule of law , eligibility for federal transfer payments , and favorable tax treatment .
Puerto Ricans who are not US government employees do not pay federal income tax , and the island ’ s bonds are “ triple tax-exempt ” ( free of federal , state , and local taxes ) .
But there are also disadvantages to this arrangement .
For example , Puerto Rico is subject to the Jones Act , which requires using very costly US-built ships and crews for all sea transport to and from the mainland .
The island must also comply with the federally mandated minimum wage , despite an income level about half that of the poorest US state .
And municipalities cannot benefit from Chapter 9 of the US bankruptcy code .
Puerto Rico ’ s current troubles trace their origin to the gradual withdrawal , starting in 1996 , of earlier exemptions from US corporate taxes for companies located on the island .
Capital-intensive companies , especially pharmaceutical firms , began leaving .
Puerto Rico ’ s economy recorded little growth after 1996 , and real ( inflation-adjusted ) GDP has been falling for the past decade .
Many Puerto Ricans , unable to find jobs on the island , have migrated to the mainland , with the population and labor force estimated to be shrinking at a rate of 1.5 % this year .
Moreover , Puerto Rico ’ s labor force participation rate is under 40 % , compared to 62 % on the mainland .
There is plenty of blame to go around for these failures . Puerto Rico and the US government each bear responsibility .
Successive Puerto Rican governments thought that the island ’ s economy was in “ recession ” and attempted to spur activity by increasing government spending .
Low interest rates meant that deficits could be financed by floating bonds .
Debt mounted , and markets are now almost entirely closed to more .
Despite efforts to cut expenditures and boost tax receipts , current and prospective obligations ( including pension liabilities ) far exceed any feasible increase in government revenues .
Given the ease with which Puerto Ricans move to the mainland , raising taxes is unlikely to increase revenues .
The US government also is culpable .
The inapplicability of Chapter 9 makes orderly debt restructuring very difficult .
Moreover , Puerto Rico is covered by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and must pay accordingly , even though the island ’ s doctors are compensated at a lower rate than those on the mainland ( and the Puerto Rican government must bear much of the cost ) .
The same is true of some other welfare payments .
Low labor force participation is a result of the relatively low productivity of Puerto Rico ’ s unskilled workers .
Companies cannot compete with firms that pay much lower wage rates on neighboring islands .
A rule of thumb is that a minimum wage that is above 55 % of the median wage will impede job creation ( and economic growth ) ;
Puerto Rico ’ s minimum wage is 77 % of the median , owing to the federal mandate .
A family of three with one wage earner at the minimum wage can take home about $ 1,100 per month , while it could get about $ 1,700 on welfare .
No surprise , then , that people either leave the island or go on welfare and work in the informal economy .
Overcoming Puerto Rico ’ s crisis will require restoring growth , implementing a sustainable fiscal policy , and debt restructuring .
Accomplishing the first of these would , together with reduction of excessive government expenditures , help to achieve the second .
For the Puerto Rican authorities , this means making the island friendlier to business , including by removing onerous labor-market regulations .
Meanwhile , the US government could exempt Puerto Rico from the Jones Act , extend to it Chapter 9 bankruptcy coverage , and align the island ’ s welfare and labor requirements with its productivity level .
Each of these policy actions requires political will .
Puerto Rico ’ s governor , Alejandro García Padilla , has appointed a working group to produce a five-year program to restore growth and fiscal sustainability .
Bills to make Puerto Rico eligible for Chapter 9 are being introduced in Congress .
These and other measures now under consideration promise to improve Puerto Rico ’ s economic prospects .
But they will require concerted and determined action on all fronts .
Puerto Rico is not Greece ; successive governors of the island have introduced budgets they thought were balanced , only to find that inadequate growth led to lower revenues and higher expenditures than had been projected .
But it is a US territory .
The US government should do its part to improve the island ’ s prospects .
