China and the Afghan Endgame
BEIJING – Ever since US President Barack Obama decided to begin withdrawing American troops from Afghanistan , global interest in what role ( if any ) China will play in determining that war-ravaged country ’ s future has grown dramatically .
After all , China is not merely a neighbor of Afghanistan , but the world ’ s most important rising power – indeed , a “ world power , ” as Mike Mullen , Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff proclaimed in Beijing this past June .
If China proves itself willing to help shore up Afghan President Hamid Karzai ’ s administration , it will not seek to gain any immediate advantage from the withdrawal of US forces .
But , despite the billions of dollars China has invested in developing Afghanistan ’ s natural resources , it is hard to see it undertaking a policy of broader and proactive engagement there .
One reason why China is wary of assuming a bigger role in Afghanistan , despite the country ’ s undoubted importance for regional stability , is that America ’ s war there has been controversial in China from the outset .
Chinese nationalists believe that the war was undertaken by the US partly in order to place its military near one of China ’ s most sensitive borders .
Moreover , to supply its Afghan forces , the US deepened its military footprint in Central Asia by renting the Manas Air Base in Kyrgyzstan , which also shares a border with China .
In the eyes of Chinese nationalists , these efforts were all the part of an American conspiracy to encircle China .
Thus , Chinese nationalists can ’ t wait to see the back of America ’ s Afghan military presence .
For Chinese strategic realists , any support for America ’ s efforts to help end the Afghan insurgency should be part of a broader China-US bargain .
China might agree not to undermine America as it withdraws only if the US agrees to rethink its arms sales to Taiwan , or to pull back from its commitment to support Japan ’ s claims to the Diaoyu / Senkaku islands , the ownership of which China disputes .
Obviously , such deals will be unwelcome in the US .
Given that neither Chinese foreign-policy camp believes that it will get what it wants out of cooperating with the US , both simply want America ’ s withdrawal to happen as soon as possible , without concern for what Afghanistan will look like afterwards .
For both camps , only great-power politics matters for China ’ s national security , and if diplomacy cannot influence the balance of power , there is little reason to engage with an issue .
For Chinese liberals , Afghanistan is fraught with ethnic threats .
By recklessly denying China ’ s request to extradite Uighur extremists to China for trial , the US showed scant regard for an issue of paramount importance – the threat posed to China ’ s hard-won unity by separatists .
Muslim Uighurs from Xinjiang province were captured in Taliban training campus and jailed at Guantánamo Bay with other international terrorists from 2002 through 2009 .
China thought their extradition necessary to undercutting international sympathy for Uighur independence seekers .
But the US worried about the potential for human-rights abuses in China and rejected the Uighurs ’ extradition .
Indeed , former President George W. Bush welcomed Rebiya Kadeer , a leader of the exiled Uighur independence movement , to the White House , embittering many Chinese .
And given that the Uighur bastion of Xinjiang is close to China ’ s borders with Afghanistan and Pakistan , the US was unwise to raise Chinese hackles in this way .
Of course , a stable , orderly , and secular Afghanistan serves China ’ s interests as much as it benefits the rest of the world .
Yet few Chinese are willing to confess that the US-led Afghanistan war , which removed the Taliban and Al Qaeda from their dominant roles in the country , improved China ’ s domestic security .
That refusal is clearly the result of the “ structural ” ambivalence that now exists between the US and China .
The extent to which China will engage Afghanistan positively will depend in large part on whether China rids itself of the prevailing zero-sum mindset and facilitates America ’ s military withdrawal by doing what it can to stabilize the country .
China can help by stiffening the resolve of Pakistan ’ s military to move more aggressively to contain Taliban extremists on its territory ; open border regions to help resupply NATO forces in Afghanistan ; and invest in the country ’ s infrastructure .
Indeed , China ’ s relations with Pakistan have assumed greater importance recently , owing to the tensions that now exist between Pakistan and the US .
The Obama administration ’ s challenge nowadays is to calibrate its recent suspension of some military aid to Pakistan in order to maximize its leverage without pushing the government even closer to the extremists .
By working with the US on Pakistan , China can help secure its own interest in a strong Pakistani campaign against the militants on its territory .
Regardless of the Bush-era disputes with the US over the Uighur prisoners at Guantánamo , China is in a better position to tell its “ all-weather ” friends in Islamabad that stabilizing Afghanistan is not only an American objective , but a significant Chinese goal as well .
China ’ s cooperation may not be essential to defeating Al Qaeda and other militants in Afghanistan , but it will be if lasting peace and stability is to be realized .
Chinese and US interests in Afghanistan are unlikely ever to be perfectly aligned , but the two sides can and must learn to cooperate for their own benefit , and that of the region .
The challenge for China is to exert its power and influence in a way that harmonizes with the US , despite widespread displeasure among Chinese at America ’ s position on a variety of issues , from Taiwan to the East and South China seas .
