China ’ s Monetary-Policy Surprise
NEW HAVEN – In economic policy , as in most other areas , actions speak louder than words .
By cutting its benchmark policy interest rates on November 21 , the People ’ s Bank of China ( PBOC ) has underscored the tactical focus of the government ’ s stabilization policy , which aims to put a floor of around 7 % on GDP growth .
Achieving this goal will be no small feat .
China ’ s economy is caught in the crossfire of structural and cyclical & nbsp ; headwinds .
Structural pressures have & nbsp ; arisen from the shift to a new model of services- and consumer-led growth , and cyclical pressures stem from & nbsp ; a tough global environment that has & nbsp ; put downward pressure on the old model of & nbsp ; export and investment-led growth .
The cyclical challenges , in particular , are proving to be more vexing than anticipated .
Though exports have declined considerably from their pre-crisis peak of 35 % of GDP , they continue to account for about 24 % , leaving China exposed to the global growth cycle – especially to markets in the developed world , where demand is exceptionally weak .
Indeed , 42 % of Chinese exports go to Europe , the United States , and Japan – three economies that are flirting with secular stagnation .
And Europe , China ’ s largest export market , has struggled the most .
Given that development strategies typically & nbsp ; begin to fail when economies reach middle-income status – a threshold that China is rapidly approaching – China cannot afford to allow mounting cyclical risks to undermine its structural transformation .
Modern history shows that the easiest way for a developing country to become ensnared in the dreaded “ middle-income trap ” is to cling to its old model for too long .
The fact is that only structural transformation can lift a middle-income developing country to high-income developed status .
Fortunately , China ’ s leaders recognize this , and are committed to achieving it .
President Xi Jinping has been spearheading the effort to press ahead with reform and rebalancing .
A year ago , at the Third Plenary Session of the 18th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party ( CCP ) , Xi and his team created the country ’ s most ambitious economic-reform agenda in 35 years .
This , together with the 12th Five-Year Plan that was & nbsp ; enacted in 2011 , highlights the authorities ’ commitment to bolstering the services sector and domestic consumption .
At the same time , China has been shifting responsibility for implementing reform from its antiquated planning apparatus ( the National Development and Reform Commission ) to a more effective market-based mechanism embedded in the CCP ’ s structure ( the Leading Small Group for Comprehensively Deepening Reforms ) .
Add to that Xi ’ s unprecedented anti-corruption campaign , and there is no turning back on China ’ s road to rebalancing and structural change .
But the risk of cyclical disruptions , such as an unexpected decline in global economic growth , remains .
This raises an important tactical challenge for China . How can it stay the reform course without being derailed by a significant growth slowdown in the short term ?
This is not the first time that China has confronted this challenge & nbsp ; – & nbsp ; nor will it be the last . The Great Recession of 2008-2009 also & nbsp ; pushed China to the brink of outright & nbsp ; recession .
With global trade collapsing and Chinese export demand having plummeted from 26 % annual growth in mid-2008 to a 27 % contraction by early 2009 , the government moved aggressively to inject CN ¥ 4 trillion ( $ 586 billion ) into the economy .
Though this enabled growth to recover by the end of 2009 , it also contributed to new problems , including excessive debt , a property-market overhang , and mounting local-government financial risk .
The last thing China needs is more fiscal stimulus .
Today ’ s cyclical disruption pales in comparison to that of 2008-2009 , and , unlike the fiscally reckless developed economies , China recognizes excessive government & nbsp ; debt as a legitimate & nbsp ; threat to sustainable growth and development .
Moreover , unlike major developed economies , most of which have used up all of their conventional monetary-policy ammunition by reducing their policy interest rates to zero , China has plenty of monetary stimulus on reserve to address cyclical disruptions .
In these circumstances , it makes sense for China to lean more on monetary policy than on fiscal expansion .
Nonetheless , the PBOC ’ s tactical decision is not without potential pitfalls – not least because interest-rate cuts encourage the extension of more credit at a time when China is trying to wean itself from debt-intensive growth .
A key challenge will be to avoid escalating credit risk , which could undermine the process of reform and rebalancing .
From the start , China ’ s leaders knew that the interaction between structural transformation and the business cycle would be complex .
As former Premier Wen Jiabao noted nearly eight years ago , China ’ s economy had become increasingly “ unstable , unbalanced , uncoordinated , and unsustainable . ”
The longer China delayed addressing its problems , the more intractable the solution became .
Xi and his colleagues are resolute in attempting to solve this problem by staying & nbsp ; the & nbsp ; course to rebalance the Chinese economy , while remaining acutely aware of cyclical risks .
After all , China ’ s vulnerability to such risks is rooted in its old growth model , which was allowed to remain in place for far too long .
With the recent monetary easing , the Chinese authorities seem to be drawing a line in the sand to prevent an excessive drop in growth . & nbsp ; This & nbsp ; suggests that they now & nbsp ; view a cyclical disruption as a real threat to the country ’ s longer-term structural-reform agenda .
To the extent that those fears persist , additional monetary easing can be expected .
