Charlie Hebdo ’ s Rights and Wrongs
DAVOS – In the wake of the terrorist attack on the French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo in Paris , declarations of “ Je suis Charlie ” have echoed worldwide .
And , indeed , Charlie Hebdo should be free to publish what it likes , without fear of violence , as long as it does not directly incite violence itself .
But does that mean that other news outlets and individuals should republish it ?
To be sure , freedom of expression should almost never be repressed , a point that the United States Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes emphasized in a dissenting opinion in a case concerning the US Constitution ’ s guarantee of free speech .
“ [ W ] e should be eternally vigilant against attempts to check the expression of opinions that we loathe and believe to be fraught with death , ” he wrote , “ unless they so imminently threaten immediate interference with the lawful and pressing purposes of the law that an immediate check is required to save the country . ”
From this perspective , I would have marched with the millions who gathered in Paris , proclaiming “ Je suis Charlie . ”
And I fully understand the desire to purchase the subsequent issue of Charlie Hebdo , published – with bravery and determination – a week after the attack .
People not just in France , but around the world , want to show their solidarity with the victims and support the fundamental principle of free speech .
But supporting Charlie Hebdo ’ s right to express whatever message it chooses does not necessarily imply support for its portrayals of the Prophet Mohammed or a willingness to participate in their dissemination .
Support for the principle does not demand endorsement of the practice .
In the days after the attack , it became an act of solidarity to retweet the offending cartoons , rather than simply posting expressions of support .
The Lebanese blogger Gino Raidy wrote , “ Please , publish the cartoons again , and again , and again .
Maybe with time , the murderous savages that kill for a drawing in the name of their god , will get it through their thick heads that they can never stop us , and every attempt to only fuels our cause more ( sic ) . ”
The passion in Raidy ’ s appeal is admirable , and the sentiment is understandable .
But the view that defending free speech imposes a duty to disseminate specific content is deeply problematic .
The decision to publish images or words that disrespect or defame others ’ deeply held beliefs must be a personal one .
Each individual must be free to make that decision , which is why anti-blasphemy laws violate universal human rights .
The fundamental principle underlying freedom of expression is that speech must be answered with more speech , never with violence , imprisonment , or censorship .
Anti-blasphemy laws not only violate that principle ; they can easily be abused as a tool of political power and impoverish their societies by imposing a code of rigid conformity .
But people can choose to avoid speech that others will hear as blasphemy .
Though I will defend the right of individuals to make racist statements , I would not make such statements myself or listen to a speaker making them .
After all , such views undermine many other important principles – namely , those needed to create and sustain an inclusive , tolerant , and peaceful society .
In the case of Charlie Hebdo , the question is whether depictions of the Prophet Muhammad are likely to foster the kinds of debate and behavior that are compatible with the coexistence of Muslims , Christians , Jews , other believers , and atheists in a society that upholds the freedom of worship and expression .
All human beings are entitled to hold something – a place , an idea , an image – sacred .
Desecrating a shrine , defacing a cross , or , in the US , burning a flag , is an aggressive and insulting act , one that causes real pain for believers .
It may incite a conversation , but it does so from a position of profound disrespect .
Charlie Hebdo , of course , used humor precisely to challenge sacred cows .
And its editors bravely and nobly stood by their convictions , even when their lives were threatened .
We should uphold their right to publish .
But to embrace the images they published as a statement of Enlightenment conviction weakens the values that are essential to a civilized society .
The new issue of Charlie Hebdo , which featured another image of the Prophet on its cover , sparked protest marches in Pakistan , Afghanistan , Kuwait , Lebanon , and Tunisia .
Commenting on the intensity of these protests , Iyad El-Baghdadi , a self-described “ Islamic libertarian , ” aptly tweeted : “ Unapologetic hatred is going mainstream everywhere .
I worry for our world . ” Mobilizing mass demonstrations around whether you “ are ” or “ are not ” Charlie Hebdo invites demagoguery from extreme factions in all societies that gain from fueling sectarian conflict .
The easiest way to compound the tragedy in Paris would be to use the deaths of Charlie Hebdo ’ s editor , Stéphane Charbonnier , and 11 others to fan the flames of religious hatred .
Surely we can defend people ’ s right to express themselves without approving or endorsing their views .
In the case of Charlie Hebdo , the decision not to disseminate its cartoons can be driven not by fear , but by respect .
