China on the Launch Pad
SINGAPORE – Behind a veil of secrecy , China ’ s development of strategic and tactical missiles is well into its third generation of modernization .
While the development of Chinese long-range missile and nuclear forces has traditionally been characterized as conservative , incremental , and slow , it has taken place against a backdrop of steadily growing official emphasis on the country ’ s defense-industrial complex , particularly its aerospace sector .
This process has been accelerated by a confluence of defense-industry reforms , comprehensive military upgrading , and integration of innovative operational concepts .
The net effect is a growing capability of China ’ s strategic missile forces and military space platforms .
Various reports suggest that China is selectively enhancing its strategic and tactical missile capabilities by developing solid-fuel motors ; diversifying its range of warheads and increasing their accuracy ; deploying missiles with multiple warheads ; and upgrading its ballistic-missile defense countermeasures , such as decoys , chaff , jamming , and thermal shielding , and possibly maneuverable reentry vehicles ( MaRVs ) and multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles ( MIRVs ) .
In particular , China is developing , testing , and deploying a new generation of solid-propellant , road-mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles ( ICBMs ) .
These include the DF-31 and DF-31A , which are equipped with nuclear payloads .
It is also designing and developing new classes of conventional short-range ballistic missiles ( SRBMs ) and medium-range ballistic missiles ( MRBMs ) , such as the DF-21 – mobile , solid-propellant , longer range , more accurate , and able to exploit vulnerabilities in ballistic missile-defense systems .
As part of its missile and nuclear-force modernization , China is also focusing on developing its sea-launched ballistic missiles ( SLBMs ) such as the JL-2 , testing the DF21-D as an anti-ship ballistic missile ( ASBM ) for maritime strikes , and further developing its anti-satellite weapon capabilities ( ASAT ) .
The purpose behind China ’ s continuous modernization of its strategic assets is to enhance the credibility of its deterrent threat by improving the survivability of its nuclear forces .
Thus , China is diversifying its missiles in terms of their strike capabilities and mobility , and formulating innovative anti-access / area-denial asymmetric warfare concepts to close the gap with technologically more advanced adversaries and near competitors – principally the United States , Russia , and Japan .
China ’ s progress in modernizing its strategic assets and capabilities owes much to the ongoing transformation of China ’ s defense industries , particularly the aerospace sector , over the past decade .
Since the late 1990 ’ s , China ’ s government has gradually introduced elements of competition and globalization , with the aim of overcoming the entrenched monopoly of China ’ s traditional defense-industrial conglomerates .
The reforms have been guided by two broad concepts : the “ Four Mechanisms ” – competition , evaluation , supervision , and encouragement – and yujun yumin , or identifying military potential in civilian capabilities , with defense industries integrating into the broader civilian economy .
The reforms have essentially enabled China to streamline research and development efforts , as well as technology transfers between selected components of its civil and commercial space programs .
As a result , China has also been able to bypass existing export controls and restrictions on the transfer of sensitive military technologies , particularly aerospace and satellite components and know-how .
Indeed , China ’ s military use of space is increasingly dependent and interlinked with civilian and commercial space activities , infrastructure , and human capital .
Its space launch vehicles ( SLVs ) can be used for satellites with a range of applications – including communications , weather , observation , and navigation – which may significantly enhance the effectiveness of China ’ s military space operations and systems .
While ballistic missiles have generally different rocket engines , basing profiles , and launch methods , their guidance and control systems may use similar components , and SLVs may use stage components based on ballistic missiles .
The trajectory of China ’ s ballistic missile R & amp ; D and production shows a gradual transition from copying and reproducing first-generation Soviet ballistic-missile technologies to adapting and modifying smaller , mobile , solid-propellant ballistic missiles and their follow-on second-generation systems .
China is now an independent producer and technological innovator of selected missile systems and related aerospace technologies .
Ultimately , China views its military , civil , and commercial space programs as being at the forefront of its national defense , economic development , and geostrategic influence .
The rest of the world should regard China ’ s aerospace capabilities as an important part of its future power projection .
