Break Up Citigroup
WASHINGTON , DC – America ’ s presidential campaign is already well underway .
The election is not until November 2016 , and very few candidates have formally thrown their hats into the ring , but the competition to promote and develop ideas – both behind closed doors and publicly – is in fully swing .
Earlier this month , Citigroup took advantage of this formative political moment by seizing an opportunity to score a tactical victory – but one that amounts to a strategic blunder .
Using legislative language apparently drafted by Citi ’ s own lobbyists , the firm successfully pressed for the repeal of some of the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial reforms .
The provision was then passed after it was attached to a last-minute spending bill – a tactic that ensured very little debate in the House of Representatives and none at all in the Senate .
At a stroke , Citi executives demonstrated both their continued political clout in Washington and their continued desire to take on excessive amounts of financial risk ( which is what this particular legal change permits ) .
Lobbying to be allowed to load up on risk is exactly what Citi did during the 1990s and 2000s under Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush – with catastrophic consequences for the broader economy in 2007-09 .
As a result , breaking up Citigroup is under serious consideration as a potential campaign theme .
For example , in a powerful speech – watched online more than a half-million times – Senator Elizabeth Warren responded uncompromisingly to the megabanks ’ latest display of muscle : “ Let ’ s pass something – anything – that would help break up these giant banks . ”
Defenders of the megabanks – Citi , JP Morgan Chase , Bank of America , Wells Fargo , Goldman Sachs , and Morgan Stanley – dismiss Warren as an avatar of left-wing populism .
But this is a serious misconception ; in fact , Warren is attracting a great deal of support from the center and the right .
Senator David Vitter of Louisiana is the most prominent Republican member of Congress in favor of limiting the size and power of the biggest banks , but there are others who lean in a similar direction .
Similarly , the vice chair of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation , Thomas Hoenig , a political independent , consistently warns about the dangers associated with megabanks .
And former FDIC Chair Sheila Bair , a Republican from Kansas , argues strongly for additional measures to rein in the biggest banks .
From the perspective of anyone seeking the nomination of either of America ’ s political parties , here is an issue that cuts across partisan lines . “ Break up Citigroup ” is a concrete and powerful idea that would move the financial system in the right direction .
It is not a panacea , but the coalition that can break up Citi can also put in place other measures to make the financial system safer – including more effective consumer protection , greater transparency in markets , and higher capital requirements for major banks .
From the left , the emphasis has been on the megabanks ’ abuse of power and the great rip-off of the middle class .
From the right , the stress is on the hazards of crony capitalism , owing to the massive implicit government subsidies that these banks receive .
But both left and right agree on the fundamental asymmetry that the recent “ Citigroup Amendment ” implies : Bankers get rich whether they win or lose , because the US taxpayer foots the bill when their risky bets fail .
Potential Republican presidential candidates have hesitated to take up this issue in public – perhaps feeling that it will inhibit their ability to raise money from Wall Street .
Among the Democrats , however , the opportunity seems to be much more compelling ; indeed , avoiding a confrontation with Wall Street might actually create problems for a candidate ( as Hillary Clinton may well find out ) .
The Progressive Change Institute is currently running “ The Big Ideas Project , ” whereby people can vote on what they regard as the most important policy proposals . Three of the top ten ideas under “ Economy & amp ;
Jobs ” are about imposing greater constraints on the big banks – and there is a sharp upward trend in support for Break Up Citigroup ( full disclosure : I suggested this item for the website ) .
This idea would play well in the Democratic primary elections ( which start in early 2016 ) .
And , because it forms the basis for responsible policies , it would attract support from centrists .
And voters on the right like proposals that offer a credible way to end the favoritism – if not outright corruption – that has come to define the relationship between the top levels of government and Wall Street .
“ Break up Citigroup , end dangerous government subsidies , and bring back the market . ”
