China ’ s North Korean Contradictions
BEIJING – The release by WikiLeaks of American diplomatic cables written between 2004 and 2010 contains considerable material on China ’ s policy toward North Korea .
The leaks supposedly unveil a Chinese readiness to accept the reunification of Korea in favor of South Korea .
This proposition almost beggars belief because it starkly contradicts China ’ s actions in failing to openly condemn North Korea for its sinking of the South Korean warship Cheonan in March , or for the recent artillery attack on South Korea ’ s Yeonpyeong Island .
Similarly , rather than demand that North Korea stop its brinkmanship , China ’ s leaders have called for emergency consultations involving the United States , Japan , Russia , China , the United Nations , and South Korea .
None of these actions suggest a willingness to make the North Korean regime pay the price it deserves for its provocations .
So why doesn ’ t China move more decisively to rein in North Korea ?
The conventional wisdom is that China doesn ’ t want to lose North Korea as a buffer between it and the US military in South Korea .
Thus China does what it must , shoring up the Kim family dynasty to prevent Korea from reunifying on South Korean terms .
Indeed , the controversy in Chinese eyes is not really about Korean reunification – few in Beijing speculate that the endgame will be otherwise – but to what extent reunification can be achieved without damaging China ’ s security concerns .
Every time North Korea acts provocatively – testing nuclear bombs , launching missiles , touting its secretive uranium enrichment facilities , and killing South Korean soldiers and civilians – China comes under diplomatic fire .
Its chronic indecisiveness about the North and unwillingness to use its leverage , thus shielding its socialist ally , seems to reveal to the wider world a China obsessed with its own narrow interests .
But these interests are hard to quantify .
The volume of China ’ s trade with South Korea is almost 70 times that with the North .
Thus , if China truly is the mercantilist power that many in the West claim , it should tilt decisively towards the South .
Moreover , China has no interest in stoking a “ new Cold War ” in East Asia , so it should be enthusiastic about the cause of denuclearization and thus play a bigger role in curtailing North Korea ’ s nuclear provocations .
The irony is that Chinese dithering has incited Cold War-type concerns in South Korea , Japan , and the US .
Indeed , given its lack of confidence in China ’ s readiness and willingness to keep the North in check , South Korea is now seeking even deeper defensive ties with the US , as well as enhancing its political and defense cooperation with Japan .
If North Korea fails to restrain itself , and China ’ s approach remains tantamount to coddling a dangerous , nuclear-armed state , strategic rivalry across East Asia might revive around a Washington-Tokyo-Seoul axis vis-à-vis a China-North Korea coalition .
Not surprisingly , that prospect offers scant comfort to China .
And yet China seems to turn a blind eye to it all .
Unfortunately , China ’ s obsolete ideology plays a key role here .
Although China claims that it “ normalized relations ” with North Korea in 2009 , its policies and attitudes toward the North remain mired in a morbid comradeship .
For example , in October , on the 60th anniversary of the start of the Korean War , Chinese Vice President Xi Jinping ( the likely successor to President Hu Jintao ) dubbed the conflict a glorious fight against a “ US-initiated invasion . ”
A majority of Chinese dislike Kim Jong-il ’ s dynastic Leninist regime .
And the two countries have diverged enormously in political , economic , and social terms .
Yet China ’ s leaders remain incapable of seeming to abandon the North , no matter how odious its behavior .
Their diplomatic values , after all , were shaped by an official emphasis on sympathy for the weak in any struggle against the strong , and by comradely reminiscences about the North – far and away the weakest of the participants in the six-party negotiations over the North nuclear armaments with the US , South Korea , China , Russia , and Japan .
In the end , Chinese outrage at North Korea usually gives way to refusal to play any part in the demise of its neighbor and one-time ally .
More than one Chinese official has told me of holding hearty affection for North Korea ’ s people .
China ’ s leaders recognize that North Korea is a huge burden for them , but , like loving parents of a rogue son , they cannot bring themselves to disown him .
These emotional ties , combined with the usual bureaucratic love of the status quo , are the real cause of China ’ s failure to overhaul its North Korea policy .
Whenever a crisis erupts , China becomes agitated .
But , instead of seeking a new path , it re-traces its old steps .
Indeed , China ’ s North Korea policy is dominated by inertia rather than sensitivity to its own national interests .
This is not to say that China ’ s policy on North Korea will never change .
But change will require that China ’ s leaders find a way out of their psychological ambivalence .
Fortunately , Chinese thinking on North Korea nowadays is no longer monolithic .
Indeed , among China ’ s elite no foreign-policy issue is more divisive .
Given North Korea ’ s ability to scare China with its geographic proximity and the prospect of a sudden collapse ( with all its security implications , including an influx of refugees ) , these divisions are likely to grow .
As a result , China ’ s calculations about North Korea will remain complicated , even as the risks posed by the North ’ s behavior rise .
China ’ s fears could be addressed by greater international collaboration , but China must be willing to cooperate as well , and , as we have seen again in recent days , it is unlikely to be forced out of its indecisiveness .
That will only come when it opens its eyes to the real and positive possibilities of such collaboration .
