China ’ s Stability Gambit
BEIJING – The first principle that I learned when I started focusing on China in the late 1990 ’ s is that nothing is more important to the Chinese than stability – whether economic , social , or political .
Given centuries of turmoil in China , today ’ s leaders will do everything in their power to preserve stability .
Whenever I have doubts about a potential Chinese policy shift , I examine the options through the stability lens .
It has worked like a charm .
Stability was on everyone ’ s mind at the annual China Development Forum ( CDF ) held March 17-20 in Beijing .
Hosted by Premier Wen Jiabao , with many ministers of the State Council in attendance , the CDF is China ’ s most important international conference .
Yet , literally two days before this year ’ s CDF began , the controversial Bo Xilai was removed as Party Secretary of Chongqing .
As a strong candidate to join the Standing Committee of the Politburo , China ’ s inner circle of leadership , Bo ’ s sudden demise was stunning .
There was a palpable buzz in the air as we convened in the Diaoyutai State Guesthouse .
The formal sessions played out predictably , placing great emphasis on the coming structural transformation of China ’ s growth model – a colossal shift from the all-powerful export- and investment-led growth of the past 32 years to a more consumer-led dynamic .
There is now broad consensus among China ’ s senior leadership in favor of such a rebalancing .
As one participant put it , “ The debate has shifted from what to do to how and when to do it . ”
Many of the other themes flowed from this general conclusion .
A shift to services-led growth and an innovations-based development strategy were highlighted .
At the same time , there was considerable concern about the recent resurgence of state-owned enterprises , which has tilted the distribution of national income from labor to capital – a major impediment to China ’ s pro-consumption rebalancing .
The World Bank and the China Development Research Center ( the CDF ’ s host ) had just released a comprehensive report that addressed many aspects of this critical issue .
But the CDF ’ s formal proceedings never even hinted at the elephant in the chambers of Diaoyutai .
There was no mention of Bo Xilai and what his dismissal meant for China ’ s domestic politics in this critical year of leadership transition .
While it is easy to get caught up in the swirling tales of palace intrigue that have followed , I suspect that Bo ’ s removal holds a far deeper meaning .
Chinese officials faced the risk of a dangerous interplay of political and economic instability .
Hit by a second external demand shock in three years – first , America ’ s subprime crisis , and now Europe ’ s sovereign-debt crisis – any outbreak of internal political instability would pose a far greater threat than might otherwise be the case .
Bo personified that risk .
He embodied the so-called “ Chongqing model ” of state capitalism that has been ascendant in China in recent years – government-directed urbanization and economic development that concentrates power in the hands of regional leaders and state-owned enterprises .
I spent some time in Chongqing – a vast metropolitan area of more than 34 million people – last summer .
I left astonished at the scope of the city ’ s plans .
Orchestrated by Chongqing Mayor Huang Qifan , the principal architect of the spectacular Pudong development project in Shanghai , the goal is to transform the Liangjiang area of Chongqing into China ’ s first inland urban development zone .
That would put Liangjiang on a par with coastal China ’ s two earlier showcase projects – Pudong and the Binhai area of Tianjin .
Yet this is the same state-dominated development model that came under heavy criticism at this year ’ s CDF – and that stands in sharp contrast to the more market-driven alternative that has gained broad consensus among senior Chinese leaders .
In other words , Bo was perceived not only as a threat to political stability , but also as the leading representative of a model of economic instability .
By dismissing Bo so abruptly , the central government has , in effect , underscored its unwavering commitment to stability .
This fits with yet another curious piece of the Chinese puzzle .
Five years ago , Wen famously warned of a Chinese economy that was in danger of becoming “ unstable , unbalanced , uncoordinated , and unsustainable . ”
I have repeatedly stressed the critical role that Wen ’ s “ Four Uns ” have played in shaping the pro-consumption strategy of the “ Next China . ”
Wen ’ s critique paved the way for China to face its rebalancing imperatives head on .
But , in their formal remarks to the CDF this year , China ’ s senior leadership – including Premier-designate Li Keqiang – dropped all explicit references to the risks of an “ unstable ” Chinese economy .
In short , the Four Uns have now become three .
In China , such changes in language are no accident .
The most likely interpretation is that those at the top no longer want to concede anything when it comes to stability .
By addressing economic instability through pro-consumption rebalancing , and political instability by removing Bo , stability has gone from a risk factor to an ironclad commitment .
There can be no mistaking the Chinese leadership ’ s core message nowadays .
They are the first to concede that their growth and development strategy is at a critical juncture .
They worry that the “ reforms and opening up ” of Deng Xiaoping are in danger of losing momentum .
By addressing the interplay between economic and political risks to stability , the government is clearing the way for the next phase of China ’ s extraordinary development .
I would not advise betting against their commitment to achieving that goal .
