American Leadership in a Multipolar World
LONDON – Giving up the spotlight is never easy .
The United States , like many aging celebrities , is struggling to share the stage with new faces , especially China .
The upcoming meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank – two institutions dominated by the US and its Western allies – provide an ideal opportunity to change that .
The US must come to terms with the reality that the world has changed .
The longer the US remains in a state of denial , the more damage it will do to its interests and its global influence , which remains substantial , if more constrained than before .
The world no longer adheres to the static Cold War order , with two blocs locked in open but guarded confrontation .
Nor does it work according to the Pax Americana that dominated in the decade after the Soviet Union ’ s collapse , when the US briefly emerged as the sole superpower .
Today ’ s world is underpinned by a multipolar order , which emerged from the rise of developing economies – most notably China – as major actors in trade and finance .
The US – not to mention the other G-7 countries – now must compete and cooperate not only with China , but also with India , Brazil , and others through expanded forums like the G-20 .
To this end , the US must show leadership and adaptability .
It cannot refuse to support China ’ s efforts to expand its role in global governance .
Nor should it issue harsh rebukes to its allies when they do not follow suit , as it did when the United Kingdom announced its intention to join the new China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank .
The US seems to be stuck in the Bretton Woods system , the rules-based order – underpinned by the IMF and the World Bank , with the US dollar at its heart – that emerged after World War II .
The Bretton Woods system institutionalized America ’ s geopolitical supremacy , leaving the old imperial power , the UK , to step aside – a step that it took graciously , if a little desperately , given its grave postwar economic situation .
Over the years , however , the Bretton Woods system , with its mix of liberal multilateralism and market-oriented economic policies , has come to symbolize the Anglo-American dominance of the global economy that much of the world now criticizes , especially since the global financial crisis .
In particular , the Washington Consensus – the set of free-market principles that influences the policies of the IMF , the World Bank , the US , and the UK – has generated considerable resentment , especially after the Asian financial crisis of the 1990s .
Against this backdrop , it is hardly surprising that China has been using its growing global influence to help engineer a new economic order – one in which the US dollar does not reign supreme .
Zhou Xiaochuan , the governor of the People ’ s Bank of China , China ’ s central bank , has repeatedly called for a shift toward an international monetary system that allows for the use of multiple currencies for payments and investment .
Such an approach would reduce the risk and impact of liquidity crises , while decoupling the international monetary system from the “ economic conditions and sovereign interests of any single country . ”
Of course , China believes that its own currency , the renminbi , should eventually play a central role in this new monetary system , so that it reflects China ’ s role not only as a leading engine of global economic growth , but also as the world ’ s largest creditor .
Indeed , together with the other systemically important economies ( the US , the UK , Japan , and the eurozone ) China drives trends that , for better or worse , extend far beyond its borders .
Since 2009 , China ’ s leadership has been pursuing a set of policies that encourage the use of the renminbi in regional trade and reduce its dependence on the dollar in international payments .
But expanding the renminbi ’ s role in the international monetary system is just the first step toward institutionalizing a multipolar world order .
China has also spearheaded the establishment of new multilateral institutions , with AIIB following on the heels of the New Development Bank , created with other major emerging economies ( Brazil , Russia , India , and South Africa ) .
By taking these steps , China ’ s leaders have called attention to the inadequacy of the existing international monetary system , and its institutional framework , in today ’ s complex , multipolar world economy .
In particular , China ’ s agenda highlights questions about America ’ s capacity to provide the needed liquidity to support international trade and finance .
To be sure , the US is right to wonder whether the new order that China hopes to build will be as open and rules-based as the American-led order – the one that gave China the market access it needed to achieve its spectacular economic rise .
But the answer to that question can be found only by engaging China on the issue of reform of global governance – not by denying that change is needed at all .
As the US stubbornly pursues a policy of containment toward China – exemplified in its fight against the AIIB ’ s establishment , its relentless accusations of currency manipulation , and its refusal to ratify IMF reforms that would increase China ’ s influence – it risks losing its ability to shape what comes next .
The result could be a world of fragmented blocs – an outcome that would undermine not only global prosperity , but also cooperation on shared challenges .
The Spring Meetings of the IMF and the World Bank offer an important opportunity to signal a new approach toward China .
And there could be no more credible signal than US support for the renminbi ’ s addition to the basket of currencies that the IMF uses to value its international reserve asset , the Special Drawing Right .
America will be in the spotlight once again .
