Africa \ u0027s \
I visited Ghana recently and like many others left asking : how can a " developing " country be developed ?
But there was something troubling about this formulation , in particular with the word " developing , " which is often a euphemism for the absence of economic development .
Do countries stop developing because outsiders are so intent on developing them ?
My hosts , the Kweku Hutchful Foundation , invited me with a different question in mind : How can Ghanaian leaders be developed ?
Something troubled me about this formulation , too .
It was that word " development " again .
Do we really " develop " leaders or countries ?
Do multinational companies , international non-governmental organizations , and multilateral lenders really understand local needs ?
Just because some " best practice " works in New York , does that mean it will work in Accra , Ghana ?
Imagine how American managers would react to consultants arriving from Ghana with their " best practice " : " It worked in Accra , so it is bound to work in New York ! "
Of course , there is a prominent example of just that : Kofi Annan , under whose stewardship the UN has undergone a remarkable improvement .
Annan spent most of his career outside of Ghana , and had some of his higher education in the US .
But , as one of Annan 's advisors once put it , he " runs the UN like an old-fashioned African village , with long discussions among the elders , periods of reflection , and eventually a decision . "
Of course , Annan can hardly control the UN by imposing great strategies on everyone else , as American corporate CEOs do .
But perhaps he knows better .
Unlike most American CEOs , Annan was not parachuted in from outside ; he is the first career employee to lead the UN .
So he knew what was wrong and appreciated that it had to be fixed carefully and patiently , by engaging the staff rather than intimidating them .
His re-election to a second term as UN Secretary General was supported by nations all over the world , rich and poor , as well as by UN employees .
Was Kofi Annan " developed ? "
Perhaps we don 't develop leaders so much as foster the conditions that bring out leadership .
If so , then a key condition must be the self-respect that comes from working things out for ourselves , individually and collectively .
This self-respect is fostered by organizations and institutions that can likewise stand on their own feet , building on the best of their own cultural traditions .
Passive importation of techniques , controls , and beliefs , via agencies and experts that run around solving everyone else 's problems , may be the biggest impediment to development--just another form of outside exploitation , of which Africa has had more than enough .
Is it not time for indigenous development , of countries and leaders alike ?
One thing is clear .
Countries like Ghana do not lack enterprise .
Markets and personal initiative are pervasive .
At a red light in New York , a squeegee kid or two might approach your car ; in Accra , a stopped car is immediately surrounded by a virtual supermarket .
What Ghana and most of Africa lacks is not enterprise , but
Instead , foreign corporations , with their funds , controls , and experts--and , just as importantly , their beliefs--dominate larger enterprise .
To be sure , foreign corporations can do good things : bring in fresh ideas , techniques , and processes , as well as capital and the scale required in some contemporary forms of manufacturing .
But nothing they do--aside from cosmetic modifications to consumer products and marketing tactics--responds to local conditions .
Development as now practiced often fails because it does not build on a country 's unique strengths , respect its social traditions , or foster the autonomy necessary to develop indigenous leaders and enterprises .
All too often , it is
Pride , dignity , and self-confidence do not figure in economic theory : they cannot be measured .
But they figure prominently in just about every story of success , whether of countries or of leaders .
How people feel about themselves , personally and collectively , greatly influences the energy with which they develop themselves .
America , for example , did not develop by depending on an imposed ideology or outside experts .
It developed through the indigenous efforts of Americans acting in their own way--assisted by extensive state intervention , through land grants to farmers , railroads , and mining companies , military spending that stimulated the economy ( and still does ) , and , of course , tariff barriers .
Likewise , indigenous development played a key role in Japan and Germany after WWII , in South Korea more recently , and the UK long before .
In fact , has
Globalization must not be allowed to blind us .
Ghana certainly needs to develop economically , because material wealth is required to improve health , provide education , and sustain democracy .
But the reverse is also true : a deep-rooted sense of democracy--precisely what globalization lacks--seems necessary to support economic efforts .
The ( economically ) developed West should consider importing that lesson .
