What I Learned From Vladimir Putin
LONDON – Is Russian President Vladimir Putin , like most political leaders , predisposed to spinning the truth for his own benefit ?
Or does he go far beyond that , governing Russia and dealing with his neighbors and the rest of the world with reckless mendacity , abetted by a supine national media ?
Sometimes , in answering questions like this , we can draw not only on what we have heard and seen , but also on personal experience .
I first met Putin in October 1999 in Helsinki , when I was attending a European Union-Russia summit as the EU ’ s external affairs commissioner .
President Boris Yeltsin canceled his attendance at the last moment ; he was “ indisposed . ”
In his place , Yeltsin sent the new acting prime minister , Vladimir Putin , whose behavior confirmed the wisdom of the observation that you can take the man out of the KGB , but you can ’ t take the KGB out of the man .
Preparing for the meeting in the early morning , the EU team heard that there had been an explosion in Grozny , Chechnya ’ s capital , killing several people .
When Putin arrived , we asked him about it .
He claimed to know nothing , but promised to find out by lunch what had happened .
At our lunchtime discussion , he reported that the explosion had been caused by Chechen terrorists who were running their own arms bazaar .
By this time , we knew that the deaths had been caused by a Russian military assault ; it subsequently came to light that a wave of Russian ballistic missiles ( probably Scuds ) had killed more than a hundred people .
Putin had looked us in the eye and lied , almost certainly aware that we knew he was lying .
The communiqué that day made no mention of Chechnya , but enunciated the usual “ blah blah ” about shared values , belief in democracy , human rights , and the rule of law , and the need for strategic cooperation .
I can recall countless instances of – how can I best put it ? – Putin and his colleagues economizing with the truth on a spectacular scale .
On Chechnya , they regularly reported either that they had received no complaints from the EU about humanitarian relief , or that they were complying with the United Nations code on relief efforts ; they were duplicitous on both counts .
Similar dissembling characterized negotiations on trade , partnership agreements , the enlargement of the EU to Eastern Europe , and access to Kaliningrad .
Against this background , I find it difficult to believe any of Putin ’ s account of what has been happening in Ukraine – a view shared by many seasoned observers in Poland and the Baltic states . Putin does not want to preside over a country with a declining population and a footprint that is largely Asian .
To this end , Putin has always resisted Ukraine ’ s historic turn to the West , about which the EU itself has been standoffish in the past .
The EU was prepared to recognize Ukraine ’ s “ European vocation , ” but it did as little as it could to encourage this outcome .
When Ukrainians earlier this year ousted their corrupt president , Viktor Yanukovych , after he backed out of an association agreement with the EU , Russia set out to destabilize the country .
Crimea was annexed on the spurious grounds that it had once been part of Russia – a justification that , if applied elsewhere , could underwrite the violent redrawing of boundaries in much of Europe .
Then came Russia ’ s fomenting of , and participation in , armed separatists ’ effort to take over parts of eastern Ukraine , which led directly to the downing last month of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 and the death of all 298 people on board .
Though likely an accident , it was an accident that happened only because of Russia ’ s duplicitous and lethal meddling .
So , though I am saddened by the Putin regime ’ s behavior , I am not surprised by it .
I do hope to be surprised by the EU ’ s recognition that what has happened in Ukraine requires Europe to stand up for international decency and the rule of law .
There should be no more happy talk about shared values .
This is a time for steely principle .
That will not be welcomed by Europe ’ s far right , from Hungary ’ s Jobbik to France ’ s National Front .
They love Putin .
But Ukraine has proved a step too far for some of his erstwhile admirers , like Nigel Farage , the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party .
If Farage had had some first-hand experience dealing with Putin , he might have reached an accurate assessment much sooner .
