China ’ s Dollar Problem
CAMBRIDGE – When will China finally realize that it cannot accumulate dollars forever ?
It already has more than $ 2 trillion .
Do the Chinese really want to be sitting on $ 4 trillion in another five to 10 years ?
With the United States government staring at the long-term costs of the financial bailout , as well as inexorably rising entitlement costs , shouldn ’ t the Chinese worry about a repeat of Europe ’ s experience from the 1970 ’ s ?
During the 1950 ’ s and 1960 ’ s , Europeans amassed a huge stash of US Treasury bills in an effort to maintain fixed exchange-rate pegs , much as China has done today .
Unfortunately , the purchasing power of Europe ’ s dollars shriveled during the 1970 ’ s , when the costs of waging the Vietnam War and a surge in oil prices ultimately contributed to a calamitous rise in inflation .
Perhaps the Chinese should not worry .
After all , the world leaders who just gathered at the G20 summit in Pittsburgh said that they would take every measure to prevent such a thing from happening again .
A key pillar of their prevention strategy is to scale back “ global imbalances , ” a euphemism for the huge US trade deficit and the corresponding trade surpluses elsewhere , not least China .
The fact that world leaders recognize that global imbalances are a huge problem is welcome news .
Many economists , including myself , believe that America ’ s thirst for foreign capital to finance its consumption binge played a critical role in the build-up of the crisis .
Cheap money from abroad juiced an already fragile financial regulatory and supervisory structure that needed discipline more than cash .
Unfortunately , we have heard leaders – especially from the US – claim before that they recognized the problem .
In the run-up to the financial crisis , the US external deficit was soaking up almost 70 % of the excess funds saved by China , Japan , Germany , Russia , Saudi Arabia , and all the countries with current-account surpluses combined .
But , rather than taking significant action , the US continued to grease the wheels of its financial sector .
Europeans , who were called on to improve productivity and raise domestic demand , reformed their economies at a glacial pace , while China maintained its export-led growth strategy .
It took the financial crisis to put the brakes on US borrowing train – America ’ s current-account deficit has now shrunk to just 3 % of its annual income , compared to nearly 7 % a few years ago .
But will Americans ’ newfound moderation last ?
With the US government currently tapping financial markets for a whopping 12 % of national income ( roughly $ 1.5 trillion ) , foreign borrowing would be off the scale but for a sudden surge in US consumer and corporate savings .
For the time being , America ’ s private sector is running a surplus that is sufficient to fund roughly 75 % of the government ’ s voracious appetite .
But how long will US private sector thrift last ?
As the economy normalizes , consumption and investment will resume .
When they do – and assuming that the government does not suddenly tighten its belt ( it has no credible plan to do so ) – there is every likelihood that America ’ s appetite for foreign cash will surge again .
Of course , the US government claims to want to rein in borrowing .
But , assuming the economy must claw its way out of recession for at least another year or two , it is difficult to see how the government can fulfill its Pittsburgh pledge .
Yes , the Federal Reserve could tighten monetary policy .
But they will not worry too much about the next financial crisis when the aftermath of the current one still lingers .
In our new book This Time is Different : Eight Centuries of Financial Folly , Carmen Reinhart and I find that if financial crises hold one lesson , it is that their aftereffects have a very long tail .
Any real change in the near term must come from China , which increasingly has the most to lose from a dollar debacle .
So far , China has looked to external markets so that exporters can achieve the economies of scale needed to improve quality and move up the value chain .
But there is no reason in principle that Chinese planners cannot follow the same model in reorienting the economy to a more domestic-demand-led growth strategy .
Yes , China needs to strengthen its social safety net and to deepen domestic capital markets before consumption can take off .
But , with consumption accounting for 35 % of national income ( compared to 70 % in the US ! ) , there is vast room to grow .
Chinese leaders clearly realize that their hoard of T-Bills is a problem .
Otherwise , they would not be calling so publicly for the International Monetary Fund to advance an alternative to the dollar as a global currency .
They are right to worry .
A dollar crisis is not around the corner , but it is certainly a huge risk over the next five to 10 years .
China does not want to be left holding a $ 4 trillion bag when it happens .
It is up to China to take the lead on the post-Pittsburgh agenda .
