China ’ s Trouble with the Neighbors
BEIJING – China ’ s “ good neighbor ” policy is under unprecedented pressure ; indeed , it is at its nadir since the Cold War ’ s end .
One after another , frictions with neighboring countries have arisen recently .
From the territorial disputes with Vietnam and the Philippines in the South China Sea to tensions with Burma ( Myanmar ) and Thailand , relationships that were sound , if not always friendly , have now soured .
Myanmar ’ s decision to shelve the Chinese-backed Myitsone Dam project shocked China .
Likewise , the killing of 13 Chinese boat crewmen on the Mekong River in October serves as a stark reminder that China ’ s presumably peaceful southern land border , which has been untroubled for nearly 20 years , today resembles the most hostile sort of neighborhood .
China ’ s people and government are especially dismayed by the Mekong killings , which seemed to demonstrate , once again , the government ’ s inability to protect its citizens from being murdered abroad , despite the country ’ s newfound global status .
As a result , two compelling questions have arisen : Why do China ’ s neighbors choose to neglect its interests ?
And why , despite China ’ s rise , do its authorities seem increasingly unable to secure Chinese lives and commercial interests abroad ?
Chinese anxiety about these questions forms the atmosphere shaping Chinese policy .
With Muammar el-Qaddafi ’ s fall from power in Libya , Chinese companies lost investments worth roughly $ 20 billion , which Libya ’ s new government has implied are unlikely to be recovered .
Many Chinese were disquieted by their government ’ s decision to evacuate China ’ s citizens from Libya , and would have preferred a bolder effort to protect the countries ’ commercial assets there .
Similarly , the Chinese government ’ s later , and quite sudden , about-face in recognizing the rebel Transitional National Council as Libya ’ s government aroused considerable sneering at home .
After all , China spent valuable political capital to oppose NATO ’ s airstrikes at the beginning of the intervention , only to end up backing the forces that NATO helped bring to power .
This was China ’ s utilitarian , commercially-driven diplomacy at its most transparently hollow .
For most Chinese , Libya is a far-away and out-of-reach country , owing to China ’ s limited capacity to project power .
So the emphasis on restoring Chinese commercial interests is accepted reluctantly if not completely understood .
But Myanmar and the other Mekong River countries are supposed to be the country ’ s “ good neighbors , ” and are completely within reach of Chinese power , so public anger over threats to the country ’ s interests in these places is intense .
Those interests include a new oil pipeline linking Myanmar to Kunming , the provincial capital of Yunnan province .
China is also working on “ connectivity ” projects – namely , a rail and highway network – aimed at boosting economic and social ties between China and the ASEAN countries .
The Myitsone and Mekong incidents have now cast a shadow over these projects , fueling fear of a chain reaction that could wreck China ’ s two-decade-long effort to achieve deeper regional integration .
Obviously , Myanmar ’ s new government does not want to aggravate sentiment in its already-unstable border areas , where rebel groups were using the dam project to rally new supporters .
The new government ’ s effort to share power with political forces in Myanmar ’ s volatile regions , and thus weaken local warlords , clearly contributed to the decision to halt construction .
The dam ’ s Chinese investors , for their part , relied too heavily on the depth of the two countries ’ bilateral ties , and so heavily discounted the project ’ s political risks .
Their behavior also reflects the implied guarantee of official government mercantilism , as well as the complacency of China ’ s state-owned enterprises , which account for most Chinese overseas investment .
Operating on the assumption that the government will back them – or bail them out if they fail – they can afford to be cavalier .
The Mekong incident tells another grim story .
The river , which links five countries , has been long famous as a setting for trans-national crimes such as drug trafficking , gambling , and smuggling .
China ’ s booming economy has brought growing interaction between China and the Mekong ’ s underground economies .
The killing of the 13 Chinese boat crewmen was linked to this trend .
But China can best avoid similar tragedies not by flexing its muscles , but by building greater multilateral cooperation to combat transnational crime along the Mekong .
The Myitsone and Mekong episodes highlight China ’ s suddenly edgy relations with its southern neighbors .
Its good-neighbor policy , it turns out , has steered China ’ s regional diplomacy into uncharted waters .
Indeed , China ’ s neighbors will not be reliably good to Chinese interests unless and until China begins to provide essential public goods – not just commerce , but also full-fledged regional governance based on the rule of law , respect for human rights , and regional economic growth .
Otherwise , ruptures such as those at Myitsone and along the Mekong will recur , deepening China ’ s sense of isolation and panic .
