North Korea ’ s Step Too Far ?
BEIJING – After nearly a month of belligerent bluster from North Korea , China appears to have had enough , ending its silence about North Korea ’ s brinkmanship and suddenly roaring its disapproval of its ally ’ s reckless threats .
China ’ s exceptional tough talk does not necessarily mean that it intends to abandon Kim Jong-un ’ s regime ; but , at the very least , it does suggest that a radical shift in China ’ s policy toward North Korea might no longer be unthinkable .
When Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi exchanged phone calls with United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on April 6 , he expressed China ’ s rejection of rhetoric and action aimed at destabilizing the Northeast Asian region .
Moreover , Wang made clear that China would not allow “ troublemaking on China ’ s doorstep . ”
The next day , Chinese President Xi Jinping , speaking to an assembly of primarily Asian political and business leaders at the annual government-sponsored Boao Forum for Asia , declared that no country “ should be allowed to throw a region and even the whole world into chaos for selfish gain . ”
Xi did not mention any country by name , but his implicit condemnation of North Korea was clear to all .
Before these official rebukes , there had been much speculation about whether China would risk a fundamental change in its relations with North Korea , the socialist “ little brother ” that it continues to subsidize heavily .
Following the rare display of open indignation by Xi and Wang , such speculation has now become stronger than ever .
Some ask what “ value ” Kim ’ s hermit kingdom provides that prevents China from acting decisively ; others wonder to what extent Chinese leaders ’ domestic concerns continue to inhibit their willingness to switch course on North Korea .
In fact , China ’ s leaders have agonized over North Korea ’ s recent provocations .
They have been struggling to persuade the Kim regime to temper its volatility and accept a “ grand bargain ” : official recognition and normalization of relations with all of its neighbors , and with the United States , in exchange for denuclearization .
Indeed , this has led to considerable squabbling between the two countries in recent years .
China understands that North Korea ’ s intractability is rooted in its deep isolation from the world , mass deception of its people , and Kim ’ s fear of losing control of a country that only his family has ruled .
So the country ’ s rulers have come to believe that they can gain attention and resources only through provocation .
For China , the Kim regime ’ s survival can be assured only if it follows China ’ s lead in reforming and opening up .
But , faced with South Korea ’ s shining democracy and booming economy , the Chinese model is irrelevant to the North : following it would mean acknowledging the South ’ s supremacy on the Korean Peninsula , and thus an instant loss of legitimacy .
During the past two decades , North Korea ’ s leaders have experimented lightly with minimal “ reform , ” only to retreat from it quickly .
China patiently bore this pattern of intermittent brinkmanship and timid reform , largely owing to its belief that the risks posed by the Kim dynasty could be controlled as long as China did not cut off the regime ’ s lifeline of oil , food , and other necessities .
More important , China ’ s leaders believed that by shielding the North from US pressure , it was acting in the interest of its own national security .
But here China ’ s analysis has been completely wrong , for it underestimates the Kim regime ’ s unmanageable desperation whenever it believes that its survival in doubt .
Moreover , North Korea does not want to be beholden to any power , including China .
So it exploits China ’ s goodwill and national-security concerns , and even regards Chinese patronage as its due .
A further complication concerns North Korea ’ s nuclear aspirations .
The North appears to be convinced that , with nuclear weapons , it can maintain complete diplomatic independence , and that China , fearing nuclear blackmail , will never abandon it .
Now , however , it is North Korea ’ s turn to make a mistake .
Kim Jong-un ’ s childish tantrums have genuinely enraged China .
Yes , the country ’ s leaders have sometimes complained about the heavy burden of subsidizing North Korea ; but , until now , they had never shown such open disgust with the North ’ s performance .
China ’ s warning that it will not allow North Korean “ troublemaking on China ’ s doorstep ” can be considered the equivalent of a “ yellow card ” in soccer .
China has not decided to abandon North Korea .
But the warning is a stern one for Kim Jong-un : China may send him to the sidelines if he does not change his behavior .
US Secretary of State John Kerry is set to visit Beijing in the coming days .
It is now time for American and Chinese leaders to negotiate a real and viable exit from the current crisis , while productively exploring ways to restart the denuclearization process on the Korean peninsula .
If Kim ’ s bombast and nuclear threats lead to China-US bonding over a joint North Korea settlement , the entire world will be the safer for it .
