Wall Street for President ?
WASHINGTON , DC – America ’ s presidential election is still nearly two years away , and few candidates have formally thrown their hats into the ring .
But both Democrats and Republicans are hard at work figuring out what will appeal to voters in their parties ’ respective primary elections – and thinking about what will play well to the electorate as a whole in November 2016 .
The contrast between the parties at this stage is striking .
Potential Republican presidential candidates are arguing among themselves about almost everything , from economics to social issues ; it is hard to say which ideas and arguments will end up on top .
The Democrats , by contrast , are in agreement on most issues , with one major exception : financial reform and the power of very large banks .
The Democrats ’ internal disagreement on this issue is apparent when one compares three major proposals to address income inequality that the party and its allies have presented in recent weeks .
There are only small differences between President Barack Obama ’ s proposals ( in his budget and State of the Union address ) , those made in a high-profile report from the Center for American Progress , and ideas advanced by Chris Van Hollen , an influential member of Congress .
( For example , Van Hollen recommends more redistribution from higher-income people to offset a larger tax cut for middle-income groups . )
Against this backdrop of programmatic unity , the difference of opinion among leading Democrats concerning Wall Street – both the specifics of the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial reforms and more broadly – stands out in bold relief .
On Dodd-Frank , Democrats – including Obama – are apparently of two minds on the extent to which they should stick up for their own reforms .
In December , the White House agreed to a Republican proposal to repeal a provision of Dodd-Frank that would have limited the risk-taking of the country ’ s largest banks ( in fact , the proposal ’ s language was drafted by Citigroup ) .
More recently , however , Obama has threatened to veto any further attempts to roll back financial reform .
And now he is proposing to impose a small tax on the largest banks ’ liabilities , which he hopes will encourage “ them to make decisions more consistent with the economy-wide effects of their actions , which would in turn help reduce the probability of major defaults that can have widespread economic costs . ”
In contrast , the Center for American Progress report devoted very little space to financial-sector reform – in the authors ’ view , such issues hardly seem to be a high priority .
Van Hollen does have some concerns – and proposes a financial transaction tax to reduce speculative activities .
But a serious challenge to all of these views has now emerged , in proposals by Senator Elizabeth Warren , a rising Democratic star who has become increasingly prominent at the national level .
In her view , the authorities need to confront head-on the outsize influence and dangerous structure of America ’ s largest banks .
Warren ’ s opponents like to suggest that her ideas are somehow outside the mainstream ; in fact , she draws support from across the political spectrum .
In last month ’ s fight against Citigroup ’ s successful effort to roll back Dodd-Frank , for example , Warren ’ s allies included the House Democratic leadership , the Independent Community Bankers of America , Republican Senator David Vitter , and Thomas Hoenig ( a Republican-appointed vice chair of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ) .
Warren ’ s message is simple : remove the implicit government subsidies that support the too-big-to-fail banks .
That single move would go a long way toward reducing , if not eliminating , crony capitalism and strengthening market competition in the financial sector .
This is a message that plays well across the political spectrum .
And growing support for Warren ’ s ideas helps the Federal Reserve and other responsible regulators in their efforts to prevent big banks from taking on dangerous levels of risk .
The big Wall Street banks have enormous influence in Washington , DC , in large part because of their campaign contributions .
They also support – directly and indirectly – a vast influence industry , comprising people who pose as independent or moderate commentators , edit the financial press , or produce bespoke “ research ” at think tanks .
These megabanks are making a determined attempt to repeal as much of Dodd-Frank as possible , and the House Republicans seem keen to help them .
This is not an issue that will fade away .
The Democrats need to figure out their policy on Wall Street .
In the past , they have simply gone for the campaign contributions , doling out access and influence in exchange .
It is now obvious that this is not consistent with defending what remains of Dodd-Frank .
Warren offers a plausible , moderate alternative approach to financial-sector policy that would play well in the primaries and attract a great deal of support in the general election .
