China ’ s Landing – Soft not Hard
NEW HAVEN – China ’ s economy is slowing .
This is no surprise for an export-led economy dependent on faltering global demand .
But China ’ s looming slowdown is likely to be both manageable and welcome .
Fears of a hard landing are overblown .
To be sure , the economic data have softened .
Purchasing managers ’ indices are now threatening the “ 50 ” threshold , which has long been associated with the break-even point between expansion and contraction .
Similar downtrends are evident in a broad array of leading indicators , ranging from consumer expectations , money supply , and the stock market , to steel production , industrial product sales , and newly started construction .
But this is not 2008 .
Back then , global commerce was collapsing , presaging a 10.7 % drop in the volume of world trade in 2009 – the sharpest annual contraction since the 1930s .
In response , China ’ s export performance swung from 26 % annual growth in July 2008 to a 27 % contraction by February 2009 .
Sequential GDP growth slowed to a low single-digit pace – a virtual standstill by Chinese standards .
And more than 20 million migrant workers reportedly lost their jobs in export-led Guangdong province .
By late 2008 , China was in the throes of the functional equivalent of a full-blown recession .
Thanks to a massive fiscal stimulus , China veered away from the abyss in early 2009 .
But it paid a price for this bank-funded investment boom .
Local governments ’ indebtedness soared , and fixed investment surged toward an unprecedented 50 % of GDP .
Fears surfaced of another banking crisis , the imminent collapse of a monstrous property bubble , and runaway inflation .
Add a wrenching European crisis to the equation , and a replay of 2008 no longer seemed far-fetched .
While there is a kernel of truth to each of these China-specific concerns , they do not by themselves imply a hard landing .
Nonperforming loans will undoubtedly increase in response to the banking sector ’ s exposure to some $ 1.7 trillion of local-government debt , much of which was incurred during the stimulus of 2008-2009 .
But the feared deterioration in loan quality is exaggerated .
The reason : With rural-urban migration projected to exceed 310 million people over the next 20 years , there is reason to believe that much of the apparent overhang of housing supply will be steadily absorbed .
Like Shanghai Pudong in the late 1990 ’ s , today ’ s Chinese “ ghost cities ” are likely to be teaming urban centers in the not-so-distant future .
Meanwhile , deposit-rich Chinese banks have ample liquidity to absorb potential losses ; the system-wide loan-to-deposit ratio is only about 65 % – well below earlier pre-crisis levels that were typically closer to 120 % , according to a recent analysis by the Xerion team of Perella Weinberg Partners .
Nor is the Chinese property market about to implode .
Yes , a building boom and speculative excesses have occurred .
But a year and a half ago , the government moved aggressively to dampen multiple property purchases – raising down payments to 50 % for second homes and to 100 % for third homes .
While that halted much speculative activity , house prices have remained at elevated levels – underscoring lingering affordability issues for China ’ s emerging middle class .
Notwithstanding that problem , major imbalances in Chinese property markets should prove to be the exception over the next two decades . & # 160 ;
While there could be supply-demand mismatches in any given year , with an average of roughly 15 million citizens a year slated to move from the countryside to newly urbanized areas , demand should rise to meet supply . & # 160 ; Meanwhile , there are encouraging signs that property inflation is now cooling : For 46 of 70 major Chinese cities , property prices either declined or stayed flat in August 2011 compared with 31 cities that reported similar conditions in July .
Inflation is always a serious risk in China – especially with headline increases in the country ’ s Consumer Price Index surging through the 6 % threshold this summer .
The government has responded forcefully on four fronts .
First , food inflation , which accounts for about half the recent run-up in overall prices , has been addressed by administrative measures aimed at cutting fertilizer costs and removing bottlenecks to increased supplies of pork , cooking oil , and vegetables .
Second , in an effort to curtail excess bank lending , reserve ratios were increased nine times in the past 11 months .
Third , the rate of currency appreciation has edged up .
Finally – and perhaps most importantly – the People ’ s Bank of China has raised its benchmark policy rate five times since October 2010 .
At 6.5 % , the one-year lending rate is now 0.3 % above August ’ s headline inflation rate .
If food inflation recedes further , and the headline inflation rate starts to converge on the 3 % core ( non-food ) rate , the result will be the equivalent of " passive monetary tightening " in real ( inflation-adjusted ) terms – precisely what the inflation-prone Chinese economy needs .
All of this underscores a potential silver lining .
An increasingly unbalanced Chinese economy cannot afford persistent 10 % GDP growth .
Provided that there is no recurrence of the severe external demand shock of 2008 – a likely outcome unless Europe implodes – there is good reason to hope for a soft landing to around 8 % GDP growth .
A downshift to this more sustainable pace would provide welcome relief for an economy long plagued by excess resource consumption , labor-market bottlenecks , excess liquidity , a large buildup of foreign-exchange reserves , and mounting inflationary pressures .
For China , there is a deeper meaning to recent global developments . & # 160 ;
A second major warning shot in three years has been fired at this export-led economy . & # 160 ;
First , the United States , and now Europe – China 's two largest export markets are in serious trouble and can no longer be counted on as reliable , sustainable sources of external demand .
As a result , there are now major questions about the sustenance of China 's long powerful export-led growth model .
Accordingly , China has no choice but to move quickly to implement the pro-consumption initiatives of its recently enacted 12th Five-Year Plan .
Strategic transition is what modern China is all about .
That ’ s what happened 30 years ago , when economic reform began . & # 160 ; And it needs to happen again today . & # 160 ;
For China , a soft landing will provide a window of opportunity to press ahead with the formidable task of increasingly urgent economic rebalancing .
