China ’ s Evolving Web
HONG KONG – In a recent article , the economist Axel Leijonhufvud defines the market system as a web of contracts .
Because contracts are linked with each other , one default can trigger an avalanche of broken promises , “ [ making ] it possible to destroy virtually the entire web of formal and informal contracts which the market system requires for its functioning . ” The state ’ s role is to protect , enforce , and regulate these contracts and related property rights , as well as to intervene to prevent systemic failure .
This web of contracts – often taken for granted in mainstream economics , to the extent that it becomes almost invisible – embodies the formal and informal rules embedded in the market system that shape and constrain individual and social behavior .
They form the fabric of all human institutions .
Advanced economic systems have very complex webs of contracts , such as financial derivatives .
For Europe , Leijonhufvud argues , this implies a three-pronged approach that focuses on “ levels of leverage , ” “ maturity mismatches , ” and “ the topology of the web , ” – that is , “ its connectivity and the presence of critical nodes that are ‘ too big to fail . ’ ”
This is because “ [ t ] he web of contracts has developed serious inconsistencies . ” To insist that all contracts be fulfilled would “ cause a collapse of very large portions of the web , ” with “ serious economic and incalculable social and political consequences . ”
By contrast , emerging markets like China have less sophisticated systems and evolve more complex contractual / institutional links over time , particularly through globalized transactions .
Under China ’ s planned economy , most contracts were between individuals and the state , whereas more sophisticated market contracts have emerged or re-emerged only over the last 30 years .
Indeed , the widespread use of market contracts with publicly-owned companies was a recent and important adaptation in the move toward a “ socialist market economy . ”
The web of contracts , however , can also be understood as complex adaptive market systems , which encompass the state and family relations as well .
To understand China ’ s socialist market economy , it is essential to examine systematically these different forms of contracts and their institutional structures .
Family and kinship contracts , which govern marriage , adoption , cohabitation , inheritance , etc . , form the basic unit of human society .
These contracts are the most ancient and remain the foundation of social relationships in China today .
Corporate contracts place the profit-oriented legal person at the center of the transaction and bind all of its stakeholders .
Chinese corporate contracts have grown exponentially over the last 30 years , but they have special characteristics that reflect the primary role of Chinese state-owned enterprises .
Market contracts between producers and consumers – and / or among producers in supply chains – link individuals , families , firms , governments , and public organizations through local or global markets .
Over the last few decades , China has begun to practice modern contract law and joined the World Trade Organization , committing itself to international rules governing trade and investment .
Non-governmental and non-profit civil contracts bind people together for communal , religious , social , and political activities .
These contracts are still relatively new and evolving in China .
Social contracts created by constitutional and administrative laws define the powers and responsibilities of the state and its constituent bodies vis-à-vis individuals and the private sector .
They include the authority to impose taxes and restraints on individuals and private entities through criminal , administrative , and civil law , as well as the state ’ s obligation to provide public goods and services .
China has strengthened its unitary state with important institutional innovations that have delivered growth and middle-income prosperity , but it still retains the basic five-level administrative structure – central government on top , with provincial , city , town , and village bodies below – that first emerged two millennia ago .
Deciphering the structure of the web of contracts holds the key to understanding how an economy behaves , including its dynamic non-linear adaptation to internal and external forces .
Following the physicist Fritjof Capra , one should regard living organisms , social systems , and ecosystems as an interconnected and interdependent , complex adaptive system .
This means that we should view the economy and society not as rigid hierarchies or mechanical markets , but as networks or webs of life , in which contracts , formal and informal , fulfilled or violated , are the essence of human activity .
Examining webs of contracts should be similar to a biologist ’ s examination of cell structure and DNA .
China has created four functioning global-scale modern supply chains in manufacturing , infrastructure , finance , and government services , thanks to its evolving , expanding , and complex web of contracts .
But how was China able to build a modern industrial base within a relatively short period of time from its traditional , patrimonial family contracts and archaic constitutional structures ?
Through experimentation , adaptation , and evolution – a process that has been described as “ crossing the river by feeling the stones ” – China has been able to evolve a higher-order , or fifth , supply chain in political decision-making .
This “ top-level governance architecture , ” as it is known in China , has been essential for coordinating and orchestrating the different supply chains and the overall web of contracts to achieve the delicate balance among individual , family , corporate , social , and national objectives .
This top-level governance architecture is analogous to a computer ’ s operating system , which orchestrates the other software and hardware components to form a holistic unity .
Such a structure exists in many economies , but , in the Chinese context , where the state plays a central role in the economy , it is critical to the system ’ s effectiveness .
How it is shaped will depend on how China ’ s history , culture , institutional context , and evolving web of contracts affect the country ’ s social fabric .
