America ’ s Dangerous Debt Ceiling Debate
NEWPORT BEACH – It has been raised more than 70 times in the last 50 years , mostly without commotion .
It must be raised again this summer if the United States government is to continue paying its bills on time .
But now America ’ s debt ceiling has become the subject of intense political posturing and touch-and-go negotiations behind closed doors .
And , obviously , the outcome has implications that go well beyond the US .
As part of America ’ s system of checks and balances , Congress gets to do more than just approve the annual federal budget .
It also sets a limit on how much debt the US Treasury is allowed to issue .
Beyond this ceiling , the government can spend only from current revenues .
US Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner recently informed members of Congress that the government will be in this situation on or around August 2 .
Having already officially hit the ceiling , the Treasury is moving money around and tapping various pots of unused funds to pay its bills .
In a few weeks , this “ flexibility ” will be used up .
With the US government now borrowing around 40 % of every dollar it spends , a truly binding debt ceiling would immediately force the government to reduce spending radically and in a disorderly fashion .
Politicians across the political spectrum know that such a situation would unsettle an already fragile US economy , severely weaken the dollar , and raise serious concerns about the country 's ability to meet its debt-service obligations , including to the many foreign creditors that the US will need in the future .
Yet , in today ’ s polarized environment in Washington , Republicans and Democrats are unwilling to compromise – or at least to compromise “ too early . ”
By holding out , Republicans wish to force President Barack Obama ’ s administration into massive spending cuts .
Democrats respond that such a one-sided approach would be economically harmful and socially unjust .
In the meantime , both sides risk disrupting transfer payments ( including to the elderly ) and the provision of public services , as well as eroding further America ’ s global credit standing .
The overwhelming – and sensible – expectation is that the two parties will compromise and raise the debt ceiling before inflicting serious economic and financial dislocations .
The most recent precedent was the bipartisan agreement reached earlier this year on another fiscal issue that threatened to disrupt the normal functioning of government : the absence of a formally approved budget for this year .
A compromise would allow both parties to declare partial victory , for it would likely entail commitments to cut spending and some steps to make taxation more socially just .
But , like many last-minute agreements , it would have little durable impact .
In effect , the political system would again be kicking the can down the road , with real progress on necessary fiscal reforms expected only after the November 2012 presidential election .
Two scenarios for the timing of an interim compromise are possible , depending on whether it is a one- or two-step process .
Most observers expect a one-step process for bipartisan agreement before August 2 .
But politicians may need two steps : an initial failure to agree , and then a quick deal in response to the resulting financial-market convulsions .
In the meantime , the Treasury would temporarily re-prioritize and slow outgoing payments .
This two-step process would be similar to what happened in 2008 , when Congress was confronted with another cliffhanger : the Bush administration ’ s request for $ 700 billion to prevent a financial-market collapse and an economic depression .
Congress initially rejected the measure , but a dramatic 770-point drop in the stock market focused politicians ’ minds , bringing them back to the table – and to agreement .
But the two-step scenario involves incremental risks to the US economy , and to its standing in the global system .
And the longer America ’ s politicians take to resolve the debt-ceiling issue , the greater the risk of an inadvertent accident .
This brings us to a third , and even more unsettling possibility : a longer and more protracted negotiation , resulting in greater disruptions to government entitlement payments , other contractual obligations , and public services .
Creditors would then ask many more questions before adding to their already-considerable holdings of US government debt , generating still more headwinds in a US economy that already faces an unemployment crisis and uneven growth .
The next few weeks will provide plenty of political drama .
The baseline expectation , albeit subject to risk , is that Democrats and Republicans will find a way to avoid disruptions that would damage the fragile US economy , but that the compromise will not meaningfully address the need for sensible medium-term fiscal reforms .
Such political paralysis on key economic issues is increasingly unsettling for the US private sector , and for other countries that rely on a strong US at the core of the global economy .
This helps to explain why so many companies continue to hoard cash , rather than investing domestically , and why a growing number of countries want to diversify gradually away from dependence on the dollar as the reserve currency and on US financial markets for intermediation of their hard-earned savings .
The world economy is hard-wired to the assumption of a strong America , and Americans benefit from this .
But the more their politicians argue over the debt ceiling , the greater the risk that the wiring will become irreparably frayed .
