India ’ s Olympic Also-Rans
NEW DELHI – As the world awaits the Beijing Olympics , many wonder whether China ’ s grand coming-out party will also mark the occasion when it wrests dominance of the medal tally from the United States .
China ’ s dedicated athletes are widely assumed to have dozens of gold and silver medals in their grasp .
Whether or not they overtake the US , however , one thing is certain : China ’ s neighbor and regional geopolitical rival , India , will be lucky to win even a single medal .
International sport is , of course , an exercise in national chauvinism by other means .
At some level , we all pretend to tune into the Olympics to admire human athleticism .
But none of us can deny the attraction of the flags under which those athletes compete , the anthem that is played for the winners , and , ultimately , that impossible-to-ignore , regularly-updated medal tally , listing the gold , silver , and bronze medals awarded to each country , the Games ’ real honor roll .
Every Indian who follows the Olympics has cringed scanning the daily list of medal winners , eyes traveling down past dozens of nations big and small before alighting on a solitary Indian bronze in tennis or wrestling .
Worse yet , we have all known the shame of waiting day after day for India to appear on the list at all , as countries a hundredth our size record gold upon gold and Indian athletes are barely mentioned among the also-rans .
Indians like to think we can hold our own against the best in the world in any field : our Kalidasa can stand up to their Shakespeare , our Ramanujan to their Einstein , our Bollywood to their Hollywood and , these days , our Infosys to their Microsoft .
In sport , however , it is a different story .
Our cricketers have come close to being considered the best in the world , but cricket is not an Olympic sport .
Our sole world champion in any sport is the chess grandmaster Vishwanathan Anand – in another non-Olympic sport , and one that calls for brain , not brawn .
In fact , in the Olympics , India ’ s record has declined over time .
The one gold medal we had become used to winning since the 1920 ’ s , in field hockey , has proved elusive in recent Games , as our players have stumbled on Astroturf .
This year , India ’ s hockey players failed even to qualify for the Games .
In everything where simple human prowess is at stake – running , jumping , swimming , lifting , throwing - Indians simply don ’ t have what it takes .
An Indian beauty queen , Madhu Sapre , once became an unwitting victim of Indians ’ sense of national shame at our sporting insignificance .
She was unjustly denied a Miss World title in 1992 because of her answer to the final-round question , “ What is the first thing you would do if you became the ruler of your country ? ”
Her response – “ I would build a sports stadium ” – was considered stupid by the judges , and the almost-certain crown ( she was the overwhelming favorite ) slipped from her grasp .
Sapre ’ s answer might not have been the brightest , but if the judges had any idea of how desperate Indians are for sporting success , they would have understood that she was not expressing such an absurd priority .
Why do Indian athletes perform so badly ?
The explanations range from the anthropological to the borderline racist : Indians don ’ t have the genes , the build , the stamina , the climate , whatever .
There are structural and infrastructural explanations : lack of training facilities , gymnasiums , running tracks , equipment , financial resources .
We are a developing country , it is said ; after all , it is not just your eye against his , your legs against hers , but what you can do against their trainer , their running shoe , their ergodynamic costume , their titanium archer ’ s bow .
But those rationales won ’ t do : other developing countries , from Jamaica to Ethiopia , regularly rake in the medals .
Our talent pool isn ’ t really a billion , some argue ; it ’ s only the well off and middle class , maybe 300 million strong , who can afford to play sports .
But even that is a larger population base than a hundred countries that do better than India at the Olympics .
On the other hand , the incentives for success are not great ; the years of sacrifice and effort it takes to become a world-class athlete are simply not a realistic option to an Indian who needs to make a living , and sponsors are few and far between ( and they are all spending their sponsorship money on cricket ) .
Finally , there ’ s the usual Indian problem : sports administrative bodies and government departments are ridden with patronage and petty bossism , with officials more interested in protecting their turf ( and enjoying paid vacations to sporting events ) than in promoting athletes .
With all these factors , failure in the Olympics , it is suggested , is encoded in our national DNA .
Yet success or failure still depends on the individual athlete .
Indian genes in a developing country did not prevent Vijay Singh emerging from Fiji to rival Tiger Woods as the best golfer in the world .
And if Indians can be better than white and black sportsmen on the cricket field , why can ’ t they beat them in an Olympic stadium ?
The newly globalized India can no longer content itself with mediocrity in this global competition .
For a land with world-class computer scientists , mathematicians , biotech researchers , filmmakers , and novelists , sporting excellence is the last unconquered frontier .
But 2008 won ’ t be the year in which that frontier is breached .
