How New is Egypt ’ s “ New ” Foreign Policy ?
CAIRO – In the months since Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak ’ s resignation , his successors have signaled a shift in foreign policy by reaching out to former adversaries . Egypt ’ s government has welcomed Iranian diplomats and embraced the Palestinian group Hamas . Many interpret such moves as clear evidence of Egypt ’ s desire for a diplomacy that is not subordinate to American interests .
But Mubarak never entirely fit his detractors ’ portrayal of him as an American lackey . In fact , Mubarak ’ s need to please his Saudi Arabian benefactors , not the United States , was paramount in his thinking . Although he sometimes supported American policies , Mubarak frequently rebuffed the US when its positions did not align with his own .
Since the end of the October 1973 war , Arab-Israeli peace has been a cornerstone of America ’ s Middle East agenda . The US often looked to Egypt , the most important and influential Arab country , to play a leading role in promoting this goal . And , when it suited him , Mubarak played his part . When the late Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat humiliated Mubarak before the US secretary of state and the international media by refusing to sign an annex to an Israeli-Palestinian accord brokered in Cairo , Mubarak told him , “ Sign it , you son of a dog ! ”
On the other hand , when Arab public opinion opposed Palestinian concessions , Mubarak remained aloof from US peace initiatives . For example , in 1996 , he declined President Bill Clinton ’ s invitation to come to Washington , along with Arafat and the leaders of Israel and Jordan , to settle a bout of Palestinian violence . And when Clinton asked Mubarak to pressure Arafat to facilitate an Israeli-Palestinian peace deal during negotiations at Camp David in 2000 , he refused .
Mubarak had a rocky relationship with Israel , and held America ’ s closest Middle East ally at arm ’ s length throughout his presidency . For almost ten of his 30 years in office , Egypt had no ambassador in Tel Aviv . Mubarak never made an official state visit to Israel , and he frequently refused Israeli prime ministers ’ requests to come to Cairo . When the US sought to extend the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1994 , Mubarak mobilized the Arab world against the initiative , because Israel refused to sign the NPT .
Instead , Mubarak ’ s relationship with the Saudis usually determined his foreign policy . When Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990 and threatened to attack Saudi Arabia , Mubarak quickly dispatched troops to defend the kingdom . He was keen to support the Saudis and their Persian Gulf allies , who provided him with a steady flow of aid and an outlet for surplus Egyptian labor .
Though Mubarak ’ s opposition to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1991 happened to align with US policy , he was unwilling to back other American campaigns against Arab leaders . When President Ronald Reagan ’ s deputy national security adviser , John Poindexter , asked Mubarak to launch a joint US-Egyptian attack against Libya in 1985 , the Egyptian president scolded his visitor , saying , “ Look , Admiral , when we decide to attack Libya , it will be our decision and on our timetable . ”
Mubarak again refused to acquiesce in US plans to isolate Libya in the 1990 ’ s for its involvement in the downing of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie , Scotland . Instead of ostracizing Libyan leader Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi , Mubarak welcomed him to Cairo . After the United Nations imposed an international flight ban against Libya in 1992 , its land crossings with Egypt proved crucial to Libya ’ s economy ( and possibly Qaddafi ’ s political survival ) . Libya withstood the sanctions in part by importing food and oil infrastructure supplies via Egypt , and by exporting petroleum and steel with Mubarak ’ s help .
In fact , Mubarak ’ s Libya policy was driven largely by economic and security concerns , and rarely took US interests into consideration . More than one million Egyptians worked in Libya , which was also a large export market . And Qaddafi was eager to help Mubarak subdue Islamist threats to the Egyptian regime . Unlike neighboring Sudan , which harbored Egyptian radicals , like al-Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri , who were bent on destabilizing the country , Libya turned them over to Mubarak .
While Qaddafi delivered terrorists to Mubarak , the Egyptian president declined American requests to do the same . After Palestinians in 1985 hijacked the Italian ship Achille Lauro , killed an American , and berthed in Egypt , the US asked Mubarak to extradite them . But Mubarak refused , saying that Secretary of State George Shultz was “ crazy ” if he believed that Egypt would betray the Palestinian cause .
Egypt ’ s new leaders have inherited Mubarak ’ s dilemma – how to realize the country ’ s aspiration to lead the Arab world without angering its Saudi benefactors . For this reason , the Egyptian-Iranian rapprochement will yield more photo opportunities than tangible results . On opposite sides of religious and ethnic divides , a close bilateral relationship would seem unlikely under even the best circumstances . And , with Egypt in need of massive financial aid to offset the economic losses caused by its February revolution , its leaders can ill afford to alienate the Saudis , who view Iran , not Israel , as the gravest threat to regional stability .
Egypt is entering a new era . But the radical policy upheavals predicted by analysts will prove to be small tremors . Saudi interests will continue to weigh heavily on Egyptian foreign policy .
And that , above all , means preserving the status quo .
