India \ u0027s China Syndrome
CAMBRIDGE : India may the most important unheralded story of the world economy in coming years .
Though India 's one billion people constitute nothing less than one-sixth of humanity , and notwithstanding the fact that India is the world 's largest democracy , India remains off the radar screen for most observers of the world economy .
This may change soon , for India is on the move .
If it remains on course with economic reforms , India will be one of the fastest growing economies in the world in the next few years , and will become one of the premier locations for foreign investment .
India 's global political influence is likely to rise in conjunction with economic success , benefiting both the cause of democracy as well as the global economy .
India 's low profile is easy to understand .
Upon independence half a century ago , India 's first Prime Minister , Jawaharlal Nehru , set India on a course of protectionism and socialism – two of the most self-defeating economic strategies of modern times .
To a country that had struggled for decades against British imperialism , however , neither capitalism nor openness to foreign investors seemed a prudent course .
While India made important advances – in science , agricultural technology , and democratic institutions – the economy remained below its potential for decades .
Only when India chose a course of market reforms in the mid-1980s did the outlook improve .
With a decisive turn towards open trade and market liberalization in 1991 , India finally broke free of the shackles of a failed economic strategy .
During the 1990s , India found its footing as a market economy integrating with the world .
Because of its poverty , its complexity , and its vastness ( even national elections have to be held over the course of several weeks , to accommodate hundreds of millions of voters ) , the uptake of market reforms has been gradual , but also remarkably resilient to shocks .
The old centralized political structure built around Nehru 's Congress Party collapsed in the mid-1990s , giving way to a succession of weak multi-party governments .
But the remarkable underlying truth is that each new government endorsed the direction of globalization and market reforms , so much so that the basic reform direction is now a national consensus of virtually every major party .
Today 's government won a strong mandate in last autumn 's elections , giving it several years to deepen and widen reform .
With this political mandate , India stands the chance of a dramatic breakthrough to rapid growth .
Several things are now working in India 's direction :
1. rapid population growth is finally slowing ( though not yet by enough ) .
A growing proportion of the population will now be of working age , and a smaller population will be children . This should boost India 's per capita income ;
2. old social barriers to education for girls and lower castes are giving way , under democratic pressures , to strong calls for universal education .
This could provide the most dramatic social boost to rapid economic growth and improved well being ;
3. decades of investment in science and technology are now paying off in creating a powerful technological base for a modern Indian economy .
Though much of rural India remains impoverished , new dynamic urban-based centers of information technology are springing up around the country .
Indian cities such as Bangalore , Chennai ( formerly Madras ) , Mumbai ( formerly Bombay ) and Hyderabad are becoming locations for software and hardware exports , the cutting edge of India 's modern economy .
India 's exports of computer software and hardware have soared from a few hundred million dollars some years back to around $ 5 billion today , with a forecasted growth to $ 30 billion or more by 2005 .
As China boomed in the 1980s , India could boom in the first decade of this new century .
If the national consensus around reforms is sustained and enlarged , two great goals could be met .
India could enjoy a decade of " income doubling , " in which per capita gross domestic product actually doubles by the year 2010 .
This would require an annual growth of per capita income of around 7 % , something that is achievable given India 's economic conditions .
Second , India could create a system of universal literacy and education for the first time in its history , another dramatic social improvement that is realistically within reach .
These goals require hard work on the part of government and society .
Most importantly , all major political groups have to get behind the concept of universal education , a commitment that has , in practice , been missing for decades .
Next , the Government must lead a massive effort of reform .
For example , despite nationalist rhetoric by state enterprises and associated trade unions , the government should decide that the vast telecommunications network should be privatized , including to foreign investors .
It 's only in this way that India can hope to create a network of fiber optics and telephone lines to catapult the country into a modern information economy .
Other economic measures will also be politically tough , like reigning in subsidies for power that undermine the budget and make it difficult to get new investors into rural areas .
( Farmers have been promised cheap electricity for years – so cheap that private-sector power supplies are loath to make new investments . )
Several other areas of reform – in finance , labor markets , foreign investment , tax reform – await action .
Another goal should be to increase the government 's spending on research and development , especially in areas of health , agriculture , environment and information technology .
Despite long-standing political obstacles to some of these reforms , this may be the best and most likely moment for a political breakthrough .
India is feeling confident about itself , especially in view of its growing role in the world of high technology and a decade of successful reforms .
The new government has an electoral mandate .
Favorable demographic realities are in the mind of policy makers .
If India cannot make a breakthrough now , when could it ?
We should pay rapt attention as the new Government unveils its new budget and new development policies in coming weeks .
It may contain positive news for India , and for the world .
