How to Keep a New Year ’ s Resolution
MELBOURNE – Did you make any New Year ’ s resolutions ?
Perhaps you resolved to get fit , to lose weight , to save more money , or to drink less alcohol .
Or your resolution may have been more altruistic : to help those in need , or to reduce your carbon footprint .
But are you keeping your resolution ?
We are not yet far into 2010 , but studies show that fewer than half of those who make New Year ’ s resolutions manage to keep them for as long as one month .
What does this tell us about human nature , and our ability to live either prudently or ethically ?
Part of the problem , of course , is that we make resolutions to do only things that we are not otherwise likely to do .
Only an anorexic would resolve to eat ice cream at least once a week , and only a workaholic would resolve to spend more time in front of the television .
So we use the occasion of the New Year to try to change behavior that may be the most difficult to change .
That makes failure a distinct possibility .
Nevertheless , presumably we make resolutions because we have decided that it would be best to do whatever it is that we are resolving to do .
But if we have already made that decision , why don ’ t we just do it ?
From Socrates onwards , that question has puzzled philosophers .
In the Protagoras , one of Plato ’ s dialogues , Socrates says that no one chooses what they know to be bad .
Hence choosing what is bad is a kind of error : people will do it only if they think that it is good . If we can teach people what is best , Socrates and Plato seem to have thought , they will do it .
But that is a hard doctrine to swallow – much harder than eating the extra slice of cake that you know is not good for you .
Aristotle took a different view , one that fits better with our everyday experience of failing to do what we know to be best .
Our reason may tell us what is best to do , he thought , but in a particular moment our reason may be overwhelmed by emotion or desire .
Thus , the problem is not lack of knowledge , but the failure of our reason to master other , non-rational aspects of our nature .
That view is supported by recent scientific work showing that much of our behavior is based on very rapid , instinctive , emotionally based responses .
Although we are capable of deciding what to do on the basis of rational thought processes , such decisions often prove less powerful than our instinctive feelings in moving us to action .
What does this have to do with keeping resolutions ?
Richard Holton , a professor of philosophy at MIT and the author of Willing , Wanting , Waiting , points out that a resolution is an attempt to overcome the problem of maintaining an intention when we expect that , at some future time , we will face inclinations contrary to our intention .
Right now , we want to lose weight and we are rationally convinced that this is more important than the pleasure we will get from that extra slice of cake .
But we anticipate that , faced with cake tomorrow , our desire for that rich chocolate texture will distort our reasoning so that we might convince ourselves that putting on just a little more weight doesn ’ t really matter all that much .
To prevent that , we seek to shore up our current intention to lose weight .
By making a solemn resolution and telling our family and close friends about it , we tilt the scales against succumbing to temptation .
If we fail to keep our resolution , we will have to admit that we are less in control of our behavior than we had hoped , thus losing face in our own eyes and in the eyes of others about whom we care .
This fits well with what psychologists have discovered about how we can improve the odds that we will keep our resolutions .
Richard Wiseman , a professor of psychology at the University of Hertfordshire , has tracked 5,000 people who made New Year ’ s resolutions .
Only about one in ten managed to stick to what they had resolved .
In his recently released book 59 Seconds , Wiseman sets out the things that you can do to make success more likely :
· Break your resolution into a series of small steps ;
· Tell your family and friends about your resolution , thus both gaining support and increasing the personal cost of failure ;
· Regularly remind yourself of the benefits of achieving your goal ;
· Give yourself a small reward each time you achieve one of the steps towards your goal ;
· Keep track of your progress towards your goal , for example by keeping a journal or putting a chart on the fridge door .
Individually , each of these factors seems trivial .
Collectively , they are ways of exerting our self-control not only now , but in the future as well .
If we succeed , the behavior we judge to be better will become habitual – and thus no longer require a conscious act of will to keep acting in that way .
These tools for keeping a New Year ’ s resolution can help us to make progress , not only in losing weight or staying out of debt , but also in living more ethically .
We may even find that that is the best resolution to make , for our own benefit and that of others .
