America the Hypocritical
In commemorating the 230th anniversary of America ’ s independence last July , President George W. Bush noted that the patriots of the Revolutionary War believed that all men are created equal , and with inalienable rights .
Because of these ideals , he proclaimed , the United States “ remains a beacon of hope for all who dream of liberty and a shining example to the world of what a free people can achieve . ”
But , at the same time , his administration was holding approximately 400 prisoners at the US Naval Base at Guantánamo Bay in Cuba . Some of them have now been there for more than five years .
None of them has ever been put on trial .
Last month , a highly reputable source confirmed that the Guantánamo prisoners are suffering from more than indefinite detention .
The US Federal Bureau of Investigation released documents showing that an FBI agent witnessed “ on several occasions ” detainees who were “ chained hand and foot in [ a ] fetal position to [ the ] floor , ” without a chair , or food or water .
In these conditions , “ most urinated or defecated on [ them ] selves . ”
They were left there for 18 or 24 hours , or more .
On one of these occasions , the agent reported , “ the air conditioning was turned up so low that the barefooted detainee was shaking with cold . ”
On another occasion the room was unventilated , the temperature over 100 degrees Fahrenheit , and the detainee was almost unconscious on the floor with a pile of hair next to him – “ he had apparently been pulling it out throughout the night . ”
Another FBI agent was laughingly told by a civilian contractor , “ [ Y ] ou have to see this . ”
He was then taken to an interrogation room where he saw a longhaired man with a full beard who was gagged with duct tape that “ covered much of his head . ”
When the agent asked how the tape would be removed , he was not given any answer .
Other FBI agents reported seeing prisoners left in shackles for 12 hours or more , again in cold conditions , being subjected to strobe lights and loud rap music for many hours , or being forced to wrap themselves in an Israeli flag .
The FBI report noted these incidents with the comment : “ doesn ’ t seem excessive given Department of Defense policy . ”
Several of the detainees told the FBI agents that they had no connection with terrorism and had no idea why they had been abducted and taken to Guantánamo .
Many prisoners were not captured fighting in Afghanistan .
Some were picked up in Bosnia , Indonesia , Thailand , Mauritania , and Pakistan .
The Bush administration says that the detainees are “ enemy combatants ” in the global war against terror – a war that is being waged around the world , and that could last for decades .
The commander of the Guantánamo task force , Rear Admiral Harry B. Harris , Jr . , recently defended harsh treatment of his prisoners , claiming , “ They ’ re all terrorists ; they ’ re all enemy combatants . ”
But the CIA has made mistakes before .
For example , Murat Kurnaz , a German-born Turkish man , was held in Guantánamo for four years before being released last August .
The case of Khaled el-Masri , a German citizen of Lebanese descent , appears to be another of these errors .
Seized by the CIA in Macedonia , he was taken to Afghanistan and interrogated for five months before being released without charge .
A German court has now issued arrest warrants for those involved in his abduction .
If there are any human rights at all , the right not to be locked up indefinitely without trial is surely one of them .
The US Constitution ’ s Bill of Rights puts considerable emphasis on that right , specifying in the Sixth Amendment that in all criminal prosecutions , “ the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial , by an impartial jury ” and “ to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation ; to be confronted with the witnesses against him . ”
None of the Guantánamo inmates has been granted these rights .
So it has never been proved , by the standards laid down in the US Constitution that any of them really are terrorists .
But the Sixth Amendment does not apply to the Guantánamo prisoners , because they are not US citizens and are in a facility that , technically , is not part of US territory , although it is under the full control of the US government .
Whatever US courts say about it , abducting people all over the world , locking them up for years without establishing that they are guilty of anything , and subjecting them to harsh and abusive treatment is a flagrant violation of international law .
By any standard of justice , it is also just plain wrong .
Tom Paine , the great American revolutionary and author of
