Does Clinton Deserve Credit for US Prosperity ?
CAMBRIDGE : A pivotal question to be debated in this year ’ s US presidential election is whether American prosperity resulted from Clinton Administration policies or from deeper changes arising from new technology and globalization .
In short , should Bill Clinton or Bill Gates get the credit for America ’ s boom ?
The economic successes of Clinton ’ s eight years are undoubted .
America enjoys its longest continuous economic expansion in history , now more than nine years old .
Economic growth averaged 3.6 % per year between 1992-1999 , far above the 2.9 % per year growth between1980-92 .
15 million jobs were created between 1992 and 1999 ; the unemployment rate , now 4 % , is the lowest in 30 years .
The stock market ’ s performance is legendary , with capital gains totaling 7 trillion dollars since the start of 1996 .
No government , of course , could be fully responsible for such large trends .
Still , the Clinton Administration was more than a bystander .
For President Clinton took a favorable inheritance B the results of the policies of previous governments , as well as global trends and innovations in science and technology B and skillfully fashioned an economic governance well designed for a knowledge based economy .
His Administration deserves much credit , both for policies followed and mistakes avoided .
First the inheritance .
A good starting point was the end of the Cold War which enabled the US to reduce military spending by around 2.5 % of GDP ( comparing 1990 and 2000 ) , a saving worth around $ 225 billion per year .
This helped Clinton reduce the budget deficit in a rather painless manner .
The second inheritance was a flexible , deregulated economy with fairly low marginal tax rates , a legacy of the Reagan-Bush era .
The third inheritance was low inflation .
When Clinton came to office there was no need for heroic stabilization policies .
The battle against high inflation was won ten years earlier .
So Clinton and the Federal Reserve Board under Alan Greenspan could pursue economic growth without worrying about the economy overheating .
The first distinct accomplishment of the Clinton Administration was to adopt some key mainstream choices of economic policymaking .
When Clinton came to office in 1993 , he had to make several key choices :
1. promote free trade , in line with policies of the Reagan and Bush administrations , or turn more protectionist as his trade-union allies urged ?
2. reduce the budget deficit , in line with mainstream economic thinking , or boost government spending , as many left-of-center economists were arguing ?
In both cases , pressures from the Republicans as well as from centrist Democrats helped to pull the Clinton Administration onto the correct track : supporting free trade despite powerful protectionist allies in the Democratic Party ; supporting budget deficit reduction instead of large fiscal spending programs .
Clinton Administration support for the North American Free Trade Agreement with Mexico , completion of the Uruguay Round on multilateral trade , and recent agreement to admit China into the World Trade Organization , are all accomplishments in support of global trade .
More recently , Clinton defended the economic mainstream against attack by conservative Republicans , who pushed for deep tax cuts that would undermine the fiscal surpluses of recent years .
These Conservatives also pressed for sharp cuts in government spending that would hurt the poor .
Clinton held the line against these excesses as well .
Clinton ’ s Administration has done much more , however , than defend the economy against ideological extremists .
It fashioned , bit by bit , a kind of “ industrial policy ” for the new Knowledge Economy .
Clinton understood earlier than most politicians , and economists as well , that US economic strength derived from a combination of basic science , technological innovation , and high-quality education .
His Administration therefore shaped a role for government that supports the generation and diffusion of knowledge in all spheres of knowledge creation .
First , America increased the level of government support for science , reaching a sum of around $ 85 billion in this year ’ s budget .
Government-supported research shaped scientific advances in information technology and biotechnology , two critical fields in which the US has the global scientific lead .
Second , Clinton policies fostered development and expansion of the internet as a core strategy of economic growth .
Clinton pushed for , and achieved , a period of tax holidays on electronic commerce .
His administration shaped the regulatory environment to achieve rapid adoption of internet-based activities and championed government programs to help get schools and libraries connected to the internet .
It even advocated liberalization of work permits for foreign workers skilled in internet technologies .
Third , Clinton pushed expansion of various programs to support higher education .
The share of US students going on to higher education after secondary school is now 67 % , up 10 % over the preceding decade .
The Administration recognized that higher education is the sine qua non for a successful high-technology economy .
The basic lessons of US success should be recognized : macroeconomic stability ; budgetary prudence ; global trade , competition and de-monopolization in telecommunications and finance ; and an active industrial policy geared towards a knowledge-based economy , building upon science , research and development , information technology , and higher education .
All of this depends , as well , on continuing reduction of global tensions .
This is not to say that all is now right with US policymaking or that the path ahead is risk-free .
The run-up in stock market prices in recent years was partly a financial bubble , and there may be a price to pay for it .
Moreover , despite US economic successes at home , America has neglected its moral and practical responsibilities as an aid giver to poor countries .
This is a sad counterpoint to American successes at home .
