Muzzled in the Name of Freedom
NEW YORK – Acts of terror can inflict terrible damage .
But they cannot destroy an open society .
Only those who govern our democracies can do that , by shrinking our freedoms in freedom 's name .
Shinzo Abe , Japan 's right-wing nationalist prime minister , does not need much encouragement to tighten up secrecy laws , give more powers to the police , or make it easier to use military force .
The grisly executions of two Japanese citizens caught by Islamic State terrorists in Syria have provided precisely the encouragement that Abe needs to pursue such measures .
But Japan has never been seen as a bastion of free speech , nor did it ever make great claims to be .
France does .
That is what the demonstration of solidarity in the face of last month 's terrorist attacks in Paris was surely all about .
France , of all countries , would avoid the trap that snared the other great Western republic claiming to be a beacon of freedom in the world .
Fear of terrorist violence after the 9 / 11 attacks did more damage to freedom in the United States than the suicidal murder of thousands of its citizens .
Because of that fear , Americans allow themselves to be spied on indiscriminately by their own government , and permit terrorism suspects to be tortured and locked up indefinitely without trial .
France , like most other countries in the European Union , already has laws that ban hate speech .
You cannot legally insult people on the grounds of their race , beliefs , or sexual orientation .
And in France , as well as in some other countries , one can be prosecuted for denying the Holocaust and other historical genocides .
President François Hollande , who is not a right-wing nationalist like Abe , now wants to strengthen those bans .
He has proposed new laws that would make online entities like Google and Facebook responsible for any " hate speech " posted online by their users .
Former EU heads of state have also backed a proposal from European Jewish leaders to criminalize in every EU country not just anti-Semitism and genocide-denial , but also " xenophobia " in general .
Few people would wish to defend expressions of xenophobia or anti-Semitism .
But is it really wise to use the law to ban opinions ?
First of all , such laws , if enacted , are unlikely to reduce the risk of terrorist acts .
Banning the expression of opinions will not make them go away .
They will continue to be expressed , more secretively perhaps , and as a result become even more toxic .
And the social and political basis for terrorism , in the Middle East and elsewhere , will not vanish just because of a public ban on xenophobic speech .
But there is a larger danger in using the law to police what people think .
It can stifle public debate .
That danger underlies the view , still operative in the US , that opinions , however obnoxious , should be freely expressible , so that they can be opposed by counter-arguments .
It would be naive , of course , to believe that religious or political extremists are interested in an exchange of views .
But inciting violence is banned in the US as well .
The First Amendment of the Constitution does not protect freedom of expression when it can be shown to create a risk of imminent violence .
Xenophobic views , or the denial of genocide , are repellent , but do not necessarily result in such a threat .
In most societies , including the US , the public expression of such opinions is limited by a rough consensus on what is socially respectable .
This consensus changes with time .
It is up to editors , writers , politicians , and others who speak in public to shape it .
Cartoonists , artists , bloggers , activists , and comedians sometimes like to challenge the consensus of respectability .
Some of these challenges might cause outrage ( that , after all , often is the point ) .
But as long as they do not promote or threaten violence , it would do more harm than good to ban them by law .
Allowing the government to decide which opinions are permissible is dangerous not just because it smothers debate , but also because governments can be arbitrary or self-serving .
It would be useful in the current climate of fear to recall a famous hate-speech case in the US .
In 1977 , the American Nazi Party planned to stage a demonstration in Skokie , a suburb of Chicago with a large Jewish population .
A local court , prompted by shocked and fearful public opinion , decided that the display of swastikas , distribution of leaflets , and the wearing of Nazi uniforms should be banned .
Such a demonstration , it was quite plausibly argued , would be an insult to a community that included Holocaust survivors .
But the ban was contested by the American Civil Liberties Union as an infringement of the First Amendment .
The argument of the ACLU lawyers , most of whom were liberal Jews , was not based on any sympathy for Nazi symbols or views .
Their argument was that if you allow the government to ban opinions you hate or despise , you weaken your right to contest a similar ban on views with which you might agree .
Freedom of speech , in other words , should mean freedom of hateful speech , too , as long as it does not threaten or promote violence .
Most European governments already take a stricter view of public insults than the US Constitution does .
It would be a great mistake to add even more restrictions .
Terrorist attacks are doing enough damage , in lives and property .
There is no reason for governments to make things worse by tampering with their citizens ' liberties .
