Gaza ’ s Crushed Childhoods
AMMAN -
Ayman is a soft-spoken 14-year-old boy in Jabalia City , Gaza .
His family is poor , and his parents have already sold almost all their furniture to pay for food and schooling for their children .
Recently , after collecting a government food handout , Ayman ’ s father , who has been unemployed since March 2006 , had to sell the milk to pay for the journey back home .
Ayman works very hard in school and dreams of a future career . But , with 47 students in his cramped classroom and double shifts the norm , his learning environment is very stressful . Home is no refuge : the recent incursion into Jabalia was 200 meters from where Ayman lives . The shooting and shelling so terrorized his five-year-old sister that she still wakes up screaming at night .
Ayman ’ s experience is all too familiar in Gaza ’ s crowded , crippled neighborhoods , where those who are least to blame for the troubles are suffering the most .
Indeed , among Gaza ’ s 840,000 children – of which 588,000 are refugees – Ayman ’ s story is luckier than many . Since the recent escalation of violence that began last month , at least 33 Palestinian boys and girls have been killed and many more injured or maimed – caught in the crossfire , shot in their living rooms , or struck by explosions in their own backyards . On February 28 , four children playing soccer were hit by a missile , which dismembered them so completely their own families could not identify their bodies .
Ayman , his siblings , and all Gaza ’ s children are finding their lives diminished each day – a cruel , slow suffocation of their spirit and their dreams .
Instead of enjoying expanding horizons , they are trapped in a virtual prison , where things that every child should be able to take for granted are instead being taken away : the right to play , to go to school , to have enough to eat , to have light to study by at night , and to feel safe in their own homes .
The weight of one of the world ’ s longest-running conflicts is resting on their thin shoulders , crushing their childhood and inflicting psychological scars that may never heal .
Palestinians were once reputed to be among the best-educated people in the Middle East ; today , after years of violence , isolation , and poverty , their proud tradition of educational excellence has been shattered .
Almost 2,000 children in Gaza have dropped out of school in the last five months .
Those who remain must share tattered textbooks and do without crucial resources .
The January 2008 semester exams at schools in Gaza operated by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East ( UNRWA ) found 50-60 % failure rates in mathematics and a 40 % failure rate in Arabic – the children ’ s native language . Despite this , Ayman insists , “ I want to be an educated person . I want to be an engineer to build my country . ”
Let the world recall that Gaza ’ s crisis is a manmade disaster . And let the world take note that conditions are worse today than at any time since the occupation began . Seventy-nine percent of Gaza ’ s households live in poverty ; eight out of ten depend on food assistance .
Almost half the labor force is unemployed ; local industry has collapsed .
Water and sewage systems are failing ; garbage is piling up in the streets .
UNICEF is working around the clock to restore a sense of normalcy for Gaza ’ s youth – developing remedial worksheets to help children keep up with their studies ; creating sports and recreation programs in schools ; and working with communities to establish play areas where kids can be kids in safety .
UNICEF works with partners to get water , hygiene , and medical supplies to households and health facilities .
And UNICEF-supported counseling teams are spread across the area , helping Palestinian parents and children cope with the burden of stress .
But , while UNICEF is doing all it can to comfort those in the midst of Gaza ’ s madness , only political leaders can bring the dreadful nightmare to an end . It is time for new engagement . The siege must be lifted .
The killing of civilians has to stop , on both sides .
Palestinian and Israeli children deserve to grow up in peace . And leaders on both sides , supported by the international community , must join in the kind of honest dialogue that is the only viable path toward achieving it .
Ayman ’ s father quietly says , “ My children are my hope . ” The children of Gaza are a light in the darkness . They deserve a chance to shine .
