Emerging Infectious Diseases
Today ’ s bio-diversity crisis is not just one of lost habitats and extinct species .
It is also a crisis of emerging infectious diseases ( EID ’ s ) , such as HIV in humans , Ebola in humans and gorillas , West Nile virus and Avian Influenza in humans and birds , chytrid fungi in amphibians , and distemper in sea lions .
There is every reason to take these events seriously , because EID ’ s appear to have a long evolutionary history .
This is because many pathogens are capable of infecting a range of hosts , but evolved in places where only some of those hosts live .
Pathogens also have specialized means of transmission from host to host .
If , for example , a pathogen is transmitted by an insect that lives in the tops of trees , susceptible hosts will not be infected if they never leave the ground .
For humans , HIV , Ebola , West Nile virus , and Avian flu are only the latest in a long line of EID ’ s .
When our ancestors moved out of the African forest onto the savannah more than a million years ago , they rapidly became effective predators .
Sharing prey with pre-existing carnivores , they acquired tapeworms that originally inhabited only hyenas , large cats , and African hunting dogs .
When humans began to move out of Africa , they carried some of their pathogens to new areas , where they switched over to native hosts while native pathogens took up residence in the newly arrived humans .
Agriculture and urbanization subsequently exposed us to yet more pathogens .
If doctors were around back then , they would have called all these occurrences EID ’ s .
Geographical restriction and specialized transmission mean that in most time periods , most pathogens occur in a small number of host species , often only one , but retain the ability to infect more .
But climate change alters everything .
Species move out of their areas of origin and ecosystems change .
Pathogens come into contact with susceptible hosts that they have never before encountered , and that never had the opportunity to evolve resistance .
As a result , EID ’ s are not just possible ; they are inevitable .
Indeed , every episode of climate change has produced them .
Anticipating a problem is always more effective in terms of time and cost than responding to a crisis , no matter how viable the response .
Unfortunately , we usually fight existing diseases but neglect looking forward .
For example , white-tailed deer living in northwestern Costa Rica host six species of tick .
None of the ticks is known to carry Lyme Disease , which has never been reported in Costa Rica .
As a result , there are no public health advisories about Lyme Disease there .
But some of the ticks are closely related to known carriers , and thus are potential carriers themselves .
This debilitating – and difficult to diagnose – illness could thus be introduced to Costa Rica inadvertently by something as simple as an asymptomatic eco-tourist .
The information about Costa Rican deer ticks comes from an inventory of parasites of vertebrates in northern Costa Rica , but it is the only inventory of its kind ever undertaken .
We must do better .
More than 50 % of the species on this planet are parasites of some form , including pathogens affecting humans , livestock , crops , and wildlife .
But , relative to our overall knowledge of biodiversity , we have documented less than 10 % of the world ’ s pathogens .
The remaining 90 % are potential EID ’ s .
We face a potential crisis , therefore , that stems from our fundamental ignorance about the biosphere , for it is impossible to be proactive about species of pathogens whose existence has not been documented .
This makes many pathogens “ evolutionary land mines ” awaiting us as we relocate to novel habitats , move species around , and alter existing ecosystems .
Nevertheless , most resources are still being allocated for responses to known EID ’ s rather than to assessing the risk of potential EID ’ s .
Simply put , we must complete the global inventory of species .
Now .
Five hundred thousand years of experience in hunting and gathering , coupled with cheaper and faster molecular analysis , performed by faster and cheaper computers makes this task economically feasible .
Rapid identification using genetic “ bar codes ” can increase the rate of discovering species and determining the transmission dynamics of potential EID ’ s .
Pathogens have highly specialized transmission modes , and groups of closely related species tend to be very similar .
All species of malaria , for example , are transmitted by mosquitos .
Once classified , we will then be able to make predictions about two closely related species based on incomplete information about either , buying time and saving money .
Finally , this information should be digitized and made freely available over the Internet to all concerned researchers and parties .
If EID ’ s were rare , management through crisis response might be cost-effective .
But EID ’ s are not rare at all .
Rather , they are a common outcome of geographic dispersal associated with large-scale environmental changes .
So we must cease being ignorant and reactive , and become informed and proactive .
As a common sports adage puts it : never change a winning game , but always change a losing one .
