Protecting Civilians Responsibly
BEIJING – Would China ever be willing to host an international policy discussion about the conditions that would legitimize invading another country to stop genocide or other mass-atrocity crimes from being committed within its borders ?
Given China ’ s long history of antagonism to “ interference in internal affairs ” in general , and to “ humanitarian intervention ” in particular , and in view of its contribution to the UN Security Council ’ s long paralysis over much less coercive measures in Syria , you would be in good company if you answered , “ No . ”
But you would be wrong .
I have just been at a two-day meeting in Beijing that wrestled with just this topic .
The meeting , hosted by the foreign ministry ’ s think tank , the China Institute of International Studies , brought together specialist scholars and practitioners from China and the other BRICS countries ( Brazil , Russia , India , and South Africa ) .
And this month , the Russian Foreign Ministry ’ s Diplomatic Academy will host a conference in Moscow , with local and international experts discussing the same subject .
Both meetings are , to my knowledge , the first of their kind .
The fact that they are happening at all – and , if my Beijing experience is any guide , in a constructive , problem-solving spirit – is an encouraging development .
Although no outcome was formally agreed or made public , several themes emerged from the Beijing meeting .
Taken together , they offer reason for confidence that it may be possible to recreate international consensus , so long missing in Syria , about how to deal with the hardest mass-atrocity cases .
First , there was widespread acceptance that the “ Responsibility to Protect ” ( R2P ) doctrine , unanimously agreed by the United Nations General Assembly in 2005 , is here to stay .
R2P recognizes that sovereign states have a responsibility to protect their people from genocide , ethnic cleansing , crimes against humanity , and war crimes ; that other states have a responsibility to assist them to do so ; and that if a state is “ manifestly failing ” to protect its people , the wider international community has a responsibility to step in with “ timely and decisive action , ” which might in an extreme case include military action if approved by the UN Security Council .
True , some Chinese scholars remain inclined to argue that the entire R2P enterprise – particularly its sanction of military action in exceptional cases – is just “ old neo-interventionist wine in a new bottle . ”
But this did not appear to be a majority sentiment , nor did it stop anyone from engaging in lively discussion of how the R2P doctrine could be most effectively implemented in practice .
Second , there was widespread agreement about what had caused the breakdown of consensus in the Security Council concerning how to respond to events in Syria ( at least until the use of chemical weapons in August proved to be a game changer ) .
The cause was not an attempt by the global South to revive outdated notions of unlimited sovereignty ; rather , it was a reaction to the perceived overreach of the NATO-led military intervention in Libya in 2011 .
The Security Council ’ s three Western permanent members – France , the United Kingdom , and the United States ( the P3 ) – had sought and been given a limited mandate to protect civilians , specifically invoking R2P .
But they were perceived as then ruthlessly pursuing full-scale regime change , without securing any further agreement from the Council .
If the P3 ( now often privately , and rather more acerbically , described as FUKUS ) were going to take a mile after being given an inch , then no more inches would be offered .
Third , and most important , there was widespread agreement about how consensus within the Security Council on the hardest cases might be recreated .
The idea was that R2P should be “ enriched ” by the acceptance of a complementary principle , called “ Responsible Protection . ”
Floated by the Chinese scholar Ruan Zongze in a journal article last year , and evidently the subject of much internal discussion since , Responsible Protection builds upon “ Responsibility While Protecting , ” an approach earlier proposed by Brazil that has already gained some traction at the UN .
The core elements of Responsible Protection , as articulated by Chinese participants in the Beijing debate , won strong support around the table .
Tough criteria – specifically , legitimate intention , last resort , proportionality , and balance of consequences – should be clearly satisfied before any military mandate is granted , with every effort made to exhaust diplomatic solutions before more robust alternatives are embraced .
There should be better methods of supervision and accountability to ensure that the “ protection ” objective remains at the heart of any response .
And the primary emphasis of the entire R2P enterprise should continue to be prevention of mass-atrocity crimes – both their occurrence and their recurrence .
Some in the P3 and elsewhere will see all of this as a mere spoiling operation with a more sophisticated face .
But they will do so at their peril .
The idea of Responsible Protection – like the Brazilian initiative that preceded it – reflects genuinely and widely felt concerns .
If not addressed , they will make Security Council resolutions in support of military action in R2P cases almost impossible to obtain in the future .
It remains to be seen whether China – and the other BRICS countries – will now move to champion the idea of Responsible Protection in a formal way .
If they do , it should not be viewed as a rearguard action designed to undermine the R2P norm , but rather an effort to assume co-ownership of it .
In terms of getting serious about saying “ never again ” to mass-atrocity crimes , that is about as positive a development as anyone could hope for .
