Don \ u0027t Write off The New Economy as Dead
CAMBRIDGE : Until recently America 's booming New Economy reigned supreme : no inflation to speak of , stocks at all time highs , four years at over 4 % growth , full employment , and budget surpluses .
To that vision even cynics surrendered .
Now everything looks different .
Signs of inflation in product and labor markets loom ; the only question now is whether the economy will slow quickly by itself or whether the Federal Reserve Board must beat it into the ground by quickly raising interest rates .
So , was it all hype or will the New Economy survive slowdown ?
The answer : it will live and spread throughout the world , becoming as pervasive as the welfare state and big government became in the 1930s .
It will shape our economies and our lives for decades .
Why ?
The New Economy involves five interacting motors : technology , competition , and a new economic culture for government , households and business .
Technology is the most obvious part : the telecommunications revolution is far more pervasive and spreading more rapidly than the telegraph or telephone did in their time .
There is also the information revolution with its ability to create software programs that restructure dramatically tasks from accounting to ticketing , from finance to shopping to leisure .
This part of the revolution is far from over : in fact , we are merely at the end of the beginning of this revolution .
The explosion of computing capacity will soon introduce opportunities now out of reach of anyone 's imagination today .
In terms of competition : we have not had as much nor as pervasive competition since early in the century .
Sharply higher competition is even becoming the rule in countries that hate it like the devil -- Germany , France , Japan and others . The agents of competition are of course world trade , made more effective by technology , domestic deregulation and dismantling welfare states .
Stockholders insist on getting their pound of flesh .
Risk capital is available to anyone , not just the establishment , and there is no limit .
It is a short step from here to breaking down protected markets .
The New Economy is a rat race , but everybody , at least as a buyer , is king .
The third driver is a new economic culture .
Central banks and treasuries have learned that stable prices and sound budgets make extraordinary contributions to prosperity .
As important , individuals and businesses have gotten the two key messages of a world where everything is possible : " Don 't take NO for an answer ! " And " Don 't wait for the government ; if you have a problem , solve it yourself . "
These attitudes fundamentally change the way the world works : middle management , the bulwark of tradition , is being liquidated .
As in every revolution , protagonists of the status quo are kicked out .
Risk talking is valued , not shunned .
Young people want to be in startup companies , not investment banks .
The man who said something is impossible gets interrupted by someone who just did it .
Josef Schumpeter ( failed turn-of-the-century Austrian finance minister at age 21 , bankrupt banker shortly after , formidable Harvard economist after that ) called this process " creative destruction . "
He envisaged trade , changed rules of the game , or an important innovation shocking markets , the result being that prices , players , and rules of the game change throughout the entire economy .
In the process , a dramatic reshuffling greatly raises productivity as established and tired organizations break up .
There is no better example of Schumpeter 's creative destruction than what has happened in America over the past decade .
But this is no longer a US story .
Creative destruction ( reinforced by economic openness and technology ) is sweeping the world .
Skeptics keep arguing that competition and technology wreak havoc upon society 's harmony ; that they create inequality and eviscerate the middle class .
True , the New Economy is tough for those who sit on their backsides and live at the expense of stockholders or taxpayers .
True , it gives a chance to energetic people formerly on the sidelines .
Interestingly , in the US it has meant full employment and a sharp improvement in the economic status of the poorest .
Yes , people change jobs ; yes , they must hustle .
But who wants to go back ?
Not parents who see great mobility and opportunities for their kids ; not the kids who have the time of their life . Three cheers for creative destruction .
Despite stock market dips , the New Economy has come of age .
It does not offer a quick way to riches ; it does not double the growth rate ; it does not happen by just breathing the air .
The New Economy means hard work ; its miracles are limited but real .
In many places , it turns the world upside down : Finland as a high tech center , Germany lagging because change is denigrated , Japan 's slumping economy rescued by its formidable technology potential .
Central banks and treasuries can no longer create false prosperity .
And most important , perhaps we have even done away with the business cycle .
Far too early for a requiem , the New Economy is just starting .
