Government Accountability or Government Accounting ?
Paris amp # 45 ; amp # 45 ;
When Nicolas Sarkozy ’ s government spokesperson announced that each minister ’ s performance would be assessed according to criteria set by a private auditing firm , he probably did not expect to elicit a fierce response .
But he should have .
The opposition quickly attacked the move as a “ dangerous gimmick ” and a “ smokescreen . ”
One pundit asked , “ Will the time soon come when ministers are hired by head-hunters ? ”
And a young MP declared that “ France cannot be managed like a bolt factory . ”
But what is so absurd about establishing standards by which to assess the fulfillment of Sarkozy ’ s campaign promises ?
As soon as they were appointed in June 2007 , Sarkozy ’ s ministers were given a clear set of objectives in the form of a letter of intent .
Isn ’ t it normal to create some means of holding ministers accountable ?
A culture of “ results ” has become central to economic modernization in France , so shouldn ’ t the same be true of French governments , with their entrenched inclination toward passivity and aloofness ? And the issue of setting measurable standards for government operations is not confined to France . British Prime Minister Gordon Brown has made such quantifiable goals a hallmark of his leadership ever since he was Chancellor of the Exchequer .
Of course , the institutions charged with supervising France ’ s public sector , such as the Cour des comptes or the Inspection générale des finances , have the skills and capacities that are needed to fulfill their tasks .
Moreover , French public policies are subject to a general review procedure .
But the culture of a private auditing firm can bring something new by moving beyond a basic review of legality to a general assessment of performance .
For the plan ’ s opponents , the main causes of indignation are the criteria for assessment .
Should the immigration minister be judged according to the number of illegal immigrants expelled ?
Should the education minister be assessed according to how much overtime work teachers are made to perform ?
Should the culture minister be assessed according to the number of visitors to free museums and the share of French movies in the domestic market ?
Such questions hide more basic ones : can the fulfillment of political goals really be quantified ?
Is it possible to evaluate a state in the same way that you evaluate a firm , thereby reducing its performance to a set of specific actions ?
To some extent , the answer is yes .
After all , state bureaucracies are , on one level , simply a species of the large and complex organizations that , in the private sector , are subject to standardized performance indicators .
In many Western democracies – New Zealand , Sweden , the United Kingdom , and even Italy – efforts at administrative modernization have focused on forging a stronger link between management and performance .
On another level , however , state bureaucracies are very different from private-sector organizations , for they have their own characteristics and objectives , which will be endangered were they are reduced to quantitative standards of performance and efficiency .
Indeed , one of the main reasons why certain tasks are given to governments , rather than left to the private sector , is that ordinary market mechanisms do not work in the case of so-called “ public goods ” because the market cannot determine the optimal level of their supply .
Quantitative targets thus hide the crucial policy decision about the right “ portfolio ” of services that a government should provide .
And if assessment of state action were based only on a set of pre-defined quantitative targets , ministers would also understandably – but mistakenly – neglect quality and other important objectives .
So , should the French be worried ?
According to Prime Minister Francois Fillon , “ We are not at school . ”
Beyond technical criteria , ministers will still be assessed according to the influence exercised by their party or political faction , election results , and their popularity among the media and the public .
Thus , there is no contradiction between the aim of turning ministers into efficient managers and parliament ’ s power to hold members of the government accountable .
Eventually , the voters will have the final say .
So , targeting quantitative objectives can be a useful innovation , but only as long as its purpose is to provide a new tool in managing certain aspects of the state ’ s performance .
Beyond that point , the goals of state action – the substance of ministers ’ responsibilities – will still be assessed according to values whose richness and complexity cannot be reduced to the cold one-dimensionality of a spread sheet .
