Europe and Anti-Europe
BERLIN – Since 2008 , when the global financial crisis erupted , the European Union has been confronted by a succession of crises : the escalating Greek crisis ; Russian revanchism in Ukraine ; and the refugee crisis in the Mediterranean ( which is inextricably linked to the regional crisis in the Middle East and Africa ’ s various wars ) .
These crises have stretched the EU ’ s powers and institutions up to – and beyond – their limits , which is why Europe ’ s response has been so mortifyingly weak .
The ineffectiveness of existing institutions and structures in the face of today ’ s threats is now jeopardizing the EU ’ s legitimacy , because Europe ’ s citizens are calling for solutions that the EU obviously is unable and partly unwilling to provide .
One consequence is erosion of support for the EU among its member states ’ electorates .
And the pace of erosion could accelerate in the next two years .
The United Kingdom now seems certain to hold , by 2016 , a referendum on remaining in the EU , and a far-left party – determined , as in Greece , to escape the rigors of economic reform – could win Spain ’ s general election next autumn .
Certainly , events could turn out positively , with the UK remaining part of the EU , and Spain opting for the status quo or a more moderate vision of change than Greece ’ s Syriza-led government has embraced .
But the worst-case scenario for the EU ’ s future looks increasingly likely : “ Grexit ” ( Greece leaving the eurozone ) , “ Brexit ” ( the UK leaving the EU ) , and a Spanish election result that resembles Greece ’ s .
Should such a perfect storm occur , the EU ’ s very existence would be in doubt , because other member countries would consider or begin planning their own post-EU futures .
Indeed , all of the Euroskeptic and nationalist forces in the EU ’ s member states would strive , with increasing success , to make their respective countries ’ withdrawal from the EU the central issue in domestic political debate and election campaigns .
In other words , nearly 60 years of European integration – the entire European project – could be undone .
Europe need not go down this path ; but , given EU leaders current failure to acknowledge and rise to the challenges they confront , it seems realistic to assume that it could happen .
The combination of Grexit and Brexit , and its consequences not just for the stability of the eurozone , but for the continued existence of the EU , is probably the greatest danger that Europe has faced since the Cold War ’ s end .
Moreover , Europe ’ s internal crisis is playing out in a dangerous , unstable geopolitical environment .
Though external threats may bolster strategic cooperation among the EU member states , this may not be enough to keep the Union intact , particularly given Russia ’ s effort to divide Europe by strengthening its nationalist , Euroskeptic , and xenophobic forces .
Preventing the EU from falling apart will require , first and foremost , a strategic solution to the Greek crisis .
Greece needs both money and reforms – rapidly and within the eurozone and the EU .
The governments in Athens , Brussels , and even Berlin cannot live with Greece as a failed state and economy .
The continuing poker game between the Greek government and the troika ( the European Commission , the European Central Bank , and the International Monetary Fund ) hurts all parties involved – and Europe most of all .
It can ultimately end only with a renewed bailout of Greece or with Europe ’ s plunge into disaster .
If Grexit is to be averted ( which should be the EU ’ s highest priority ) , the challenge posed by Brexit would already look significantly less daunting , given that here the risks are spread much more evenly between the Union and the UK .
In fact , the risks are greater for British Prime Minister David Cameron , because it is almost certain that Scotland will not accept a Brexit , placing the UK ’ s own future in jeopardy .
So , despite Cameron being in a largely self-dug hole , the EU should show some flexibility in its negotiations with Britain over questions that do not concern the Union ’ s basic principles .
The UK could be offered additional opt-outs from EU policies ( such as it now enjoys from the euro ) .
And EU leaders could find a formulation that reassures Britain about the eurozone ’ s impact on the single market .
If , in addition to dealing effectively with the risks of Grexit and Brexit , the EU can strengthen its unity and determination in addressing the Ukraine crisis and confronting today ’ s revisionist Russia , it will have succeeded in fending off today ’ s existential threats .
Indeed , it could even emerge from its coming tests stronger than before .
That is not the likeliest scenario today , but it could become so if Europe decides – sooner rather than later – that the consequences of failure must be avoided at nearly any cost .
