Abe ’ s Asian Gambit
CANBERRA – With the world producing more history than most of us can consume right now , it is easy to lose sight of recent developments that could have even greater consequences for long-term peace and stability than recent alarming events in eastern Ukraine , Gaza , and Syria-Iraq .
The outcome of the nuclear negotiations with Iran , the change of leadership in India and Indonesia – two of the world ’ s three largest democracies – and the re-energizing of the BRICS group of major non-Western states ( Brazil , Russia , India , China , and South Africa ) may all be such game-changers .
But Japan ’ s international muscle-flexing under Prime Minister Shinzo Abe may be even more significant .
Unless it is very carefully managed by all concerned , including the United States and Japan ’ s other closest Asia-Pacific allies , Abe ’ s makeover of Japanese foreign policy could undermine the fragile power balances that have so far kept the Sino-American rivalry in check .
Japan is right to be concerned about China ’ s new regional assertiveness , and Abe ’ s recent diplomatic push to strengthen Japan ’ s relations in Southeast Asia , and with Australia and India , is understandable in that context .
Nor is it inherently unreasonable – despite opposition at home and abroad – for his government to seek to reinterpret Article 9 of Japan ’ s “ peace constitution ” to permit wider engagement in collective self-defense operations and military cooperation with allies and partners .
But the risks in all of this must be openly acknowledged .
Opposition to any perceived revival of Japanese militarism is hard-wired in Northeast Asia .
Abe is an intensely conservative nationalist , still deeply reluctant to accept the extent of Japan ’ s World War II guilt ( even when acknowledging , as he did in Australia recently , “ the horrors of the past century ’ s history ” and offering gracious condolences for “ the many souls who lost their lives ” ) .
His refusal to rule out future visits to the Yasukuni Shrine , with its war-glorifying Yushukan Museum alongside , fuels hardline skepticism in China .
It also makes common cause with South Korea much more difficult , and heightens the risk of maritime territorial disputes becoming explosive .
Less noticed , but possibly more important in the long term , have been Japan ’ s efforts to reshape regional security arrangements , which for many years have had three key elements .
First , there have been the hub-and-spoke alliances of the US with Japan , South Korea , and Australia ( and more loosely with Singapore , Thailand , and the Philippines ) .
These alliances are accepted and well understood , if not loved , by China .
Second , there are national defense efforts , encouraged by the US , increasingly aimed at greater self-reliance in the event that China ’ s rise becomes a military threat .
This , too , has been accepted reasonably calmly , if not always quietly , by China , and has not undermined the continuing growth in bilateral economic relationships that every country in the region is developing with China .
Finally , there have been multilateral security dialogues – the ASEAN Regional Forum and now the East Asia Summit the most prominent among them – designed to be vehicles for confidence building , and conflict prevention and management .
These mechanisms have so far promised more than they have delivered , though not for want of continuing efforts to give them more clout .
For all of the hype that has accompanied the US “ pivot ” to Asia – announced by President Barack Obama in the Australian Parliament in November 2011 – the delicate balances involved in this basic architecture have changed little for decades .
But now Japan , with overt support from Australia in particular , seems determined to change the balance by establishing , as a counterweight to China , a much denser alliance-type relationship with selected partners .
Abe spoke repeatedly in the Australian Parliament earlier this month of Japan ’ s new “ special relationship ” with Australia – terminology normally associated only with the strongest of alliance partnerships – and followed his address by signing an agreement for the transfer of defense equipment and technology .
Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott , who earlier this year described Japan as both our “ best friend in Asia ” and a “ strong ally , ” has warmly embraced the “ special relationship ” language .
He consummated the love-in by expressing his admiration for “ the skill and sense of honor ” of the Japanese submariners who died attacking Sydney Harbor in 1942 , while saying of Japan ’ s waging of aggressive war and wartime atrocities only that “ we disagreed with what they did . ”
We have not yet seen any renewed attempt to re-establish the “ Quadrilateral Security Dialogue , ” comprising Japan , Australia , the US , and India , which conducted joint military exercises in 2007 and was seen by China as a hostile containment enterprise .
But it is not hard to imagine that this is still very much on Abe ’ s wish list .
The dangers should not be exaggerated .
But , with strategic competition between the US and China as delicately poised as it is , and with the economic interests of Australia , Japan , and many others in the region bound up just as intensely with China as their security interests are with the US , rocking the boat carries serious risks .
Countries like ours should take a clear stand when China overreaches externally ( as it has in the South China Sea with its indefensible “ nine-dashed line ” asserting historical rights with no known justification in international law ) .
The same applies when China does not behave like a good international citizen on the UN Security Council , or should it commit egregious human-rights violations at home .
But we should be cautious about moving beyond taking stands to taking sides in the region to a greater extent than has been the norm for decades .
Kishore Mahbubani has argued recently that we need to recognize that in China , as elsewhere , a significant internal contest between hard- and softer-liners is taking place .
To the extent that this is the case , it is smart policy for every state in the region to speak and act in a way that helps the doves and gives no encouragement to the hawks .
