India \ u0027s Divide and Misrule
So said Mahatma Gandhi , the apostle of non-violence . Today communal violence ravages his home state Gujarat .
Were Gandhi alive to witness today 's communal violence between Hindus and Muslims in Gujarat , he would sink into despair .
Despair not only for the victims of violence , but for the cynicism of those politicians , such as Gujarat 's Chief Minister Narendra Modi , who seek to justify lawlessness , violence and even murder of minority members by the majority Hindus .
The current spate of violence began on February 27 th , when a train carrying many Hindu devotees was set ablaze by some Muslims at Godhra , Gujarat .
Retaliation against Muslims came swift - the next day - and has smouldered since , leaving hundreds dead , orphaned , and homeless . The tension boils on thanks , in part , to the refusal of Gujarat 's government to pursue and prosecute the perpetrators of the crime .
That such bloodshed occurred in today 's Gujarat is surprising , for the state is no economic backwater but is , instead , one of India 's most dynamic states .
Moreover , it has been noted for tolerance : not only Muslims , but of Parsees ( a minority community from Persia who practice Zorastrianism ) .
So why did such a state suddenly explode ?
The politics of division that bedevils Indian national politics is in ugly display in Gujarat . True raj dharma ( good governance ) creates the conditions for social trust and tolerance to flourish .
But instead of seeking to encourage these civic ( and economic ) virtues , the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) use threats of communal violence to boost its electoral ends .
But playing with fire brought only momentary advantages .
After the Gujarat violence the national BJP government faced a " censure motion " vote in parliament . It survived , but was none the less discomforted by it .
Voters , indeed , increasingly see through such cynical toying with ethnic and religious divisions , for it is clear that prompt arrest and prosecution of those who instigated the Godhra incident would have brought independent voters flocking to the BJP . The party has squandered that opportunity .
Of course , the BJP is not alone in seeking to exploit India 's religious and caste divisions .
Even the venerable Congress party - which led India 's struggle for independence - manipulates religious , communal and caste rivalries so as to boost its chances of forming government .
Thankfully , many small parties , who are the key to coalition politics , are pressing the big parties to behave more responsibly .
For example , some of the 15 or so centrist parties who support the BJP-led coalition national government are demanding real action in Gujarat , including removal of its Chief Minister . They still support Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee , but their demands for accountability have laid down boundaries beyond which the BJP and Congress will now stray only at the risk of paying a high political cost .
The BJP can 't take such risks because it fears holding early elections .
Although BJP members trumpet the party 's fundamentalist Hindu agenda , it won power nationally on its promise to deliver good government after the seeming corruption and chaos of the Congress party 's previous term in power .
" Good government " remains the public 's biggest concern , and the BJP knows that murderous riots will undermine its claim to be delivering such .
The Congress , however , is keen to push for elections because it scents blood .
Its performance in local and state elections has improved markedly since Congress 's popularity collapsed in the early 1990s and it now rules 14 of the 29 states ( including government of the national capital region Delhi ) .
Should an election take place , Congress is likely to increase its strength in parliament .
But until Congress forges an attractive political program , and acquires charisma beyond that inherited from the Nehru family , it seems condemned to opposition .
Of course , the Nehru family name still commands loyalty among India 's masses , but that is a shallow political foundation in a democracy .
Moreover , reliance on the Nehru / Gandhi name prevents the party from addressing its malaise because many party leaders still think that they can rely on the old magic to win .
Good governments must emphasise real development , which means removing what the Nobel laureate Amartya Sen calls the unfreedoms of illiteracy , ill-health and social deprivation .
The smouldering fires of Gujarat provide India 's politician with a moment to do as Sen suggests .
It calls for speedy and impartial rehabilitation to the victims and bringing to trial in a transparent manner the perpetrators of these crimes . Only such decisive actions can break India 's cycle of divide and misrule .
" Into that heaven of freedom , my Father , let my country awake , " wrote the Nobel laureate Rabindra Nath Tagore in Gitanjali in 1912 .
His sentiments remain relevant for today 's India .
Wake up Gujarat !
Wake up India !
Read more from " Modi 's Operandi "
