Sorry is the Hardest Word
CANBERRA – Apologies , or the lack of them , have been back in the news , raising questions again about how useful they are in resolving international problems .
The efficacy of timely and sincere apologies in defusing personal tensions cannot be doubted .
Is the same true for diplomacy ?
In some recent cases , the issue has been not much more than an irritating sideshow , as when Afghan President Hamid Karzai demanded an apology from the United States late last year for causing unintended civilian deaths – at the price , bizarrely , of allowing the Americans to continue defending him and his country ( the US understandably refused ) .
But in other cases , the stakes have become very high indeed .
Bilateral relations between Indonesia and Australia since last November have become more frigid than they have been in decades , owing to President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono ’ s very real anger at Australia ’ s refusal to offer an apology for tapping his private telephone ( and his wife ’ s ) .
And Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe ’ s visit in December to the Yasukuni Shrine , which honors Japan ’ s war dead – including , since 1978 , its most serious convicted war criminals – has re-opened long-festering wounds among Japan ’ s neighbors , who perceive a lack of sincere contrition for waging aggressive war and committing wartime atrocities .
It has certainly added tension to Japan ’ s already-fraught standoff with China over their competing claims to the Senkaku / Diaoyu Islands in the East China Sea .
In the case of Indonesia ’ s reaction to former US intelligence contractor Edward J. Snowden ’ s revelations of Australian spying on its first family , a personal apology from Prime Minister Tony Abbott would have made all the difference .
He had merely to follow the playbook of President Barack Obama ’ s response to German Chancellor Angela Merkel when the US was similarly caught out .
Had he coupled this with a simple promise to “ review our collection processes and priorities , ” there might even have been no need to pledge explicitly , as the US now has , to end all monitoring of “ the leaders of our close friends and allies . ”
I was in Jakarta at the time , and formed that judgment after speaking to very senior officials , and I advised the Australian government accordingly .
But the government took the view that when it comes to intelligence matters , apologies are for wimps .
With elections looming in Indonesia , and nationalist sentiment there strong , Australia will be paying the diplomatic price for a long time unless it changes course .
The case of Japan is more complex .
Under strong international pressure in the 1980 ’ s and 1990 ’ s – to which I hope I contributed as Australia ’ s foreign minister – a series of powerful apologies were in fact offered .
Notable among them was then-Chief Cabinet Secretary Yohei Kono ’ s statement in 1993 on the issue of Korea ’ s “ comfort women , ” and Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama ’ s expression , on the 50th anniversary of the end of the World War II , of “ deep remorse ” and “ heartfelt apology . ”
There has been no subsequent outright disavowal of these apologies ; indeed , this month Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida said that Abe ’ s cabinet members “ have never denied ” the Kono and Murayama statements .
But , save for a gracious acceptance by South Korea ’ s then-President Kim Dae-jung in 1998 , Japan ’ s apologies simply have not resonated much in the region , because they have regularly been accompanied by apparent side-stepping or backsliding .
Japan ’ s Diet , for example , failed to endorse Murayama ’ s statement in 1995 , agreeing only to express “ a deep feeling of remorse ” ( and even then 241 MPs abstained ) .
Above all , there have been Japanese leaders ’ recurring pilgrimages to Yasukuni .
The shrine not only records war criminals in its “ Book of Souls ” ; it also contains the Yushukan museum , where Japan ’ s conquests in the 1930 ’ s and 1940 ’ s are glorified as “ just wars fought for survival and self-defense ” or for the “ liberation of Asia . ”
Certainly some of the outraged reaction by Japan ’ s neighbors is of questionable sincerity .
South Koreans have often failed to acknowledge the number and intensity of statements about comfort women ( who were forced to provide sexual services to Japanese soldiers ) and the amount of compensation on offer .
China , for its part , periodically mobilizes nationalist sentiment to divert attention from internal problems , and partly encouraged Abe ’ s recent assertiveness by declaring an Air Defense Identification Zone beyond its acknowledged national airspace in the East China Sea – a move that , while not illegal , was certainly provocative .
But Japan could and should have done much more to give real substance to its apologies , as the Germans have done .
At least since 1970 , Germany has taken a comprehensive and credible approach to atoning for its Nazi past , fully acknowledging its horrors in school curricula , graphically commemorating them in museums , monuments , and ceremonies , and employing official discourse that has been unfailingly contrite .
Harvard ’ s Ezra Vogel , while not sparing China from his prescriptions , recently mapped some strategies by which Japan could defuse historical issues .
Vogel recommends a full and objective official account of the suffering Japan ’ s military aggression caused , lengthening the time that students must devote to modern Japanese history , and including regional reactions and criticism in that study .
Diplomats can learn from examples of transformative national apologies .
The reconciliation of indigenous and white Australians was hugely advanced by Prime Minister Paul Keating ’ s Redfern speech in 1992 , in which he declared : “ We committed the murders .
We took the children from their mothers .
We practiced discrimination and exclusion .
It was our ignorance and our prejudice ... ”
Likewise , former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd offered a strong apology in 2008 to the “ stolen generations ” of Aboriginal children taken from their families by welfare officers .
There are many situations in which apologies are not necessary , because both sides agree to move on .
And “ non-apology apologies ” – for example , “ I ’ m sorry if you feel I have offended you ” – are often worse than nothing , although they are a familiar diplomatic stock-in-trade of which I , too , have been guilty of using .
It is also conceivable that genuine apologies may be counterproductive , because they trigger a backlash from local extremists , which may in turn fuel even more flames on the other side .
I would , however , resist the conclusion that Japan ’ s apologies have been a net negative in this respect .
These arguments will continue .
But it is difficult to believe that when a wrong has been done , a sincere apology will not have some restorative impact .
In public , as in private life , honest apologies are a powerful tool , and should be used less nervously and more often .
