The Foundations of Greece ’ s Failed Economy
NEW YORK – Too many politicians and economists blame austerity – urged by Greece ’ s creditors – for the collapse of the Greek economy .
But the data show neither marked austerity by historical standards nor government cutbacks severe enough to explain the huge job losses .
What the data do show are economic ills rooted in the values and beliefs of Greek society .
Greece ’ s public sector is rife with clientelism ( to gain votes ) and cronyism ( to gain favors ) – far more so than in other parts of Europe .
Maximum pensions for public employees relative to wages are nearly twice as high as in Spain ; the government favors business elites with tax-free status ; and some state employees draw their salaries without actually turning up for work .
There are serious ills in the private sector , too – notably , the pervasive influence of vested interests and the country ’ s business and political elites .
Profits as a share of business income in Greece are a whopping 46 % , according to the latest available data .
Italy came in second at 42 % , with France third , at 41 % .
( Germany ’ s share is 39 % ; the United States ’ , 35 % ; and the United Kingdom ’ s , 32 % . )
Insiders receive subsidies and contracts , and outsiders find it hard to break in .
Astoundingly , young Greek entrepreneurs reportedly fear to incorporate their firms in Greece , lest others use false documents to take away their companies .
According to the World Bank , Greece is one of the hardest places in Europe to start a business .
The result is that competition for market share is weak and there are few firms with new ideas .
This stunted system springs from Greece ’ s corporatist values , which emphasize social protection , solidarity instead of competition , and discomfort with uncontrolled change .
These values may well be beneficial for family life ; but , even with the best of intentions , they are a recipe for a static economy and stultified careers .
Indeed , Greece ’ s labor productivity ( GDP per worker ) is only 72 % of the level in the UK and Italy , and a mere 57.7 % of that in Germany .
And surveys indicate that mean life satisfaction in Greece is far below that found in the wealthiest EU countries ( the EU15 ) .
Contrary to claims by the Greek government , corporatism impoverishes the less advantaged .
EU data on poverty rates in 2010 put Greece at 21.4 % – far higher than the mean EU15 rate of 16.7 % .
To be sure , Greece saw productivity gains after World War II – but mostly from increases in education and capital per worker , which can go only so far .
Two important sources of broad prosperity are blocked by Greece ’ s system .
One is an abundance of entrepreneurs engaged in detecting and exploiting new economic opportunities .
Without them , Greece does a poor job of adjusting to changing circumstances ( an imperative emphasized by Friedrich Hayek ) .
Greece ’ s much-lauded shipowners , for example , were too slow to adapt to containerization , and thus lost their market share .
The other source of broad prosperity is an abundance of business people engaged in conceiving and creating new products and processes – often termed “ indigenous innovation . ”
Here , Greece lacks the necessary dynamism : venture capital investment flows are smaller , relative to GDP , in Greece than in any other EU country .
So Greece ’ s economy has scant ability to create sustained productivity growth and high human satisfaction .
Some economists believe that these structural considerations have nothing to do with Greece ’ s current crisis .
In fact , a structuralist perspective illuminates what went wrong – and why .
For several years , Greece drew on the EU ’ s aptly named “ structural funds ” and on loans from German and French banks to finance a wide array of highly labor-intensive projects .
Employment and incomes soared , and savings piled up .
When that capital inflow stopped , asset prices in Greece fell , and so did demand for labor in the capital-goods sector .
Moreover , with household wealth having far outstripped wage rates , the supply of labor diminished .
Thus , Greece went from boom to outright slump .
The structuralist perspective also explains why recovery has been slow .
With competition weak , entrepreneurs did not rush to hire the unemployed .
When recovery began , political unrest last fall nipped confidence in the bud .
The truth is that Greece needs more than just debt restructuring or even debt relief .
If young Greeks are to have a future in their own country , they and their elders need to develop the attitudes and institutions that constitute an inclusive modern economy – which means shedding their corporatist values .
Europe , for its part , must think beyond the necessary reforms of Greece ’ s pension system , tax regime , and collective-bargaining arrangements .
While Greece has reached the heights of corporatism , Italy and France are not far behind – and not far behind them is Germany .
All of Europe , not just Greece , must rethink its economic philosophy .
