The GMO Stigma
STANFORD – In August , at the International Rice Research Institute in the Philippines , a group of activists vandalized test fields of so-called “ golden rice , ” which has been genetically engineered to contain beta-carotene , a precursor of vitamin A. Some of the perpetrators were even supported by the Swedish government ’ s International Development Cooperation Agency via its funding of the radical Filipino group MASIPAG .
For poor people whose diet is composed largely of rice – a carbohydrate-rich but vitamin-poor source of calories – “ biofortified ” strains are invaluable .
In developing countries , 200-300 million preschool children are at risk of vitamin A deficiency , which compromises immune systems , increasing the body ’ s susceptibility to illnesses like measles and diarrheal diseases .
Every year , vitamin A deficiency causes blindness in about a half-million children ; some 70 % of them die within a year .
In September , an eminent group of scientists called upon the scientific community to “ stand together in staunch opposition to the violent destruction of required tests on valuable advances , such as golden rice , that have the potential to save millions ” of people from “ needless suffering and death . ”
But this passionate appeal fails to address the fundamental problem : the unfounded notion that there is a meaningful difference between “ genetically modified organisms ” and their conventional counterparts .
The fact is that GMOs and their derivatives do not amount to a “ category ” of food products .
They are neither less safe nor less “ natural ” than other common foods .
Labeling foods derived from GMOs , as some have proposed , thus implies a meaningful difference where none exists – an issue that even regulators have acknowledged .
Humans have been engaging in “ genetic modification ” through selection and hybridization for millennia .
Breeders routinely use radiation or chemical mutagens on seeds to scramble a plant ’ s DNA and generate new traits .
A half-century of “ wide cross ” hybridizations , which involve the movement of genes from one species or genus to another , has given rise to plants – including everyday varieties of corn , oats , pumpkin , wheat , black currants , tomatoes , and potatoes – that do not and could not exist in nature .
Indeed , with the exception of wild berries , wild game , wild mushrooms , and fish and shellfish , virtually everything in North American and European diets has been genetically improved in some way .
Despite the lack of scientific justification for skepticism about genetically engineered crops – indeed , no cases of harm to humans or disruption to ecosystems have been documented – they have been the most scrutinized foods in human history .
The assumption that “ genetically engineered ” or “ genetically modified ” is a meaningful – and dangerous – classification has led not only to vandalism of field trials , but also to destruction of laboratories and assaults on researchers .
Moreover , the GMO classification has encouraged unscientific regulatory approaches that are not commensurate with the level of risk , and that , by discriminating against modern molecular genetic-engineering techniques , inhibit agricultural innovation that could reduce strain on the natural environment and enhance global food security .
Even as study after study – both formal risk assessments and “ real-world ” observations – has confirmed the technology ’ s safety , the regulatory burden placed on GMOs has continued to grow .
This trend is making the testing and development of many crops with commercial and humanitarian potential economically unfeasible .
Despite robust laboratory research on plants since the invention of modern genetic-engineering techniques in the early 1970 ’ s , the commercialization of products has lagged .
Unprovoked attention from regulators inevitably stigmatizes any product or technology .
Endless discussion of the “ coexistence ” of genetically engineered and “ conventional ” organisms has reinforced the stigma , leading activists to pursue frivolous yet damaging litigation .
For example , in at least four lawsuits brought against regulators in the United States , judges initially ruled that regulators had failed to comply with the procedural requirements of the US National Environmental Policy Act .
And marketing as “ natural ” products that contain genetically engineered ingredients has led to lawsuits for false labeling .
The discriminatory treatment of GMOs creates widespread mischief .
In many places , the location of field trials now must be identified , even including GPS coordinates – a practice that facilitates vandalism .
( And activists frequently destroy conventional plants inadvertently , because they are difficult to distinguish from genetically engineered varieties . )
In 1936 , the Nobel laureate Max Planck observed that scientific innovations rarely spread as a result of their opponents ’ conversion ; instead , opponents of innovation “ gradually die out , ” and the next generation accepts the breakthrough .
This was the case with vaccinations and the recognition that DNA is the stuff of heredity – and it will happen eventually with genetic engineering .
Unfortunately , many will suffer needlessly in the interim .
As University of California agricultural economist David Zilberman and his colleagues have written , the lost benefits are “ irreversible , both in the sense that past harvests have been lower than they would have been if the technology had been introduced and in the sense that yield growth is a cumulative process of which the onset has been delayed . ”
As long as today ’ s activists and regulators remain convinced that GMOs represent a distinct and dangerous category of research and products , genetic engineering will fall short of its potential .
That is bad news for the millions of poor people for whom genetic engineering in agriculture , medicine , and environmental science could offer a healthier , more secure future .
