Iran ’ s New Contender
WASHINGTON , DC – Iran ’ s presidential race just got more interesting , with former Prime Minister Mir Hussein Mousavi throwing his hat in the ring and former President Mohammad Khatami withdrawing his .
This development poses the most significant challenge yet to current President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad – and a potential opportunity to alter the relationship between Iran and the West .
Mousavi , who believes that Iran is in “ poor shape , ” is perceived by many of the Iranian elite to possess the revolutionary and ideological credentials to run against Islamist fundamentalists such as Ahmadinejad .
At the same time , he is associated with Iranian reformists , who believe that Iran must enact major domestic and foreign policy changes to escape its economic crisis and international isolation .
A Mousavi presidency could lead to foreign policies that incorporate engagement with the United States and European Union on a number of issues , including Iran ’ s nuclear program .
However , Mousavi will face many obstacles in the months leading up to the June 12 vote , and he will succeed only if allowed to by Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei .
Mousavi was an important part of the revolutionary movement that overthrew the Shah in 1979 .
As Prime Minister from 1981 to 1989 , he was credited for steering Iran through the crises of the early revolutionary period and the Iran-Iraq war .
Widely viewed as a capable technocrat , Mousavi has often been able to navigate Iran 's complicated economic and political maze .
He appeared to have abandoned an active role in politics after his post was abolished in 1989 .
But now he has ostensibly resurfaced , like a Persian Cincinnatus , to help Iran in its hour of need .
Iran under Ahmadinejad is facing its worst economic crisis in decades .
Inflation , unemployment , sanctions , and falling oil prices have created a perfect storm , threatening the stability of the regime .
Yet the public and the elite few view the presidential contenders as being capable of improving Iran ’ s conditions .
Ahmadinejad maintains some support among the poor and rural classes , but he is viewed with disdain by much of the ruling class , even within his own political camp .
His economic failures have highlighted the need for a more moderate and capable president .
Former President Khatami , meanwhile , is reviled by the fundamentalists and the top brass of the Revolutionary Guards , who repeatedly obstructed his reform agenda during his presidency .
A recent op-ed in the right-wing Kayhan newspaper , which is closely associated with Khamenei , had warned Khatami to avoid the same fate as the assassinated Benazir Bhutto in Pakistan .
It is no surprise that he backed out of the race , leaving Mousavi , a technocrat and a revolutionary , as the only viable challenger to Ahmadinejad .
But change does not come easily to Iran .
Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei is wary of Mousavi , who served as Prime Minister during Khamenei ’ s presidency in the 1980 ’ s .
The two were often at odds over economic , social , and religious policies .
Ahmadinejad , by contrast , has been loyal to Khamenei and has largely followed his policies over the past four years .
In Khamenei ’ s eyes , it was Ahmadinejad who kept Khamenei ’ s reformist opponents at bay and resisted President George W. Bush ’ s attempt to “ dominate ” Iran and the Middle East .
A perceived change in American “ behavior ” under the Obama administration may facilitate Khamenei ’ s support for , or at least acquiescence in , an electoral victory by Mousavi .
Khamenei may be fundamentally opposed to full US-Iranian relations , but a new Iranian president may provide some cover for limited accommodations , including perhaps on the nuclear front .
And an easing of US-Iranian tensions over the next few months , even if unaccompanied by substantive advances in the relationship , could improve the prospect for a fairer , less manipulated election result .
Mousavi is the man to watch .
But , as always , elections in Iran are neither predictable nor transparent .
The dominant actors – Khamenei and the Revolutionary Guards – will continue to exert potentially decisive influence .
