Herr Fischer Goes to Washington
MUNICH : His party , the Greens , once stood for pacifism and ecology .
He was once a stone-throwing , radical , street-fighting man .
Now Joschka Fischer sports elegant three-piece suits , lays wreaths at the tombs of unknown soldiers and , as foreign minister , represents Germany to the world .
That transformation will be scrutinized in his forthcoming visit to a skeptical America .
Since Helmut Kohl 's semi-eternal government was voted out of power last year , Fischer has become the surprising symbol for continuity and European commitment in German diplomacy .
Although his party received a mere 7 % of the vote , Fischer defines the framework within which Germany 's international objectives are formulated .
Even Chancellor Gerhard Schroder , who suggested in a series of throw-away remarks that his government would steer a different , more assertive course , now tows the line Fischer has tied .
Schroder 's early remarks suggested a real change in German foreign policy .
The special relationship with France ?
Perhaps it should be turned into a triangle involving Britain .
Commitment to European integration ?
Fine , but first a big reduction in Germany 's financial contribution .
Enlargement of the EU to include Central Europe ?
All right in principle , but let 's wait .
At any rate , Germany would pursue a foreign policy in line with national self-interest .
The new Chancellor , whose previous job as a provincial premier had not given him much exposure to international affairs was , at the beginning of his tenure , very much at sea .
Since then he has been learning fast , with Fischer writing the script .
In an impressive tour de force before the European Parliament last January as President of the EU 's Council of Ministers , the radical-turned-diplomat put things in order again .
History , said Fischer , had long decided that enlargement would occur .
Only the how and when now needed to be tackled .
Because , after the Balkan wars it would be irresponsible to permit a zone of instability along EU frontiers , Germany favors enlargement without delay .
Yes , a fair distribution of the financial burden within the EU was needed , but Germany , the strongest economy , would remain the largest net contributor .
In a remark almost echoing Helmut Kohl , Fischer proclaimed : " Wars have become impossible within the EU , both politically and militarily .
For what once was the ‘ continent of wars ' , this is the greatest achievement of European integration , a fact we should never forget " .
Irony abounds here .
When the Social Democrats were sniffing victory last summer , they went out of their way to assure their foreign counterparts not to worry about Green participation in the new government ; no Green would get his hand on the levers of foreign and security policy .
Now it is a Green , Fischer , who has emerged as the symbol of continuity and commitment in Germany 's foreign policy .
This is a surprise only to those who have not followed Fischer over the past decade .
It was Fischer who , years ago , came out in favor of NATO when his party yearned for a world without arms .
It was Fischer who fought for ( and won ) support among the Greens to send German forces to Bosnia and now , perhaps , to Kosovo .
He has even , in extreme circumstances , favored the use of force without a prior mandate by the UN Security Council .
True , Fischer ruffled quite a few Atlantic ( many American ) feathers by arguing that NATO 's nuclear doctrine should no longer include the first use of nuclear weapons .
But he has been enough of a pragmatist not to ram the point home against the opposition of NATO 's three nuclear weapon states .
Fischer is that increasingly rare breed among post-Kohl German politicians - a committed ‘ Westerner ' as well as a committed European .
Germany 's ties to the West , he argued recently , " represent the belated bourgeois revolution which is our democratic tradition . "
In other words : Western orientation is a necessary condition of German democracy .
And Fischer made short thrift with those who like to suggest that past European policies did not adequately respond to Germany 's national interest : " Completion of the European Union is in our supreme national interest and in the European interest as well . "
Clarity of purpose and deftness of style give Fischer considerable authority in Schroder 's cabinet .
He has practically written its foreign policy brief .
Listening to the Chancellor and his Foreign Minister address some 270 international defense and security experts in February at the annual Munich " Conference for Security Policy " , it was impressive how all sang in tune , a tune Fischer composed .
As a result , an audience of staunch Atlanticists saw Germany as a responsible , reliable ally .
A year ago , the prospect of a Red-Green coalition in Bonn would have caused great dismay ; now it was all smiles and back-slapping chumminess .
Following recent setbacks for the government coalition in regional elections in Hesse , where a red-green government was sent packing , Chancellor Schroder , frustrated by Green energy minister Trittin and his attempts to steam-roll an end of nuclear power in Germany , granted Fischer the ultimate accolade : the Greens , he said needed more Fischer and less Trittin .
That remark is true , and unfortunate .
It does not help Fischer among the Greens to be praised by the big brother SPD .
More important , as foreign minister , Fischer is by definition peripatetic .
He can no longer , as he once did , spend most of his time holding his party both together and on the course of power .
In the end Joschka Fischer is likely to continue bringing cohesion and credibility to Germany 's foreign policy - at the price of no longer being able to provide cohesion and credibility for his own party .
