A Golden Opportunity
CAMBRIDGE : The rich countries meeting in June at the G-7 Economic Summit in Cologne had some interesting things to declare about their relations with the poor countries .
First , they acknowledged -- without ever quite admitting it -- that their earlier attempts to reduce developing-country debt had failed .
Therefore they signaled the start of a new program , immediately dubbed the Cologne Initiative , to reduce further the debt burden of the so-called Highly Indebted Poor Countries ( HIPCs ) .
Second , they instructed the IMF and the World Bank to re-think their development strategies , in order to put more focus on social problems , particularly health and education .
One could of course be quite cynical about both announcements .
After all , it has been clear to most objective observers for many years that the rich countries had no realistic strategy for reducing the unpayable debts of the poor countries , yet such critics were told to be patient , that everything was okay .
Moreover , only the finance ministers of the G-7 could possibly have believed that the IMF and World Bank were doing a good job in the poorest countries .
In truth , their record is often disastrous , or simply irrelevant .
The IMF in particular doesn 't have a strategy for long-term economic development , even though the United States has assigned the IMF the lead role in economic development in dozens of poor countries .
Another reason for cynicism is that the G-7 didn 't move mainly on their own initiative , but rather in response to a growing cry of international civil society for action on behalf of the world 's poorest .
The credit for the Cologne Initiative goes strongly to the worldwide movement known as Jubilee 2000 , a grass-roots movement based on the biblical concept of Jubilee , in which unpayable debts should be forgiven in order to allow a debtor to have a fresh start in life .
The Jubilee 2000 movement has adherents in all parts of the world , including Pope John Paul II , rock stars such as Bono of the Irish group U2 , and non-governmental organizations representing many religions and professions .
We should move beyond cynicism , however , in embracing the new Cologne Initiative , especially to push the G-7 countries to do all that needs to be done to make the Initiative successful .
The details of the Initiative announced in Cologne were disappointing , but these details can still be changed under international public pressure .
At least the Initiative pointed in the right direction .
The motivation for urgent action on behalf of the poorest nations is clear .
The 42 countries that are part of the HIPC initiative have a combined population of around 700 million .
Around three-fourths of these people live in Africa .
The combined HIPC population has a life expectancy of around 50 years , compared with 78 years in the rich countries .
Around one-third of the children are malnourished , and will consequently suffer a lifetime of physical and cognitive disabilities .
Many will never finish even primary school , or be able to play an effective role in modern society .
Diseases are rampant , including an AIDs epidemic that killed around 2 million people in Africa last year , and malaria , which took more than 1 million lives .
A successful Cologne Initiative would build on the following concepts .
First , the debts of the countries suffering from extreme poverty and illness would be forgiven entirely .
Around 25 countries out of the 42 HIPC countries probably need complete debt cancellation .
Second , the United Nations Development Program ( UNDP ) and the World Bank , rather than the International Monetary Fund , should take the lead in helping these countries . Both the UNDP and the World Bank would help to ensure that debt forgiveness opens the way to new and ambitious programs of social improvement -- with the focuses on health and education .
The UNDP should turn its annual Human Development Reports into concrete guidelines for social action , to help ensure that each impoverished country has the adequate resources to provide effective programs for children 's vaccines , AIDS prevention , meals for impoverished children , improved access to clean water , and mother-and-infant medical care .
The UNDP should also have the task of coordinating the specialized agencies of the United Nations on behalf of the world 's poorest , to ensure that key organizations such as United Nations Children 's Fund ( UNICEF ) and the World Health Organization ( WHO ) have the access and financial resources to fulfill their missions .
The Cologne Summit announcements so far fall short of these objectives .
The debt relief proposals are still too small .
The role of the IMF remains too large .
Public health goals are still too far down the list of priorities .
But we should maintain hope and pressure on the international organizations and the rich countries .
Already , international actions have pushed the G-7 in a new and hopeful direction .
With a continued worldwide movement on behalf of global justice and economic development , a much more ambitious program for the world 's poorest can still be reached .
