How Germany Lost the Iraq War
Wars always have winners and losers .
Saddam Hussein--dead or on the run--is , of course , the Iraq war 's biggest loser .
But Germany has also lost much , including the many US troops who will now reportedly be re-deployed to bases in other countries .
Despite the announcement of plans to create a European army along with France , Belgium , and Luxembourg , Germany is less relevant in both European and world politics than it was before the Iraq war .
Repairing the damage will not be easy .
Every part of Germany 's international position has been wounded by the Iraq war .
The country can no longer play the role of transatlantic mediator between France and America .
It can forget about US support in its campaign to gain a permanent seat in the UN Security Council .
Instead of forging a " third way " for Europe 's left with British Prime Minister Tony Blair , Chancellor Gerhard Schröder needs Blair to plead his case with President George W. Bush , who feels personally betrayed by the Chancellor 's conduct in the run-up to the war .
In postcommunist Eastern Europe , Germany is no longer perceived as an absolutely dependable advocate of the region 's needs .
Multilateral institutions that served as pillars of German foreign policy for almost half-a-century have been weakened : the European Union 's hopes for common foreign , security , and defense policies have been gravely jeopardized .
From an American perspective , flexible ad hoc coalitions of the willing have turned out to be more useful than the established NATO alliance , where Germany led the fight to refuse Turkey 's request for support .
Even the UN--the institution that Schröder was supposedly defending--has been diminished by his fecklessness .
But the heart of the matter is the deterioration of German-American relations .
Germany is by no means the only sinner here , for US diplomacy over Iraq was often clumsy and bombastic .
Nevertheless , pointing out others ' mistakes is not going to help rehabilitate Germany 's position .
German-American relations suffered a devastating blow when Schröder stoked the country 's overwhelmingly pacifist attitudes .
By doing so he drowned out the concerns about low growth and high unemployment that were threatening his re-election prospects .
But that political strategy left President Bush believing that Schröder had stabbed him in the back .
As with people , so too with states : trust once lost is extremely difficult to regain .
Germany 's opposition parties and much of its foreign policy establishment warned that the country risked diplomatic isolation , so Schröder joined an ad hoc coalition of the unwilling , along with France and Russia .
This compounded the error by adding to it a public relations disaster .
Much of the world press dubbed this " gang of three " an " axis , " a word with sinister echoes of the German-Italian-Japanese World War II axis .
Not surprisingly , Poland--like other Central and East European countries--sought reassurance from the US and Britain when their colossal neighbors , Germany and Russia , embarked on their anti-American flirtation .
But wartime victory makes cowards of leaders who backed the wrong side .
So , with Baghdad 's fall , Schröder began to send conciliatory signals to Washington and London .
Schröder implicitly began to welcome regime change in Iraq .
During a Franco-German-Russian summit in St. Petersburg , he explicitly refrained from criticizing the US and Britain .
" I don 't want to speak about the past , " he emphasized , " we should think about how the military victory can be turned to help the entire region . "
That French President Jacques Chirac is even less popular in the US than Schröder gives German diplomats slight consolation .
But opposition to US policy from France never comes as a shock .
Indeed , Chirac 's tone and tactics conform to textbook Gaullist patterns .
By contrast , German assertiveness vis-à-vis the US was stunning--perhaps because , as it is said , you have to be fully behind someone who you stab in the back .
The Chancellor 's aides try to justify Schröder 's rhetoric as an expression of the country 's political maturity .
At long last , they say , German leaders can use the unrestricted sovereignty Germany acquired with reunification in 1990 .
But the Chancellor 's juvenile experiment in mature diplomacy has diminished , not expanded , Germany 's prestige .
Quite simply , German Gaullism doesn 't work .
After all , Germany 's traditional low-key foreign policy made the country an anchor of NATO and helped secure reunification .
That diplomatic tradition has never simply been about " do-goodism " and checkbook contributions to peacekeeping missions around the world .
It was about creating and transferring stability through the strengthening of international governance and supranational structures .
Germany is too big to abstain from leadership in Europe .
But it is well advised to avoid being suspected of hegemonic goals .
Sharing sovereignty with its fellow Europeans and exerting influence through European and Atlantic institutions remains Germany 's most promising political strategy .
Besides abandoning any Gaullist pretensions , the other lesson Germany must learn is that influence is based not only on soft " civilian power , " but also on hard military capabilities that are adapted to the exigencies of the post-Cold War world .
If Germany wants to increase its diplomatic weight , it must increase its defense spending .
Only an enhanced German relevance in European and world politics will convince America that it is time to bury the hatchet .
