A Special Moment for Special Drawing Rights
NEW YORK – The recent annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in Lima , Peru , were dominated by talk of the weakness of several emerging and developing economies .
But the discussion focused very little on one key cause : the global monetary system .
Much more will be said next month at the IMF board , though what the Fund will do remains an open question .
The problem that emerging and developing economies are facing stems from the fact that their capital inflows follow a strongly pro-cyclical pattern .
When they were growing rapidly – especially compared to the advanced economies – they attracted massive amounts of capital .
But as risks multiplied , capital started to flow back toward a reserve-issuing country – namely , the United States .
After all , the US is set to raise interest rates , and the dollar has appreciated against virtually all of the world ’ s currencies .
In the past , this pattern has always ultimately led to a correction , with America ’ s growing current-account deficit eventually bringing about a dollar depreciation .
But such corrections – in 1979-1980 , 1990-1991 , and 2007-2008 – have also always been associated with a global slowdown or crisis .
This highlights the problem inherent in using the US dollar , a national currency , as the global economy ’ s primary international-reserve currency .
The Belgian economist Robert Triffin first identified this problem – dubbed the “ Triffin dilemma ” – in the 1960s , emphasizing the fundamental conflict between national objectives , such as limiting the size of the external deficit , and international imperatives , such as creating enough liquidity to satisfy demand for reserve assets .
Moreover , this system subjects the world economy to cycles of confidence in the US dollar , while placing the world economy at the mercy of a national authority – one that often makes decisions with scant regard for their international implications .
The only way to stabilize the system would thus be to place a truly global currency at its center .
This was the idea behind John Maynard Keynes ’ s proposal in the 1940s to create a supranational currency , called the “ bancor . ”
And it was the motivation behind the 1969 creation of the IMF ’ s Special Drawing Right ( SDR ) , which was supposed to become “ the principle reserve asset in the international monetary system . ”
General SDR allocations are to be based on “ a long-term global need to supplement existing reserve assets , ” with decisions made for successive periods of up to five years .
So far , such allocations have been made only three times , in 1970-72 , in 1979-81 , and in 2009 , with the latter allocation , amounting to $ 250 billion , being part of the recovery package adopted by the G-20 to manage the global financial crisis .
The SDR has been in the news again lately , owing to debate about whether the IMF should add the Chinese renminbi to the basket of currencies that determine the unit ’ s value .
Given the renminbi ’ s growing international role , it seems abundantly obvious that the currency should be part of the SDR basket .
Now , the discussion should focus on how to enable the SDR to reach its potential as an instrument of international cooperation .
The first step toward making SDRs a more active force in global finance would be to remove the division between SDR accounts and normal IMF operations .
As long as that partition remains in place , SDRs will function , at best , like a credit line that can be used unconditionally by the holder – a kind of overdraft facility , not a true reserve asset .
A better approach would be to allow countries to “ deposit ” unused SDRs in the Fund , so that they can be used to finance IMF lending operations .
In other words , issuing more SDRs would enable the IMF to finance more lending .
If those SDRs were issued during crises , like the one that emerging and developing economies are confronting today , the result would be a truly counter-cyclical global monetary policy .
This could even be taken one step further , with SDRs being allocated according to a new formula that accounts not just for IMF quotas , but also for demand ( or need ) for foreign-exchange reserves .
The current formula would have the countries most in need of foreign reserves – that is , middle- and low-income countries ( excluding China ) – receiving just over one-third of the total allocation .
That is not enough .
Even without this change , the SDR can and should gain a more prominent position in global reserves .
With emerging and developing economies in deepening trouble , there is no time to waste .
Some five decades after Triffin first identified the problems with the US dollar ’ s reserve-currency status , the SDR ’ s moment has , one hopes , finally arrived .
