Financial Panic and the Law of Unintended Conseque
CAMBRIDGE : One oft-repeated lesson of public policy is the Law of Unintended Consequences .
A policy is adopted to " fix " one problem , only to create another problem , sometimes one much worse than the original .
The closer you examine the financial crises that hit East Asia , Eastern Europe , and Latin America over the past two years , the more these events look to be almost definitive proof of the Law of Unintended Consequences .
Although each regional crisis has been blamed on mismanagement by governments in the developing world , much of the blame -- perhaps most -- actually lies in the advanced countries .
More precisely , banking regulation in the advanced countries may have precipitated financial crisis across the developing and postcommunist world .
The essence of the recent financial crisis is that international bank loans flew into the " emerging markets " during the years 1993-96 , only to flee these same markets in 1997 and after .
Countries like Russia , or Indonesia , Korea , and Thailand in East Asia , or Brazil and Peru in Latin America , were able to borrow on easy conditions in the mid-1990s , but then faced a panicked withdrawal of loans in the past two years .
The reversal of bank lending is staggering .
According to recent data prepared by the investment bank J. P. Morgan , international banks lent the 25 main emerging markets a total of $ 100 billion in net loans ( that is , loans minus repayments ) in 1995 , $ 121 billion in 1996 , and $ 46 billion in 1997 , only to demand net repayments of $ 95 billion in 1998 .
In emerging Asia , the swing was the worst : from $ 81 billion in loans 1996 to $ 84 billion in net repayments in 1998 .
Look beneath the surface and you find that these big swings were the result of two related factors .
First , most international bank lending was very short term .
Around two-thirds of the loans that went into Asia , for example , were for a period of less than one year , often for less than one month .
Second , international banks panicked in 1997 .
They decided that they had to get out of emerging markets as fast as possible because all other banks were getting out .
Nobody wanted to be last one in these countries , because they knew that the countries would be forced into default when all other banks tried to leave at the same time .
Since the loans that had been offered were so short term , they could be pulled out nearly all at once .
Why , then , were the bank loans so short term -- and therefore so prone to panic ?
Here is where unintended consequences played a huge role .
Under international banking regulations prepared by the Bank for International Settlements ( BIS ) , the club of central banks based in Basle , Switzerland , banks must maintain adequate bank capital .
In particular , bank assets ( mainly the loans by banks ) can not be more than 12.5 times the bank capital .
In the way that bank assets are counted , however , accounting regulations allow for banks to lend four times as much in short-term loans to other banks as in long-term loans .
Thus , supposedly benign accounting regulations actually encouraged banks to multiply their short-term lending , and to cut back on their long-term lending .
These regulations seem to make sense for an individual bank .
Short-term inter-bank loans are seemingly less risky than long-term lending .
But when the entire international system becomes entwined with an excessive amount of short-term inter-bank lending , the world economy becomes subject to financial panic .
Therefore , what makes sense for one bank ( to lend short term ) becomes risky for the entire world system .
When the East Asian financial crisis broke out in mid-1997 , the advanced countries and the International Monetary Fund were quick to blame the victims -- the borrowing countries .
They said that the borrowers had behaved badly , when the real problem was that the international system had created a veritable " house of cards , " in which a mountain of short-term inter-bank loans could suddenly be reversed , causing economic collapse in debtor countries .
Even today , the world 's bias toward short-term cross-border lending has not been addressed by Washington or by Basle , and the victims of this crisis continue to receive the brunt of the blame .
A final word to the victims .
Even before the international system is fixed , a measure of self-help is possible .
Countries should limit their exposure to short-term international bank loans so that they are less vulnerable to wild swings of international lending .
