The Lost Donkeys of Science
CAMBRIDGE – The biblical story of Saul finding his kingdom by chance while searching for his father ’ s lost donkeys offers an important lesson for scientists .
Instead of defining our research objectives narrowly , we must open our minds to completely different and more exciting discoveries that may be lurking at the periphery of our field of view .
Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson made such an unexpected discovery in 1965 , when their attempts to reduce the noise in their state-of-the-art radio antenna led them to discern the cosmic microwave background .
They noticed a noise floor , which turned out to be the radiation left over from the Big Bang .
This watershed discovery , which fundamentally changed our view of the universe , was made at Bell Labs – not at a premier research university .
Assembling new data is essential to scientific progress .
Data play the important role of guiding scientists toward new discoveries and solutions , as well as to new puzzles that need to be solved , thereby keeping the scientific process honest and dynamic .
Extended periods without new data facilitate – indeed , foster – the unrestrained growth of speculative-theory bubbles .
Even failures to explain puzzling data are essential to the scientific process , with the challenges that data pose encouraging creative individuals to develop new ways of thinking about physical reality .
Over extended periods of time – decades or longer – a data-driven culture without programmatic reins offers such extensive benefits that profit-oriented businesses often choose to support it .
Most famously , Bell Labs recognized the virtues of such a culture in the 1930s-1970s , assembling a collection of creative physicists to whom it gave unadulterated freedom .
This ethos produced some of the twentieth century ’ s most important discoveries in science and technology , including the foundations of radio astronomy in 1932 and the invention of the transistor in 1947 .
Bell Labs scientists also developed information theory in 1948 , solar cells in 1954 , lasers in 1958 , the first communications satellites in 1962 , charged-coupled devices in 1969 , and fiber-optic networks in 1976 .
Without patience and foresight , Bell Labs could not have reaped the tremendous long-term benefits of these breakthroughs .
In science , as in any complicated and creative endeavor , uniform opinions and approaches will always prove sterile .
The coexistence of disparate ideas cultivates competition and progress .
Of course , it is difficult to know which exploratory path will bear fruit , and there is no shortage of novel scientific ideas that were proven wrong .
Failure should thus be accepted as a natural ingredient in a culture of innovation .
The fact is that high-risk research , just like high-risk capital investments in the business world , has the potential to be more profitable than safer approaches .
If even one non-mainstream idea bears fruit , it could transform our view of reality and justify all of those heterodox hypotheses that do not .
Albert Einstein , for example , did not foresee the importance of his innovative theory of gravity to the development of precise GPS navigation systems .
Similarly , Christopher Columbus , funded by the Spanish crown , sailed westward to find a new trade route to the East Indies , but discovered the “ New World ” instead .
His financial backers clearly benefited from his unexpected discovery , as he claimed parts of America for the Spanish Empire .
The lesson is clear : while it is important to justify flagship scientific missions by what we expect to find , funding should be based mainly on their potential to lead to unexpected discoveries .
This is not to say that agenda-driven projects do not also lead to important breakthroughs .
The recent discovery of the Higgs boson was the culmination of a programmatic experimental effort to confirm a theoretical idea , proposed in the 1960s , that lies at the foundation of the standard model of particle physics .
Though the discovery was anticipated , the future advances that it will enable are unforeseeable .
It would not be prudent for agencies to allocate all of their funding to high-risk research .
But they should allocate a small fraction – say , 20 % – of their resources to research that is not tied to specific goals .
Such a funding scheme is essential for promoting breakthroughs in the long run , because it encourages researchers to take on risky projects with fundamentally unpredictable outcomes but potentially high gains .
Most important , it would give individuals the freedom to respond to unexpected insights as they arise , rather than compelling them to follow a prescribed agenda .
This approach demands an understanding that progress will not be steady over time , because discoveries rest on extensive preparatory work .
It is thus inappropriate to measure success based on the contemporaneous level of allocated resources .
Lost resources ( time and money ) should never be a concern in a culture that is not tied to a specific programmatic agenda , because an unexpected discovery could be far more valuable in the long term than these lost resources .
The advice Saul received from Samuel , who crowned him King after their chance meeting , is appropriate : “ As for the donkeys you lost three days ago , do not worry about them ... ”
