Iraq and a Great Leap for Chinese Intellectuals
Even before images of the first cruise missile strikes on Baghdad reached Chinese TV screens , the country 's intellectuals were debating the US-led war against Iraq and the government 's response .
Commentaries in leading newspapers and on-line journals demonstrated a diversity of opinion seldom seen in the country 's state-controlled media , and precipitated wider discussion in people 's living rooms .
Most debates addressed whether the war was justified .
Opinions were voiced in newspapers and in on-line forums such as the home page of the media school of Qinghua University , widely known as " China 's MIT . "
It posted an anti-war petition with over 1,000 signatories , mostly academics .
Although this grassroots response adhered to the government 's anti-war stand , it remains surprising in a country that discourages unscripted political discourse .
So it was even more surprising to see pro-war sentiments expressed publicly , such as the petition that appeared in the Guangzhou-based weekly newspaper 21st Century World Herald .
That petition voiced a taboo viewpoint : that " human rights are of greater value than national sovereignty . "
In a rare challenge to the government , Beijing-based writer Yu Jie , one of the petition 's authors , wrote that China ought to support the war on Iraq .
Only by embracing universal values and distancing itself from " evil states , " Yu argued , can China rise to the level of the world 's mainstream democracies .
Others , such as Han Deqiang of Beijing 's aerospace university , who wrote an anti-war commentary that accompanied Yu 's essay , scoffed at such an idea .
Han called pro-war Chinese intellectuals hopelessly na ? ve and overly " immersed in the American dream . "
But others supported Yu Jie 's critique .
The Beijing-based dissident writer Liu Xiaobo , an activist intellectual in the 1989 Tiananmen Square demonstrations , questioned the government 's motives for opposing the war .
Since 1989 , Liu wrote , the Chinese government has nurtured a strident nationalism to boost its own legitimacy .
Moreover , Liu argued , the government 's marginalization of pro-war sentiment and promotion of anti-war views accords with its broader effort to ascribe almost every domestic and international disaster to American hegemony .
Although the surface of this debate is about America and Iraq , the subtext , as always , concerns China .
Indeed , the debate revealed political fault lines among Chinese intellectuals that could never be openly exposed on domestic policy .
Ultimately , the two main camps of China 's intelligentsia--the " neo-leftists " ( xin zuo ) and " old liberals " ( lao you ) --ask the question that has divided Chinese intellectuals for a century : what does it mean to be Chinese and also to be modern ?
Does it mean following the West ( as liberals advocate ) or , as the neo-leftists suggest , is there some Third Way between Communism and western-style democratic capitalism ?
Most fundamentally , can the scope of economic disaster witnessed following the Soviet Union 's collapse be avoided ?
Both groups comprise scholars from numerous fields , state intellectuals serving in government think tanks , journalists and even some dissidents .
Liberals are known to favor more thorough economic and political reforms , such as democratization at the grassroots level and a free press .
Conservatives insist on a more cautious approach that avoids the " shock therapy " and drastic overhauls experienced in postcommunist Eastern Europe .
Unlike in Western countries , where intellectuals often engage in head-on public confrontations , most intellectuals in China speak obliquely .
The invasion of Iraq presented them with a relatively safe topic with which to discuss issues that are normally off limits , such as human rights .
Scholars used the Iraq debate to ask whether a state relinquishes its sovereignty when it loses popular support--a highly provocative topic in China .
" A modern sovereign state , first and foremost , bases itself on the recognition of individual rights and democracy , " according to Wang Yi , a liberal scholar . " That is to say , given the nature of the current Iraqi regime , it has no right to ask for treatment as a sovereign state . "
In the pro-war petition , Yu Jie and others made an explicit link between Iraq and China , likening Saddam Hussein , to his " colleague and predecessor , " Mao Zedong , who " disguised the illegitimacy of his authoritarian regime in the name of the people . "
As the war progressed , pro-war voices increasingly fell silent .
Some media critics ascribed this to a combination of official censorship and the effect of the scenes of Iraqi civilian deaths played ( and replayed ) on China 's new 24-hour news channel , created especially to cover the war in Iraq .
At the same time , celebrities like Zhang Ziyi , star of the film Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon joined the anti-war chorus .
Zhang , who appeared in this year 's Oscar-nominated film Hero , refused to attend the Academy Awards ceremony in Hollywood in protest .
In any case , speaking out carries a price .
The relatively independent Nanfang Daily Group , whose members include 21st Century World Herald and the Guangzhou-based liberal magazine Southern Breeze , was closed by the government for " redesign . "
It may be allowed to publish again , but no one knows when .
The Hong Kong newspaper The South China Morning Post reported that it would have been closed , permanently , if not for the personal intervention of Hu Jingtao , China 's new president and communist party chairman .
Despite these setbacks , the debate benefited China 's intellectual climate .
As ideas advanced by Jean-Jacques Rousseau , George Orwell , and Václav Havel enter China 's public discourse , interest grows in such Western thinkers and their political insights .
This alone amounts to a great leap forward for intellectual freedom .
