The Ghost of Hirohito
NEW YORK – The completion by Japan ’ s Imperial Household Agency of the 61-volume record of the life of Emperor Hirohito ( 1901-1989 ) has generated much interest and attention in Japan .
The entire formidable work was recently opened to limited public viewing , with a plan to publish it over the next five years .
But it is already clear that the new record inadvertently reflects Japan ’ s continuing inability to address some fundamental questions about its past .
Having taken a quarter-century to compile , the project relied on some 40 new sources , most notably the diary and notes of Saburo Hyakutake , an admiral who served as Court Chamberlain from 1936 to 1944 .
But , while acknowledging the enormous scale of the undertaking , specialists seem to agree that the new account offers no earth-shattering findings or innovative interpretations concerning Hirohito ’ s many and changing roles in the most tumultuous period of Japan ’ s modern history .
Perhaps this is not surprising , coming from a conservative imperial institution ’ s official team of editors .
The record takes to new lengths the idea that the historian ’ s task , as Leopold von Ranke put it in the nineteenth century , is to show “ what actually happened . ”
It is said to be an excellent chronicle of the court ’ s day-to-day goings-on , revealing , for example , that the emperor celebrated Christmas as a boy , that he had nose surgery in his youth , and how often he met with whom .
To be fair , such tidbits can be interesting and useful .
But the new account fails to explain or analyze crucial events of Hirohito ’ s reign .
Readers will be disappointed if they want to learn more about Japan ’ s entry into the Pacific War , its defeat , the Allied occupation ( especially Hirohito ’ s relationship with General Douglas MacArthur ) , or & nbsp ; Hirohito ’ s later reluctance to visit the Yasukuni Shrine , where Imperial Japan ’ s war dead , including Class-A war criminals , are honored .
What is already known about Hirohito is sketchy .
That he was a tragically conflicted man is not news .
As a young sovereign ( imperial regent at age 20 ; emperor at 25 ) , he had to assume contradictory roles : divine pater familias of the Japanese state and Supreme Commander of the imperial armed forces that were colonizing Japan ’ s Asian neighbors .
He could not have been the bravest or most decisive man , given that he was unable to resist rising militarism .
But to say that he was powerless ( and thus blameless ) or did nothing to oppose it would also be wrong .
The conflict between Hirohito ’ s divine and secular roles became most acute in the autumn of 1941 , when Japan ’ s leaders debated whether to go to war with the United States and its allies .
On September 6 , an imperial conference was convened to approve a timetable for war mobilization in the event of a breakdown in US-Japanese diplomatic talks .
As was true of all imperial conferences , Hirohito was expected to remain silent and approve a policy that already had been decided .
Breaking with protocol , however , Hirohito cautioned against giving up on diplomacy too soon , and then recited his grandfather Emperor Meiji ’ s poem from the beginning of the Russo-Japanese War , in 1904 : “ Beyond all four seas , all are brothers and sisters / Then why oh why these rough winds and waves ? ”
Thus , Hirohito might have been seeking to express his view that Japan should avoid a war with the US , especially given that the country had been fighting a savage and unsuccessful war of conquest in China for more than four years .
But , whatever Hirohito ’ s true intentions ( which we cannot know for certain ) , the larger fact remains that he went along with the war mobilization .
And , while the new official record depicts this well-known episode in some detail , it sheds no new light on how Hirohito understood his own action .
Just as he dithered over going to war with the US , Hirohito was hopelessly ambivalent about how to end it .
The new record reports that Hirohito told his closest adviser , Privy Seal Kōichi Kido , on September 26 , 1944 : “ If one could come to a peace without the question of disarmament or war responsibility , I don ’ t care [ if ] our conquered territories [ are taken away ] . ”
This is reportedly the first indication in the new account about Hirohito ’ s desire to end the war .
But , whatever his true desire , his subsequent actions were – once again – not those of a man actively trying to find a path to peace .
For months , he told himself and others that first “ Japan must have another brilliant military gain ” over the US , so that it would have a modicum of diplomatic clout in negotiating a postwar settlement .
Needless to say , many Japanese and non-Japanese lives were lost during those months of indecision .
Indeed , the very existence of the Japanese nation was endangered , as most cities were bombed , Okinawa was invaded , and atomic bombs were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki .
In the end , Japan was disarmed , postwar trials were held , and most of the country ’ s imperial conquests were reversed .
And yet Hirohito still managed to sidestep the question of his own responsibility in a war that was so obviously fought in his name .
Amid the postwar devastation , he became a symbol of peace .
The most important lesson of the new imperial record , then , might be quite different from what its compilers had intended .
Japan ’ s notorious collective inability to come to terms with its past is deeply entwined with its inability to understand this emperor .
Admittedly , the new account makes only selective use of primary sources , quite a few of which have not been declassified in their entirety .
It is possible that more revelations will emerge in the future .
But , for now , Hirohito remains a singularly unfathomable and isolated character who defies common understandings – alas , to the detriment of a better understanding of “ what actually happened . ”
