Germany ’ s Same Old Election
BERLIN – Germany ’ s current parliamentary election campaign looks like a front-running contender for the title of the most boring in the history of the Federal Republic .
The predominant response among commentators to the sole television debate between Chancellor Angela Merkel and her challenger , Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier , held two weeks before the election , was a collective yawn – all the more remarkable considering the historical events that overshadow this election .
Twenty years ago , the Berlin Wall came down , triggering a seismic shift that moved the borders of the old Federal Republic and of Western Europe as a whole , hundreds of miles to the east .
The vast Soviet empire exited the historical stage without a single shot being fired .
This anniversary should have provided ample reason for a heated debate about the successes and failures of German reunification and for offering a vision for Germany and Europe for the next 20 years .
Former German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt once quipped that politicians who have a vision should go and have their eyes checked .
That warning made sense in the 1970 ’ s , when even young parliamentarians in his Social Democratic Party dreamed of revolution .
But Schmidt would never have imagined that there would come a day when there would be no politician in search of a vision check .
Likewise , in the fall of 2008 , the threat of financial Armageddon brought not just Germany but the whole world to the brink of disaster .
The worst has been mitigated and obscured in the wealthy countries by running up unprecedented levels of debt , but any moderately streetwise person knows that the next generation – and even the one after that – will be paying for the excesses of the investment bankers .
One cannot help but marvel at how discreetly this topic is being dealt with by Merkel and Steinmeier .
Ask the party strategists and they will tell you that the financial crisis is a topic for losers ; voters want to hear something positive .
The electorate is experiencing the greatest slump since 1929 like a bad dream that is half over – and politicians don ’ t want to wake them up .
The so-called “ autonomous ” violent left-wing radicals in Berlin-Kreuzberg enjoy themselves by torching luxury cars , but not a single bank window has been smashed in Germany .
Nor has a single criminal financier-gambler , who misled the financial regulators with fudged figures , been brought to justice .
On the contrary , these bankrupts are filing lawsuits to get the million-dollar bonuses to which they feel entitled .
Quite a few of them are already back at the table gambling away with the taxpayer ’ s money and peddling their new “ financial products ” ; they know that when the next crash comes , the taxpayer will have no choice but to bail them out again .
Only some stalwarts timidly point to the inflammatory question posed by Mack the Knife in Berthold Brecht ’ s Threepenny Opera : “ What is a bank robbery compared to the founding of a bank ?
What is a pick-lock compared to a debenture share ? ”
But this slogan is from the 1920 ’ s and seems like a nostalgic reminder of past turmoil that one prefers to see on the stage .
The greatest miracle in the 2009 election campaign is the resurgence of the Liberal Democrats ( FDP ) .
In fact , the German political landscape needs nothing more than a truly liberal party , in the US sense of the word “ liberal ” – a champion of the cause of individual freedom .
Unfortunately , under the far-too-long leadership of Guido Westerwelle , the FDP has degenerated into a party notable for defending the freedom only of a few privileged individuals : bankers and businessmen .
Just a year ago , the FDP fervently adhered to the religion of the American neo-cons , according to which markets regulate themselves .
So it vigorously opposed all of the half-hearted attempts to regulate the financial sector .
As late as this past May , the FDP defended the ownership rights of US billionaire Christopher Flowers , a major stockholder in the failed German bank Hypo Real Estate , which was saved from oblivion by state guarantees worth more than € 100 billion of taxpayers ’ money .
Nevertheless , at a time when finance is under a cloud , the party that defends the freedom of the financial gamblers over the freedom of the individual is winning favor with the electorate like no other .
The FDP can count on about 13-14 % of the vote , which means that it may be able to join with Merkel ’ s Christian Democratic Union to form a government .
I cannot explain this dynamic .
I do not believe in Karl Marx ’ s iron laws of history .
Yet one historical law does seem to apply : in an immense economic crisis , the voters stick with the people whose economic competence they have traditionally trusted – that is , the very people who led them to ruin .
But there is an exception to every rule .
In this case , it is the former PDS , the successor party to the former East Germany ’ s ruling party , the SED .
Dissidents in the GDR translated those three letters as “ P ractically t he S ame . ”
This party , now using the presumptuous name “ The Left , ” has gained a foothold in West Germany with its impossible promises of higher pensions , a minimum hourly wage of € 10 , huge public investment schemes , and zero unemployment – in short , exactly the kind of socialist paradise that failed in East Germany .
And , of course , The Left , which still counts large numbers of former Stasi personnel among its members , also calls for a reassessment of East Germany itself ; many party veterans object to the term “ dictatorship ” for this phase of their lives .
So , besides the FDP , this party , too , is profiting from the mainstream political parties ’ half-hearted handling of the global economic crisis .
The only “ winner ” when Germans vote on September 27 will most likely be the “ party ” of non-voters .
I do not sympathize with this group , but I do understand that non-voters expect only one thing of Germany ’ s political parties these days : “ practically the same ”
