Domestic Spying and Chinese Politics
Corruption charges are flying between Prime Minister Zhu Ronghi , China 's number three leader , and Li Peng , the country 's second leading politician .
Those charges are , invariably , produced by China 's domestic surveillance agencies .
But China 's secret policemen are already working overtime nowadays , trying to keep up with China 's millions of internet users .
None of this zeal is new in China .
Paranoia , informers , and domestic spying are so essential to Communist rule that few people are ever surprised at the extent of secret police operations here .
Still , domestic spying did not arrive in China either with the computer revolution or Mao 's Communist one .
Indeed , the darkest moments in China 's long history often coincide with massive domestic spying systems ; usually these herald not only renewed tyranny but instability as well .
China 's secret policemen , indeed , have deep roots .
The Ming Emperor Cheng Zu 's internal espionage agency ( 1403-1424 ) was known as the Dong Chang or " Eastern Workshop . "
Staffed by eunuchs , it reported to the emperor directly .
Cheng Zu used the Dong Chang to bypass other state organs and persecute countless innocent people who had offended him .
Cheng Zu 's regime marked one of the darkest times in China 's long history .
The Nationalist government of Chiang Kai-shek believed in domestic spying as well , and practiced it both before and after the Communist takeover of 1949 , with Chiang 's spies harshly suppressing any and all signs of domestic dissent .
Nationalist " white terror " continued even after Chiang Kai-shek and his armies escaped to Taiwan .
Only the flowering of Taiwan 's democracy in recent years saw a decrease in domestic spying .
After being victimized by Chiang Kai-shek 's spies , China 's Communist rulers created a vast spying apparatus of their own .
Mao , indeed , called domestic spying " an invisible magic weapon . "
Today , although Mao 's socialist economy is shrinking , his spy networks remain as potent as ever .
Indeed , Jiang Zemin , China 's president and paramount leader , relies on spies from the Public Security Bureau and the Bureau of National Security to maintain his rule .
As well as suppressing political dissent , these operatives play vital roles in the Party 's internal power struggles .
Such spying is necessary , says Jiang , in order to uphold the " stability " of Communist rule in the face of vast and unsettling economic reforms .
Like Saturn devouring his children , however , Chinese spying devours Central Committee members and dissidents alike .
Cheng Kejie , a high Party official executed for corruption last year , was long under special surveillance by the Public Security Bureau .
The purge of a former mayor of Beijing , Chen Xitong , and his cronies , also on charges of corruption , could not have happened without evidence gathered by official spies .
Indeed , it is widely believed that President Jiang and his confidante Zeng Qinghong obsessively gather politically embarrassing evidence against corrupt officials in order to blackmail these officials into subservience .
A telling case here surrounds Bao Tong , a former Politburo member who ran afoul of the President 's inner circle .
Bao is now under around-the-clock surveillance by eighteen state agents who have even set up a guard post in front of his house .
This is all happening despite Party claims that Bao retains all his citizenship rights .
Lately , Ms. He Qinglian , a well-known author , journalist , and critic of China 's reforms has been watched daily by as many as twelve agents .
Government spies have hacked into her personal computer to download her files and documents and have forced their way onto her server to censor her emails and monitor and control her Internet access .
" Internet spies " of this type now flock to the many Internet cafes found in China 's major cities .
Since the era of Emperor Cheng Zu 's Dong Chang domestic spying has been a sign of insecurity , not self-confidence .
Domestic spying is growing and taking new forms nowadays because China 's leaders , unsettled by the changes their own economic reforms have unleashed , bluntly refuse to consider democratic reforms .
This failure is progressively undermining the regime 's legitimacy and the Central Committee knows it .
Making matters worse are the repeated demonstrations of President Jiang 's profound lack of personal self-confidence .
China 's president achieved and consolidated his power by relying on a small coterie drawn from his Shanghai political base .
The narrow circle of Jiang 's supporters reminds many people of unpopular emperors like Cheng Zu .
Jiang 's increasing dependence on internal spying and the " security apparatus " may also be due to Jiang 's close relations with his confidante Zeng Qinghong , the son of Zeng Shan , who was Minister of the Interior in charge of domestic espionage in the earliest days of Communist rule .
Under his father 's tutelage , Zeng Qinghong learned to use spy networks to entrench Communist and personal power .
Given what happened in the former Soviet Union and its East European satellites , the paranoid fears about losing power are unlikely to vanish among Chinese leaders soon .
Jiang and his colleagues understand that governance-by-spying , through eviscerating personal responsibility and civil society , left behind moribund economies and discredited governments across the former Soviet world .
Instead of slackening domestic spying in order to prepare the Chinese people for the ever increasing personal responsibility that a modern economy demands , however , Jiang remains obsessed only with maintaining Communist and personal power .
That failure may one day make China 's inevitable postcommunist transition as corrupt and chaotic as that seen in the most violent and backwards of former Soviet states .
