Iran ’ s Rattling Saber
WASHINGTON , DC – As the West ratchets up its economic pressure on Iran to halt its drive to develop nuclear weapons , the Islamic Republic ’ s rulers are not sitting idly by .
Since Iran lacks the soft power and the economic capacity to counter Western pressure , it is likely that its leaders will resort to threats , and even to force , to prevent the West from cracking down further , as the recent attack on the British embassy in Tehran shows .
Iranian authorities claimed that angry “ students ” spontaneously stormed the embassy .
While inside , they seized documents and set others alight , and took six embassy employees hostage .
It was only much later that the crowd came under police control and the hostages were set free .
The scene was quite familiar .
In 1979 , the United States embassy was also attacked by angry “ students , ” fueling enmity between the two countries that continues to this day .
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini was not aware of the students ’ plan in 1979 . But he later endorsed their actions , and made anti-Americanism a pillar of Iran ’ s foreign policy .
Iran today is not the revolutionary Iran of 1979 . Thirty-two years after the Islamic Republic was established , Iran ’ s tactics are obvious to everyone .
The so-called students are members of the Basij militia , which was ordered to attack the embassy , with the police only pretending to stop them .
In the government ’ s thinking , it does not have to accept responsibility for the attack , the attackers ’ identity will remain a mystery , and no one will even be accused of or tried for breaking the law .
The Fars News Agency , which is affiliated with Iran ’ s powerful Revolutionary Guard has called the British embassy a “ lair of espionage ” – the same term used to describe the US embassy in 1979 .
This is not the first time that a European or British embassy has been attacked by the Basij .
But the stakes are higher now than ever before .
In response to Iran ’ s nuclear program and Iranian banks ’ money-laundering activities , Britain sanctioned the Central Bank of Iran .
As a result , Iran felt compelled to respond – & # 160 ; and not solely with the assault on the British embassy : a few days prior to the attack , a majority in the Iranian parliament voted to downgrade the country ’ s diplomatic relations with Britain .
Reacting to mounting fear of Western military action against Iran ’ s nuclear facilities , Revolutionary Guard commanders recently sharpened their rhetoric against the US and Israel .
Amir Ali Hajizadeh , commander of the Guard ’ s Aerospace Division , said that , in the event of war , “ NATO ’ s missile-defense installations will be attacked by Iran . ”
Moreover , he threatened that Iran ’ s armed forces would not remain quiet if “ economic and cultural pressures ” continued .
Likewise , Yahya Rahim Safavi , Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei ’ s military adviser and a former commander-in-chief of the Revolutionary Guard , appealed to Iranian officials not to confine their threats to words , but rather to respond with military action .
He not only argued that Iran ’ s strategy should be offensive rather than defensive , but also threatened that Tel Aviv would be attacked by Hamas and Hezbollah if Israel went to war with the Islamic Republic .
Some experts argue that if covert operations against Iran ’ s nuclear and military programs – such as the assassination of nuclear scientists and explosions at the Revolutionary Guard ’ s missile arsenals – are already taking place , war has already begun .
Indeed , Khamenei and Revolutionary Guard commanders believe that covert war will inevitably become overt if Israel and the West truly believe that Iran is approaching a dangerous point in its nuclear program .
Khamenei recently stated that “ we should threaten [ the West and Israel ] in response to their threats , ” which prompted Armed Forces Deputy Chief of Staff Brigadier General Mohammad Baqeri to conclude that Khamenei ’ s remark meant “ revising [ Iran ’ s ] defense strategy . ”
Obviously , Revolutionary Guard commanders will not divulge what the new strategy is .
Instead , they hope that their own covert action might stop the West from applying more sanctions and greater pressure .
Thus , the West ’ s main concerns should stem not from Iran ’ s official responses , but from “ independent elements , ” like those that attacked the British embassy .
Recently , the US accused an Iranian-American of being instructed by a member of the Quds Force ( a Revolutionary Guard unit tasked with carrying out foreign operations ) to assassinate the Saudi ambassador in Washington . & # 160 ;
Back in 2007 , Iranian forces captured a group of British sailors in the Persian Gulf , releasing them a few weeks later under strong pressure from the United Kingdom .
With tensions much higher today , however , such acts – even if carried out by unknown or unofficial groups – can trigger war .
Indeed , Iran might become so fearful of an overt war that it starts one itself .
