Insuring Against Panic
WASHINGTON , D.C. : The panics of the past two years in emerging markets have driven home many lessons about the global economy .
It is now all too clear that in a world of interwoven financial markets and potentially destabilizing capital flows , there is a greater risk than ever that a crisis in one country will trigger crises elsewhere .
The international community — the IMF and its member countries , other international organizations and the private sector — is addressing this challenge by devising a set of reforms that have come to be known as the " new international financial architecture . "
Important progress has been made on this task , but much remains to be done .
Taken together , the reforms being undertaken are designed to create multiple lines of defense that would operate across borders and within individual countries — affecting the way that governments and the private sector operate .
These reforms bring together new or strengthened standards for financial systems , markets , and businesses with a commitment to new levels of transparency .
The aim is to ensure that all parties have access to accurate economic data and information about potentially market-moving developments .
Included in these new global ground rules are standards for such areas as fiscal and monetary policies , accounting , corporate governance , and securities and insurance regulation .
Observance of internationally recognized standards and greater transparency , when combined with sound macroeconomic policies , should place countries on a firmer footing .
By helping to make adverse economic or policy developments more apparent , greater transparency is also likely to lead to earlier incentives for governments to take corrective action .
Prevention , however , must also address the dangers posed by the potentially destabilizing movements of capital .
Recent experience teaches that the speed and magnitude with which both domestic and foreign investors can move into and out of capital markets far exceeds the ability of individual countries — and the international community — to counter such flows .
Many countries do not have foreign currency reserves sufficient to meet sudden and large outflows of capital without destabilizing their domestic economy .
Sometimes these outflows can occur through no fault of the country concerned , but as a result of financial market contagion that spreads from disturbances elsewhere .
This phenomenon was all too evident during the Asian crisis and following the Russian debt default of August 1998 .
To help prevent such contagion , the IMF has created a Contingent Credit Line ( CCL ) , a program aimed at providing countries with the financial resources they need to combat a loss of market confidence stemming from events beyond their own policies or economic conditions .
In essence , it will function as an insurance policy for healthy countries of the world financial system .
The CCL marks a significant change in how the IMF interacts with its members .
The Fund traditionally has been asked for assistance by a country seeking to repair the damage after a crisis ; contingent lending shifts the emphasis to preventative medicine from curative medicine .
The purpose is to ward off the contagion that posed such a threat to countries with generally good policies over the past two years .
As the new international financial architecture is put in place , the CCL could emerge as an important element in forestalling future crises .
In order to qualify for the CCL , countries will have the incentive to take proactive steps to eliminate the weaknesses that could leave them vulnerable .
Countries can be eligible to obtain a credit line at the IMF if they are making good progress adhering to international standards ; working to establish and maintain strong financial systems ; maintaining sound fiscal and monetary policies ; establishing constructive relationships with private creditors ; and satisfactorily managing their external debt and reserves .
All of these elements are aimed at helping countries to withstand the pressure on their balance of payments that might arise from a sudden loss of confidence caused by crises in other countries .
The CCL is intended to provide markets with a seal of approval for good policies , backed up by money — if needed .
Ideally , countries will never have to draw on that money , because the credit line will symbolize their strong defenses against contagion .
It may also mean that the Fund will have to undertake fewer rescue efforts in the future as the markets come to recognize the efforts of individual countries to address potential problems .
The IMF will play a central role not just by providing contingent financing , but also by monitoring more closely and offering technical assistance to individual countries so as to ensure that their policies accord with the international consensus for reform .
At the same time , the IMF itself has made a commitment to greater openness in the way it interacts with countries and makes its decisions .
All of this is part of a learning process intended to reduce the risk that the global economy might again have to go through the kind of difficult passage that threatened decades of prosperity and harmed the livelihood of millions of people .
