Moving on From the Euro
SAINT-PIERRE-D ’ ENTREMONT , FRANCE – European Monetary Union was never a good idea .
I remember my surprise when , as a young assistant professor , I realized that I was opposed to the Maastricht Treaty .
I believed then – and still do – that European integration is a very good thing .
But the textbook economics I was teaching showed how damaging EMU could be in the absence of European fiscal and political union .
Nothing that has happened since has convinced me that the textbook was excessively pessimistic .
On the contrary : it was far too optimistic .
Life is strewn with banana skins , and when you step on one you need to be able to adjust .
But the monetary union itself turned out to be a gigantic banana skin , inducing capital flows that pushed up costs around the European periphery .
And adjustment – that is , currency devaluation – was not an option .
Furthermore , most textbooks of the time ignored the financial sector ; thus , they ignored the fact that capital flows to the periphery would be channeled via banks , and that when the capital stopped flowing , bank crises would strain peripheral members ’ public finances .
This , in turn , would further erode banks ’ balance sheets and constrain credit creation – the sovereign-bank doom loop that we have heard so much about in recent years .
And no textbooks predicted that European cooperation would impose pro-cyclical austerity on crisis-struck countries , creating depressions that in some cases have rivaled those of the 1930s .
It has been obvious for some years that the “ actually existing EMU ” has been a costly failure , both economically and politically .
Trust in European institutions has collapsed , and political parties skeptical not just of the euro , but of the entire European project , are on the rise .
And yet most economists , even those who were never keen on EMU in the first place , have been reluctant to make the argument that the time has come to abandon a failed experiment .
A famous article by Barry Eichengreen pointed out that an anticipated EMU breakup would lead to the “ mother of all financial crises . ”
It is hard to disagree with him .
That is why economists of all stripes , whether or not they supported the introduction of the common currency , have spent the last five years developing and promoting a package of institutional reforms and policy changes that would make the eurozone less dysfunctional .
In the short run , the eurozone needs much looser monetary and fiscal policy .
It also needs a higher inflation target ( to reduce the need for nominal wage and price reductions ) ; debt relief , where appropriate ; a proper banking union with an adequate , centralized fiscal backstop ; and a “ safe ” eurozone asset that national banks could hold , thereby breaking the sovereign-bank doom loop .
Unfortunately , economists have not argued strongly for a proper fiscal union .
Even those who consider it economically necessary censor themselves , because they believe it to be politically impossible .
The problem is that silence has narrowed the frontier of political possibility even further , so that more modest proposals have fallen by the wayside as well .
Five years on , the eurozone still lacks a proper banking union , or even , as Greece demonstrated , a proper lender of last resort . Moreover , a higher inflation target remains unthinkable , and the German government argues that defaults on sovereign debt are illegal within the eurozone .
Pro-cyclical fiscal adjustment is still the order of the day .
The European Central Bank ’ s belated embrace of quantitative easing was a welcome step forward , but policymakers ’ enormously destructive decision to shut down a member state ’ s banking system – for what appears to be political reasons – is a far larger step backward .
And no one is talking about real fiscal and political union , even though no one can imagine European Monetary Union surviving under the status quo .
Meanwhile , the political damage is ongoing : not all protest parties are as pro-European as Greece ’ s ruling Syriza .
And domestic politics is being distorted by the inability of centrist politicians to address voters ’ concerns about the eurozone ’ s economic policies and its democratic deficit .
To do so , it is feared , would give implicit support to the skeptics , which is taboo .
Thus , in France , Socialist President François Hollande channels Jean-Baptiste Say , arguing that supply creates its own demand , while the far-right National Front ’ s Marine Le Pen gets to quote Paul Krugman and Joseph Stiglitz approvingly .
No wonder that working-class voters are turning to her party .
A victory for the National Front in 2017 or 2022 , which is no longer unthinkable , would destroy the European project .
Citizens of smaller eurozone member states will have noted the brutal way the ECB was politicized to achieve Germany ’ s goals in Greece , and the conclusion that the eurozone is a dangerous “ union ” for small countries will seem inescapable .
If centrist parties remain on the sidelines , rather than protesting what has happened , the political extremists will gain further valuable territory .
As for economists like me , who have balked at advocating an end to the failed euro experiment and favored reform , perhaps it is time to admit defeat and move on .
If only anti-Europeans oppose EMU , the EU baby could end up being thrown out with the euro bathwater .
An end to the euro would indeed provoke an immense crisis .
But ask yourself this : Do you really think the euro will be around in its present form a century from now ?
If not it will end , and the timing of that end will never be “ right . ”
Better , then , to get on with it before more damage is done .
