Inviting the Avoidable
Maybe it is excessive skittishness , or perhaps it is the result of global financial volatility in recent years – crises in Mexico in 1994-5 , East Asia in 1997-98 , Russia in 1998 , and then in Brazil , Turkey , and Argentina – but we economists are more concerned about monetary affairs and possible future disasters than we have been in many decades .
This month , the Switzerland-based Bank for International Settlements ( BIS ) was the latest to worry aloud about the financial risks that the world seems to be building into its future .
“ [ A ] ll the countries hit by financial crisis ... experience [ d ] a very sharp slowdown , ” the BIS says of the recent past .
It then cites “ global current account imbalances , ” particularly “ the US external deficit , ” describing it as “ unprecedented for a reserve currency country to have a current account deficit of such magnitude . ”
In short , the world has become “ increasingly prone to financial turbulence . ”
The BIS hints at the possibility of a financial crisis that , with the US at its center , would dwarf by at least an order of magnitude all crises that have occurred since 1933 .
Yet , in response to this risk , the BIS issues the standard textbook recommendations .
Countries whose policies and economies are out of balance should change their policies , thereby restoring balance : “ deficit countries should reduce the rate of growth of domestic spending below that of domestic production .
Allowing their currencies to depreciate in real terms would make their products more competitive , and also provide an incentive for production to shift out of non-tradables into tradables . ”
This is economists ’ polite code for the message that the US must gradually cut its budget deficit , while other countries – like China and Japan – must gradually let the value of the dollar fall and that of their own currencies rise .
So the BIS proposes nothing new or particularly attention-grabbing .
But if we turn to America ’ s government , we see an enormous pretense that the current budget deficit is not a problem .
As Stan Collender , a noted observer of the US federal budget , has commented , “ No one with federal budget responsibilities actually seems to be interested in the budget . ”
This is not “ because the budget committees are too busy .... [ T ] he House and Senate ... are not doing much of anything ... [ because ] they don 't want to . ”
Within the Bush administration , Director of the Office of Management and Budget Josh Bolten “ has been virtually invisible , ” while “ the president and vice president ... avoid talking publicly about the budget . ”
Let us be clear on this point : it is not that politicians who wish to take the lead on fiscal consolidation are failing to gain traction ; it is that there are no politicians – at least none with any agenda-setting influence – who are even trying to steer the US towards adopting a more responsible fiscal policy .
This is a grotesque failure of leadership .
Governments that pursue policies – whether US fiscal laxity or China ’ s exchange-rate peg – that create unsustainable imbalances do so for what they regard as important political reasons .
Appeals to them to change their policies , and thus contribute to the common global good of financial stability , are fruitless unless others are seen to change their policies , act responsibly , and so contribute to the common good as well .
International policy coordination requires a leader , a first mover .
But , while the US , as the world ’ s largest economy , is best suited for this role , it has so far failed to play its part .
Treasury Secretary John Snow has spent almost no public time on the budget , but a lot of public time on China .
Republican political operatives care far less about national savings than they do about manufacturing-sector job losses .
“ So what else is new ? ” you may ask – and with good reason .
The list of issues on which the Bush administration has failed to lead is a long one , and failure to take steps to diminish the risks of future financial catastrophe cannot rank very high .
The entire Bush administration has been a succession of leadership failures , so why harp on its poor financial management ?
Form a purely practical point of view , one reason is that ensuring global financial stability is an issue on which real progress can be made relatively easily .
The Bush administration may not care that deficit reduction is the right policy for America , but it might care far more if the issue were framed as a prerequisite for policy changes abroad that diminish pressure from imports on domestic manufacturing employment .
