Europe ’ s Vision Free Leadership
LONDON – The selection of Herman van Rompuy as President of the European Union ’ s Council of Ministers , and of Lady Catherine Ashton as the EU ’ s foreign policy chief , surely underlines the extent to which member states are in the driver ’ s seat in the EU .
They manage its institutions in their own interest .
The EU is no super-state striding bravely into a bright new dawn .
French President Nicolas Sarkozy will not have to compete for the global limelight with any Brussels supremos .
Germany will not be challenged to break out of its increasing introversion , no longer obliged to demonstrate its democratic post-war credentials by embracing the European cause at every turn .
Britain can rest easy that its world role will remain the aspiring Jeeves of the White House .
The best that could come from the appointment of Europe ’ s two new low-profile leaders is that it leads to better and more coherent management of the EU ’ s business .
Van Rompuy will be able to offer a longer view than that of a six-month national presidency .
Lady Ashton should be able to tie together the political and resource arms of Europe ’ s external policies .
But it is not yet clear , whatever the Lisbon Treaty says , that Ashton has full control of either the EU external budget or of appointments to the new diplomatic service .
She has a difficult hand to play , and can expect her elbow to be nudged regularly by EU Commission President José Manuel Barroso , who was the big winner in the carve-up of jobs .
But foreign ministers will be deeply suspicious if they think that the Commission is taking over foreign policy .
Past experience suggests that there are five guidelines to follow if we want a more effective European presence on the world stage whenever foreign and security policy are at the top of the agenda .
First , we should dare to believe that what most suits Europe ’ s interests might also be best for our relationship with our closest ally , the United States .
We should , for example , want to prevent the militarization of nuclear energy in Iran precisely because of our concern as Europeans , not because we are allies of the US .
Second , our rhetoric about our role as America ’ s international partners for peace should not stray too far from reality .
True , we tend to align ourselves these days more with Venus than Mars , something for which the rest of the world should be deeply grateful .
But we take this a little too far .
It is not just that Europe does not spend enough on hard power , but that what it does spend – about € 200 billion – is spent badly .
The EU needs common defense procurement and harmonization to acquire the helicopters , transport aircraft , battlefield communications equipment , and surveillance drones that are necessary for twenty-first-century operations .
For reasons of history , morality , and security , Africa should be regarded as a particular European responsibility .
We should deploy our aid , diplomacy , and peace-keeping capacity to support sustainable development , good governance , and regional collaboration on the continent .
Third , where Europe has a serious internal policy , it is easier to establish a more serious external policy .
The best example of this is energy policy and Russia , which wants a sphere of influence around its borders .
Dealing with Russia has probably been the biggest failure in the attempt to make European foreign policy .
To formulate such a policy requires us to frame a single energy policy .
Lady Ashton will need to be firm in dealing with Russia and with member states who subordinate Europe to the commercial interests of their national energy companies .
Fourth , European external policy is most effective the nearer it is to home .
We are at our best in our own neighborhood – and at our worst , too .
The greatest success of Europe ’ s external policy has been EU enlargement .
This promoted and consolidated regime change without the use of weapons , thereby stabilizing the European continent .
The job is not complete .
The prospect of EU membership is at the heart of EU policy in the western Balkans , where we are starting to show ( for example in Bosnia-Herzegovina ) a dangerous disinclination to apply tough conditionality .
We are committed to Ukraine ’ s “ European vocation , ” but not to its EU membership .
Spot the difference !
We undertook more than four decades ago to negotiate Turkish membership once that country became fully democratic with an open economy and respect for human rights and the rule of law .
For Europe to turn down Turkey would be tantamount to writing ourselves out of any serious script in global affairs .
We would be rejecting a country that is an important regional power , a significant NATO member , and a crucial energy hub .
We would stand accused of burning , rather than building , bridges to the Islamic world .
Unfortunately , van Rompuy , an author and poet , has spoken out against Turkish membership in far cruder terms than one would expect from a gentle haiku writer .
My final guideline for policy is that Europe is not and will not become a superpower or super-state .
Unlike the US , we do not matter everywhere .
We do not require a policy on every problem and every place .
But where the problem affects much else , and where the region is close to home , we should have a policy that consists of more than waiting to agree with whatever America decides that its policy should be , as , for example , in the Middle East .
The present “ no war-no peace ” lull in the Middle East is not sustainable ; nor is a one-state solution either possible or desirable .
So what can we do to nudge things forward in a region where America is again engaged but not respected , and where Europe is neither ?
At the very least , we could set out our own policy , beginning with an effort to end the fragmentation of Palestine and Palestinians between the West Bank , Gaza , and East Jerusalem .
Does it matter if Europe is not on the same page as the US ?
Frankly , no .
Two weeks ago , when Obama had to choose between a meeting of ASEAN or the celebrations in Berlin marking the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Wall , he chose to go to Asia .
Will Europe do enough to change his mind the next time there is such a choice ?
As things stand , we are in danger of making Europe politically irrelevant , a successful customs union with a Swissified foreign policy and a group of fractious , vision-free leaders .
