Europe \ u0027s Invisibles
In a historic turnabout , the new German government of Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder is poised to offer citizenship to four million of its foreign ( mostly Turkish ) residents .
Germany , of all European countries , by basing its citizenship laws on blood , has been Europe 's most difficult place for foreigners to acquire citizenship .
So does this move , taken with similar actions in France , bespeak a new European attitude towards immigrants ?
Should immigrants embrace the offer ?
History and present practices suggest they should think twice before doing so .
Europe , once identified as " the West " as a whole , once held a noble vision of its mission : to deliver the fruits of the Enlightenment and the practice of democracy to the world .
Born of the American and French Revolutions , that vision linked Europe to North America in a wider Atlantic civilization .
Through Voltaire and Kant the idea of Europe was broadened to mean cosmopolitanism and the ideal of global citizenship .
Not only were East European countries such as Russia not excluded , but the prospect was held out of a world community held together by the liberality of the Enlightenment .
Today , as Western Europe unites behind its new currency , the euro , that inspirational is being progressively narrowed .
The Cold War , of course , cut Europe in two .
The European Union is now cutting off not just Eastern Europe but also the United States , seen now as one of Europe 's main rivals .
Europe now effectively means only " Western Europe " , with member states of the EU policing their borders , both actually and conceptually , against aliens and the threat of aliens .
Should Poland , Hungary and the Czech Republic be allowed in ?
Perhaps - but Serbia , Romania , Bulgaria are dubious ; even more so the idea of Russia as part of this new Europe .
Turkey is , of course , highly problematic .
Europe , indeed , has resurrected some of the oldest and most exclusionary of its stigmas of isolation - not just those against Islam but also against the countries of Orthodox Christianity .
None of this bodes well for Western Europe 's 11 million non-European residents – many of them Muslims , making Islam the " second religion of Europe " .
In an earlier , larger idea of Europe , it might have made sense for such " outsiders " to pursue the strategy of inclusion , seeking national citizenship if not full assimilation into the national culture .
Policies of " multiculturalism " , despite scholarly acrobatics , held out a genuine promise of liberal , plural societies .
All this now seems a pipe dream .
More than ever , Europe insists on its integrity , its exclusiveness .
It puts up invisible walls not just against the East , against Russia in particular , but also against the West , against America .
Internally there is renewed stress on homogeneous national identities , with right-wing parties taking the lead but others following closely behind .
Muslims have replaced Jews and Communists as " the others " of Europe - Europe 's demons , threatening and malignant , as in the Middle Ages .
What should immigrant communities do ?
One innovative response is to by-pass national citizenship altogether in pursuit of " transnational citizenship " .
Turks in Germany and North Africans in France have turned to international human rights organizations to make claims as persons , rather than as citizens of any particular nation-state .
They assert the right to employment , to education , to health and to social security not as benefits conferred by the state but in their capacity as residents with human rights recognized by the international community and proclaimed in the United Nations ' Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Turks in Germany , for instance , say they want to be neither Turkish nor German , neither pulled back into their culture nor pushed into a receiving a culture that rejects what they hold dear .
They claim the right to define their identities from elements drawn from both cultures - religion , say , from one , language from another - and to add elements as they see fit , drawing on the rights created by international institutions .
When , in demanding the right to have their children educated in Turkish , they proclaim that the " mother tongue is a human right " , Germany 's Turkish residents are not asserting some primordial identity but marking out a new , freely-chosen identity in the language of universal rights .
In doing this they seek to crash through the gates of fortress Europe , refusing to be imprisoned by its narrow assumptions of national or European identity .
They may wish to play a role in the politics of their countries of origin as well as in the politics of their host countries , where they are now permanent residents and so contribute to national economic and cultural life .
And they may also wish to play a role on the wider world stage , as when they link up with fellow ethnics in international religious , cultural and labour organizations .
It would be wrong to portray " transnational citizenship " today as anything more than a goal .
The power of nation states remains strong , and immigrants must deal with them in their daily lives .
So offers of citizenship , such as to Germany 's long isolated Turkish residents , however delayed , should not be lightly spurned .
But enough has already been said and done to indicate that this is not the only possible path ; that the goal of transnational citizenship is not utterly unreal .
In pursuing it , immigrants may also begin to free their longer-established fellow Europeans from their attachment to a fortress that , if taken to extremes , could well become a prison for all .
