Follow the Euro
CAMBRIDGE : Now that the Euro has arrived , so what ? It is useful to review what it can be expected to do .
It is also interesting to ask what new risks , opportunities or ideas it offers emerging markets in Latin America or Eastern Europe .
First a negative : the claims of the great gains to be made from transparency , competition , and efficiency are overstated .
Price discrepancies in Europe reflect two facts : like politics , all prices are local . Second , price discrepancies do have a lot to do with limited retail competition and a long tradition of anti-competitive practices .
Of course , there will be gains in transactions costs from a single money . But that must wait until the money is actually there , a few years from now .
Another negative : will the Euro help unemployment ?
Per se , the Euro does very little to create jobs or reduce unemployment .
True , more financial stability on the periphery and as a result somewhat higher growth must be expected and that brings limited help .
The central fact is that higher growth and substantial dismantling of supply side obstacles to job creation and job acceptance are the real cure .
Here is something the Euro will do : reinforce financial deregulation ( national and cross border ) in Europe to create a broad and deep capital market .
Europe comes from a dinky and segmented national , bank-based financial structure . It is on the way to a US-style capital market where households hold funds and companies issue paper and stocks , intermediation margins are small and governance significant .
European companies will benefit from the transformation , the most significant supply side influence we will see .
Financial deregulation introduces the possibility of talking advantage of financial technology .
Second , financial deregulation and internal market measures open a much larger scope for cross border transactions .
Lastly , the Euro crowns these developments by adding huge scale , lowering the cost of capital and that helps growth for the wider range of users .
Next some good news : one payoff on the Euro is the macroeconomic disarmament of the periphery - Italy and Spain , even France .
Common money makes these regions safe for investors , reflected in lower interest rates and higher growth ; risk premiums are compressed because these countries no longer have central banks or exchange rates to fiddle .
Macroeconomics is gone as far as local initiative is concerned and that is a good thing in a world where whenever the Banca d ’ Italia practices " independent monetary policy " , investors can ’ t run fast enough .
In this respect , the Euro is a thoroughly modern institution , well-adapted to a highly integrated and trigger-happy international capital market .
A non-issue : inspired by their anti-market attitudes Germany and France are searching for a new international architecture to limit exchange rate fluctuations , blaming the latter for the last year ’ s instability .
But forget about fixing North-Atlantic exchange rates and the Yen .
Whatever European socialists say , there is no control-freak US government in sight , thus fixing of rates is not about to happen .
What is left for the periphery ?
A more integrating Europe and marginally better growth performance - good news but not enough to write home about .
The real lesson for the periphery is surely this : in anything but mega-countries , nationally managed monies are passe .
There is no more room for amateur central banks trying to exploit what they perceive as a residual domestic money illusion .
Having a national money is expensive - that is why Italy and France surrendered theirs .
It offers little flexibility and year after year an interest cost is paid for what is the illusion of independence .
Mexico or Poland cannot cut their rates below the US or Germany ; they would be lucky to get so low .
Monetary sovereignty nowadays means only the right to bad money .
How can the periphery get out of the self-inflicted historical curse of a central bank and a national money .
Do what Argentina did , or Italy . Give up the national money and create a hard link to a world class currency .
A hard link means a currency board , no less .
Brazil thinks it can get by announcing that it will never devalue and nobody believes it - real interest rates are 30 % because devaluation is just around the corner .
In Eastern Europe where there is a desperate wish to be part of the European Union and the first world , the politics are now easy - Europe has done it , join the crowd , peg the Euro with your currency board .
In Latin America , forget about the unending promises of no more devaluations , abandon the mess and move to the dollar .
Citizens at home , and the world capital markets , can look and do choose across borders , which is inconsistent with national financial independence .
Saying that the central bank is doing better nowadays - as in Mexico or Poland - is no argument to settle for higher risks .
Getting a really good money is worth using political capital , that is the real lesson from the Euro .
And the periphery can get there in no time .
Lets just accept that and move from there to a 21st century agenda of hard money and better economic performance for everyone .
