A New Deal for Debt Overhangs ?
CAMBRIDGE – The International Monetary Fund ’ s acknowledgement that Greece ’ s debt is unsustainable could prove to be a watershed moment for the global financial system .
Clearly , heterodox policies to deal with high debt burdens need to be taken more seriously , even in some advanced countries .
Ever since the onset of the Greek crisis , there have been basically three schools of thought .
First , there is the view of the so-called troika ( the European Commission , the European Central Bank , and the IMF ) , which holds that the eurozone ’ s debt-distressed periphery ( Greece , Ireland , Portugal , and Spain ) requires strong policy discipline to prevent a short-term liquidity crisis from morphing into a long-term insolvency problem .
The orthodox policy prescription was to extend conventional bridge loans to these countries , thereby giving them time to fix their budget problems and undertake structural reforms aimed at enhancing their long-term growth potential .
This approach has “ worked ” in Spain , Ireland , and Portugal , but at the cost of epic recessions .
Moreover , there is a high risk of relapse in the event of a significant downturn in the global economy .
The troika policy has , however , failed to stabilize , much less revive , Greece ’ s economy .
A second school of thought also portrays the crisis as a pure liquidity problem , but views long-term insolvency as an outside risk at worst .
The problem is not that the debt of countries on the eurozone ’ s periphery is too high , but that it has not been allowed to rise nearly high enough .
This anti-austerity camp believes that even when private markets totally lost confidence in Europe ’ s periphery , northern Europe could easily have solved the problem by co-signing periphery debt , perhaps under the umbrella of Eurobonds backed ultimately by all ( especially German ) eurozone taxpayers .
The periphery countries should then have been permitted not only to roll over their debt , but also to engage in full-on countercyclical fiscal policy for as long as their national governments deemed necessary .
In other words , for “ anti-austerians , ” the eurozone suffered a crisis of competence , not a crisis of confidence .
Never mind that the eurozone has no centralized fiscal authority and only an incomplete banking union .
Never mind moral-hazard problems or insolvency .
And never mind growth-enhancing structural reforms .
All of the debtors will be good for the money in the future , even if they have not always been reliable in the past .
In any case , faster GDP growth will pay for everything , thanks to high fiscal multipliers .
Europe passed up a free lunch .
This is a fully coherent viewpoint , but naive in its unqualified confidence ( for example , in the polemical writings of the Nobel laureate economist Paul Krugman ) .
As a result , the anti-austerian view masks strong assumptions and risks .
In fact , piling loans atop already-high debt burdens in the eurozone ’ s periphery entailed a significant gamble , particularly as the crisis erupted .
Political corruption , exemplified by the revolving door between Spain ’ s government and financial sector , was endemic .
Dual labor markets and product-market monopolies still hobble growth , and oligarchs have disproportionate power to protect their interests .
In reality , Germany could not have underwritten all of the European periphery ’ s debt without risking its own solvency and creditworthiness , particularly in the absence of a functioning system of eurozone-wide checks and balances .
Expansive and open-ended guarantees might have worked , but if they didn ’ t , the economic rot from the periphery could have spread to the center .
A third point of view is that , given the massive financial crisis , Europe ’ s debt problem should have been diagnosed as an insolvency problem from the start , and treated with debt restructuring and forgiveness , aided by moderately elevated inflation and structural reform .
This has been my viewpoint since the crisis began .
In Ireland and Spain , private bondholders , not Irish and Spanish taxpayers , should have taken the hit from bank failures .
In Greece , there should have been faster and larger debt write-downs .
Of course , national governments would have had to use taxpayer funds to recapitalize northern European banks – especially in France and Germany – that lent too much to the periphery .
And transfers would have been needed to recapitalize the periphery banks .
But at least then the public would have understood the reality of the situation , while restructured and recapitalized banks would have been in a position to start lending again .
Unfortunately , too many policymakers in advanced economies allowed themselves to believe that such heterodox policies are only for emerging markets .
In fact , advanced countries have resorted to heterodox policies to reduce debt overhangs on many occasions .
Debt restructuring would have given Europe the reset it needed .
Yes , there would have been risks , as IMF chief economist Olivier Blanchard has pointed out , but running those risks would have been well worth it .
So what is the way forward ?
Deeper European integration , stricter equity requirements for banks , and deeper but homegrown structural reforms are certainly key elements of any solution .
Further aid to the European periphery is still badly needed .
But , beyond that , Europe ’ s experience ought to spur a full rethink of the global system for administering sovereign bankruptcies .
That could mean bringing back older IMF proposals for a sovereign bankruptcy mechanism , or finding ways to institutionalize the Fund ’ s recent stance on Greek debt .
There is no free lunch in Europe , and there never was ; but there are much better ways to deal with unsustainable debt .
