The Winning International NGO
MELBOURNE – It has long been clear that many non-state actors have more influence on international policymaking than a great many sovereign states .
No one doubts the impact that major multinational corporations and terrorist organizations can have , for better or worse .
But the role of a number of international non-governmental organizations ( INGOs ) has been more significant than is generally recognized , and what makes the best of them tick is worth exploring .
According to current estimates , there are some 40,000 NGOs operating internationally , with the overwhelming majority focusing primarily on health , education , welfare , economics , industry , energy , the environment , human rights , social policy , and governance- and development-related issues .
A much smaller number – a few hundred at best – work primarily on peace and security issues , though some primarily human rights-focused organizations like Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International are influential here .
Those that seek to influence foreign-policy outcomes can be typecast , perhaps unkindly , as “ thinkers , ” “ talkers , ” or “ doers . ”
In other words , they tend to be pure think tanks , research institutions , or policy forums ( like London ’ s Chatham House , the Council on Foreign Relations in New York , or the Brookings Institution in Washington , DC ) ; overwhelmingly campaign-focused advocacy organizations ( like Human Rights Watch , Enough , Kony 2012 , or Global Zero ) ; or field-based , on-the-ground operational organizations engaged in activities like mediation , capacity-building , and confidence-building ( like Search for Common Ground , the Community of Sant ’ Egidio , or Independent Diplomat ) .
The organization with which I was longest and most closely associated , the International Crisis Group ( ICG ) , is an unusual combination of all three categories .
It is field-based in a way that most operational organizations are , but that think tanks and advocacy organizations are not .
It focuses , as policy-oriented think tanks do , on analyzing complex conflicts and potential conflicts around the world and identifying workable solutions .
It campaigns for the adoption of these solutions , but less at the grassroots and more by direct access to high-level policymakers .
Measuring INGOs ’ impact on policy outcomes is more an art than a science .
The most successful , like Human Rights Watch , Amnesty International , and the ICG , have high visibility among policymakers , and produce analysis and argument that – whether publicly acknowledged or not – regularly becomes part of the currency of debate .
Their perceived ability to make a difference is usually reflected in their capacity to raise funds , whether from governments or the private sector .
What does it take for organizations like these to become and remain successful ?
My own experience , as both a government insider and INGO outsider , has been mostly in the area of peace and security , but I think the lessons are generalizable .
Four criteria seem to be essential :
First , INGOs must add value , meeting a need that is not currently being met well or at all .
The primary unmet need seen by the founders of the ICG , for example , was to compensate for governments ’ growing incapacity , for both security and budgetary reasons , to develop an accurate picture of what was happening on the ground in conflict zones .
Open-source reporting and commentary by the media were not doing much to fill the gaps , because resource shortages , particularly in the quality print media , have long been dumbing down international coverage of sensitive and difficult situations .
Second , successful INGOs are marked by the clarity of their mission .
The most successful tend to be those that find a clear niche and stick to it .
When Amnesty International broadened its focus from traditional political and civil rights to the whole range of economic , social , and cultural rights , it seemed for quite some time to lose direction and impact .
The most insidious temptation to muddy an INGO ’ s mission occurs when money is potentially available for some project that is not part of its core business , and for which it does not have readily available internal expertise .
In such cases , diversion and dilution of resources and loss of focus is the inevitable result .
Third , INGOs require real independence .
Any INGO in the business of giving advice must be scrupulous about being – and being perceived as – immune from influence by vested interests .
Some organizations , like Human Rights Watch , solve the problem by refusing to accept any government funding .
The ICG doesn ’ t do that , but it has always been absolutely insistent on saying whatever has needed to be said , and in practice governments have been remarkably tolerant of specific criticism , provided it is well-supported and well-argued .
The final criterion that a successful INGO must meet in order to be taken seriously , at least by government policymakers , is total professionalism .
If you want to meet governments on their home ground , you have to provide a product that , in terms of the depth and accuracy of its research and the style of its presentation , the best of them are accustomed to and demand .
And your management – of finance , personnel , and governance – has to be sustained at the level of global best practices .
The best INGOs develop strong reputations quickly , sustain them indefinitely , and exercise real influence on policymaking .
But they operate in a highly competitive environment , and will be on a fast track to losing their way if they come to be seen as no longer meeting real needs , remaining sharply focused , or being uncompromising in maintaining their independence and professionalism .
