A Gender Divided
OXFORD – The top and the bottom of the list of countries in Newsweek ’ s recent cover story , “ The 2011 Global Women ’ s Progress Report , ” evoke images of two different worlds .
At the top of the list – the “ Best Places to be a Woman ” – we see the usual suspects : Iceland and the Scandinavian countries , the Netherlands , Switzerland , and Canada .
On that planet , we see rankings in the upper 90 ’ s for the survey ’ s five categories : justice , health , education , economics , and politics .
Women are out-earning men in college degrees ( United States ) , domestic abusers are being banned from their homes and tracked with electronic monitors ( Turkey ) , and female prime ministers are being elected ( Denmark and Australia ) .
Now look at the other planet , “ The Worst Places in the World to be a Woman . ”
In Chad , the worst of the worst , woman have “ almost no legal rights , ” and girls as young as ten are legally married off , which is also true in Niger , the seventh worst place for a woman .
Most women in Mali – the fifth worst – have been traumatized by female genital mutilation .
In Democratic Republic of Congo , 1,100 women are raped every day .
In Yemen , you are free to beat your wife whenever you like .
Though it is stunning to see these two worlds in such stark and detailed relief , their existence is not news : development specialists and human rights groups have been calling attention to these inequities for years .
But the systemic oppression of women tends to be cast in terms of claims for empathy : we shouldn ’ t follow these policies because they are not nice , not enlightened .
Some development researchers have started to make a compelling case , too , that oppression of women impedes countries ’ efforts to escape poverty .
But the data in the Newsweek list show that we need to frame this issue in stronger , more sweeping terms : When poor countries choose to oppress their own women , they are to some extent choosing their own continued poverty .
Female oppression is a moral issue ; but it also must be seen as a choice that countries make for short-term “ cultural ” comfort , at the expense of long-term economic and social progress .
It is not politically correct to attribute any share of very poor countries ’ suffering to their own decisions .
But it is condescending to refuse to hold many of them partly responsible for their own plight .
Obviously , the legacy of colonialism – widespread hunger , illiteracy , lack of property or legal recourse , and vulnerability to state violence – is a major factor in their current poverty .
But how can we blame that legacy while turning a blind eye to a kind of colonialism against women in these same countries ’ private homes and public institutions ?
When the poorest countries – most of them in Africa or with Muslim majorities – choose to sustain and even devise new policies that oppress women , we have to be willing to say that , in some measure , they are choosing the economic misfortune that follows .
The developed world ’ s silence suggests that it takes the mistreatment of black and brown women by black and brown men for granted , rather than holding all people to one standard of justice .
The “ surprises ” on the Newsweek list confirm that educating women boosts economic prosperity .
Many countries with histories of colonialism and other forms of tyranny , as well as countries without abundant natural resources , have chosen to educate women and grant them legal rights .
Some continue to struggle economically , but none is abjectly poor – and some are booming .
Think of China , India , Malaysia , Indonesia , Brazil , South Korea , and Turkey .
The low status of women on Planet Worst cannot be blamed on cultural stasis : many of the “ surprise ” countries – Romania , Portugal , the Philippines , and India – treated women far more unequally a mere 50-100 years ago .
In Pakistan , marital rape is not illegal today , and there are 800 honor killings a year .
What kind of economic boom might stagnating Pakistan enjoy if patriarchy relaxed its grip ?
If you are not innumerate , you can start a business .
If you are not living in mortal fear of rape and beatings at home , you can organize your community to dig a new well .
If you are not subjecting your daughter to traumatic genital injury at three and marrying her off at ten , she can go to school .
And , when she does marry and has children of her own , they will benefit from two educated , employed parents , which means twice as much literate conversation in the home , twice the contacts , and twice the encouragement to succeed .
Educated , pushy mothers make all the difference .
As US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton put it in the Newsweek issue , “ The world needs to think more strategically and creatively about tapping into women ’ s potential for growth .
Studies show that helping women access trade and grow businesses helps create jobs and boost incomes . ”
But on Planet Worst , forcing terrified , uneducated women to remain at home is more socially acceptable than facing the fact that this means choosing to drag down incomes for everyone .
It is time to stop tiptoeing around the poorest countries ’ responsibility to do something essential about their own plight : emancipate their women .
