Avoiding Algeria in Egypt
PORTO – The military coup that has overthrown Egypt ’ s first democratically elected president and led to the arrests of Muslim Brotherhood leaders across the country poses an enormous danger not only for Egypt ’ s democratic transition , but for the democratic hopes of the entire Arab world as well .
The fact that the coup was undertaken with massive popular support is a sign of the enormous difficulties faced by the Muslim Brotherhood during its first turn in power .
President Mohamed Morsi ’ s government struggled to address Egypt ’ s inherited economic and social crises in the face of the enormous public expectations created by the 2011 revolution , whose protagonists sought not only freedom , but also economic development and social justice .
Of course , the Muslim Brotherhood was also a victim of its own mistakes , particularly the failure of Morsi and his government to reach out to the secular opposition , elements of which had contributed to his election .
The Morsi government seemed incapable of understanding that a slim electoral majority is not enough , especially nowadays .
Indeed , the breadth of the opposition to Morsi reflects a major global tendency toward the empowerment of the educated and connected middle classes , whose members tend to be suspicious of political parties and demand more direct political participation .
In this sense , Egypt ’ s difficulties differ only in scope , not in kind , from those faced by governments in Turkey , Brazil , and even Europe .
Morsi ’ s Muslim Brotherhood dominated government from its first days in power .
But it also faced opposition from a variety of other , far less democratically minded , forces , including holdovers from Hosni Mubarak ’ s regime , who continue to wield influence in official institutions .
The judiciary , for example , dissolved the first elected legislative assembly .
Likewise , the interior minister refused to protect the Brotherhood ’ s headquarters from repeated attack .
Moreover , some secular intellectuals demonized the Brotherhood .
Like their Algerian counterparts – who in 1992 approved of the Algerian army ’ s suppression of an Islamist electoral victory , leading to years of brutal fighting that left perhaps a half-million dead – many Egyptians didn ’ t mind repressing Islamists .
Morsi and the Brotherhood also faced competition from Saudi-backed Salafists .
Indeed , on the night of the coup , these ultra-conservative Islamists appeared together with military leaders and the secular political leader Mohamed ElBaradei to announce Morsi ’ s overthrow .
The prospects for Egypt ’ s democratic transition have become increasingly difficult to predict , but one thing is clear : the military cannot and must not be trusted .
During the period after the fall of Mubarak , when the army exercised full power , 12,000 civilians were charged in military courts , virginity tests were imposed on women ( particularly those protesting against the military ) , demonstrators were killed , and myriad human-rights violations were committed with impunity .
Of course , it is possible for soldiers to assure a transition to democracy , as they did four decades ago in my homeland , Portugal , following their overthrow of the Salazar / Caetano dictatorship .
But the record of military-led transitions elsewhere has been poor : democracy may be proclaimed to be the coup ’ s raison d ’ être , but the transition stops there .
Moreover , in this case , the Egyptian army appears far more interested in protecting its enormous economic interests than it is in securing the benefits of a civilian government responsive to its citizens .
Trust should still be put in young Egyptians and their demands for freedom and democracy – demands that link the movement that overthrew Mubarak to the demonstrations that led to Morsi ’ s removal .
But the predominant goal should be to support the creation in Egypt of a pluralistic society that defends the rights of all to political participation and free and fair elections .
Today , this requires opposition to any Mubarak-style repression of the Muslim Brotherhood .
Immediately following the coup , the European Union adopted an ambivalent position toward it .
This , too , is reminiscent of Algeria in 1992 , when most European governments supported the annulment of the Islamists ’ electoral victory .
( Likewise , the EU refused to recognize Hamas ’ s electoral victory in Gaza in 2006 . )
Continuing fear of political Islam in much of the West explains past support for dictatorial regimes .
Today , the EU and the US should demand the liberation of all members of the Muslim Brotherhood , including Morsi , and the integration of the Brotherhood into any political solution .
The international community should also be concerned with the coup ’ s regional implications .
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad ’ s cynical declaration of support for the coup is a sign that some want to turn today ’ s struggle in the Arab world into a bloody contest between Islamists and secularists .
In the long term , any crackdown on the Brotherhood would lead its members and supporters – & # 160 ; already bitterly disappointed in democracy – to reject elections entirely .
That outcome could have a very negative impact on Islamist movements elsewhere .
For many , the extremists who criticized the Brotherhood and other Islamist parties for choosing a democratic route to power will have been vindicated , and a new wave of violence in the region may begin .
Hope remains that Egypt will not become Algeria in 1992 ( or Chile in 1973 ) .
But to avoid that grim fate , it is imperative that Muslim Brotherhood members ’ fundamental rights now be protected .
US President Barack Obama , who has expressed deep concern about the overthrow of Morsi , is perhaps the only leader able to mediate in such a situation and work for a consensus solution that prevents a civil war .
To achieve this , he would need to use all of the leverage at his disposal , including cutting off the massive military assistance that the US provides to Egypt ’ s armed forces , as he has threatened to do .
He can also use the reserve of trust that he established by reaching out to the Brotherhood during Morsi ’ s presidency .
But will Obama take the initiative ?
His speech in Cairo in 2009 – which called for “ A New Beginning ” in the region – inspired many in the Arab world .
Now it is time for more than words .
