E Pluribus Unum for Europe ’ s Bank Supervisors
STOCKHOLM – The European Union lacks an efficient supervisory framework for its vast financial industry , and the gap between what is needed and what exists is widening .
To pave the way towards European financial integration , the Financial Services Action Plan ( FSAP ) was launched in 1999 with the aim of creating a regulatory framework for a single financial area .
The European Commission , hoping to speed things up , published a White Paper on financial services policy covering 2005-2010 .
There has been clear progress on integration , as financial institutions across Europe have begun to realize the benefits of economies of scale .
Yet the industry has acted more quickly than regulators and supervisors have been able to respond .
At first , banks ’ cross-border operations were small , which meant that that they were mainly supervised in their own countries .
But , over the last decade , major European banks have acquired foreign banks through such mergers as the acquisition by Spain ’ s Banco Santander of the UK ’ s Abbey National , Italy ’ s UniCredito of Austria ’ s Hypovereinsbank and Holland ’ s ABN-AMRO .
This raised questions about prudential supervision , chiefly whether sufficient resources exist to check whether the institutions are financially sound .
Nordea , for example , was created by merging four major national banks , and some 70 % of its business is outside its legal domicile , Sweden .
This is a process that is likely to accelerate .
Changes in the way banks are organized have put extra pressure on supervisors .
Banks have begun to de-centralize essential functions , re-locating market and treasury operations , liquidity and capital management , and risk management , for example , in different countries .
Banks nowadays create products and IT platforms to serve their customers in all their countries of operation ; so separate prudential assessments of units in these cross-border groups , be they subsidiaries or branches , is hardly rational .
More than 60 % of banking assets in Europe are now in the hands of fewer than 50 multi-national European banks .
In Eastern Europe , most new EU members ’ banking sectors are owned by banks based elsewhere in the EU .
In short , the main part of Europe ’ s banking assets , liabilities , and risks are concentrated in these large banks .
The current de-centralized supervisory framework , with several independent “ host ” supervisors for subsidiaries and the parent bank ’ s home supervisor as primus inter pares , is clearly unsatisfactory .
Capital adequacy and liquidity risks should be assessed on a group level , rather than country by country ; how capital and risks are divided between countries is less important .
Under EU law , the home supervisor deals with a bank ’ s operations as a whole – meaning the parent company and its subsidiaries .
But the tools and powers available for home country supervisors are inadequate .
Recent attempts to remedy this under the Capital Requirements Directive have been disappointing , even though it was plainly the best that could be achieved politically given EU countries ’ differing views on prudential supervision .
Host community supervisors look at business units in isolation from the international group to which they belong .
They have their own national rules and regulations to apply , and every financial supervisory authority ( FSA ) in Europe has its own practices and traditions .
Even when implementing directives , EU member countries are often tempted to “ gold-plate ” them by introducing extra rules .
This adds to their complexity and cost , and compounds inefficiency .
Europe ’ s financial industry wants a cost-effective , transparent , and competitively neutral supervisory framework that will foster market integration , create greater financial stability , and provide for crisis management .
But Nordea ’ s recent history suggests that this is likely to take time .
The regulatory infrastructure includes supervision , deposit guarantee , the lender of last resort , and emergency liquidity assistance .
These are interlinked , and stakeholders include central banks , FSAs , national treasuries , and deposit guarantee funds .
Nordea tried to get the deposit guarantee rules changed to create a level playing field in which a cross-border merger would not distort competition between banks .
The Commission showed sympathy and understanding , but in the end it passed the problem on to national governments .
EU member governments obviously want to minimize the risk of being called on to save a cross-border bank in trouble .
So who would have to take the lead in such a situation ?
Would it be the home country FSA , with its responsibility for consolidated supervision , even though it would have only limited powers ?
Would host supervisors try to ring-fence the losses to include only those in their own country ?
What role should central banks and national treasuries play in a cross-border European banking collapse ?
Is it even possible to deal with such a situation on a purely national basis ?
To pose these questions is to conclude that there is no practical alternative to a European FSA with the sole authority to supervise multinational financial institutions , including all their subsidiaries and branches within the EU and globally .
This would not spell the end of national supervisors , as many national FSAs would likely work as partners of the European supervisor .
National banks would continue to be supervised by national FSAs , and consumer protection would also remain subject to national supervision .
The problem is that currently there is a lack of convergence and coherence between national supervisors . And that is because perceived national interests still have the upper hand over the wider interests of an integrated European marketplace .
