Ireland in the Dock
The Committee of European Finance Ministers has censured Ireland and the Irish budget , invoking for the first time in EU history the powers conferred by Article 99 of the Treaty .
That rebuke is being applied to perhaps Europe ’ s most successful economy , for Ireland has the EU ’ s second highest budget surplus , its second lowest level of public debt , and by far the highest growth in the 1990 's of countries in the Monetary Union .
This step , and its motives , are without precedent .
Ireland ’ s projected budget for 2001 foresees a slight reduction in public expenditures , from 31 % to 30.8 % of GDP , and a simultaneous reduction of taxes by about .6 % of GDP .
As a consequence , Ireland ’ s budget surplus will come down , according to forecasts , from 4.7 to 4.3 % of GDP .
Few Europeans are losing sleep over Ireland ’ s unprecedented good times .
Indeed , all the finance ministers who censured Ireland would like to face the same rosy economic data the Irish finance minister does .
Yet , according to the European Commission and those same finance ministers , Ireland ’ s fiscal posture may generate strong inflationary pressures in an already overheated economy and so merits maximum punishment .
Censuring Ireland , however , is a dangerous mistake , both on the merits and from a methodological point of view .
When a country is growing at the speed of Ireland – ie , a speed higher than Europe ’ s average – some inflation is not only inevitable but necessary .
By increasing the “ rate of real exchange , ” inflation will help slow the Irish economy unless the growth of productivity is sufficient to maintain competitiveness .
Of course , Ireland ’ s decision to cut taxes because of the huge surplus its robust economy has generated may have had electoral , rather than economic , motivations .
( Please , will the EU finance minister without a political agenda raise his hand ? ) .
It is also possible that the inflationary effects of tax cuts may be slightly higher than the .3 % estimated by the Irish government .
But the amount of uncertainty over the effects posed by Ireland ’ s budget is enormous and the macroeconomic dimensions minuscule : the reduction in Ireland ’ s budget surplus is only of .4 % of GDP .
Besides , as even the EU Commission recognizes , Irish inflation is coming down , from 5.6 % in the preceding year to 4.6 % at the end of 2000 .
Ireland has been tried and convicted on non-existent evidence .
Censuring Ireland is also a grave mistake from a methodological point of view ; indeed , this is perhaps the gravest aspect of the case .
EU Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner Pedro Solbes has often repeated in recent weeks that the Commission seeks to increase coordination of fiscal policies among Euro members .
But how is this to happen ?
When ?
For what end ?
Coordination of fiscal policies indeed , can be counterproductive .
It can , for example , restore through a side window the fiscal laxness which the Treaty of Amsterdam evicted by the front door .
The Stability Pact already imposes limits on each member ’ s fiscal policy discretion .
What else is there to coordinate ?
Evidently , the Commission believes that it can judge , case by case , the best policy for every country , including policies that satisfy the Stability Pact .
To coordinate fiscal policy , however , you need to know the effects of proposed budgets .
Yet consensus does not even exist among professional economists about this .
For example , does reducing public expenditure have positive or negative effects on economic activity ?
Unlike in the past , many economists now say that the effects are positive .
If true , the implications for coordinating fiscal policies would be diametrically opposed to those implicitly assumed by the Commission .
It is astonishing that the Commission thinks itself capable of calculating , to a second or third decimal point , the effects of this or that budgetary step in a certain country in Europe ’ s economy .
The Commission , for example , is particularly opposed to the Irish policy of reducing indirect taxes rather than social contributions , because the latter are supposedly more inflationary .
But empirical evidence on this point is practically nonexistent ; the econometric model of the Commission simply assumes that this is true , and that ’ s that .
Coordination of economic policies is , in reality , a disguise for increasing the powers of the Commission and of the Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs .
These powers may allow large countries to impose their will on smaller ones .
Can you imagine anyone trying to censure Germany because it reduced its budget surplus by .4 % of GDP ?
There is also something surreal , even obscene , in Italy , with a public debt of 100 % of GDP , a deficit of 1.5 % , and asphyxiated growth , sitting in judgement on a country with a 4 % budgetary surplus , a public debt of 39 % of GDP , and annual growth over 10 % !
Ireland is being used by the Commission to flex its muscles and issue a warning .
But the real if unspoken warning is this : something must be done to limit the ambitions of the Commission and of Commissioner Solbes and bring them back to reality .
