How to Undermine an Alliance
TOKYO – 2010 marks the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Japan-United States Security Treaty .
But , instead of celebrating an agreement that has helped stabilize East Asia for a half-century , the treaty is now at serious risk , as much from indecision as from kneejerk anti-Americanism .
In August 2009 , Japan ’ s people voted for “ change . ”
The Liberal Democratic Party , which had ruled Japan for most of the post-war decades , lost parliamentary elections to the Democratic Party of Japan .
The key reason for the DPJ ’ s victory was that voters were fed up with the LDP .
That feeling had been growing in the country for some time .
In the election of 2005 , the LDP retained power only because Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi positioned the LDP as an agent of change .
But after Koizumi left office , Japan ’ s prime ministers – Shinzo Abe , Yasuo Fukuda , and Taro Aso – came and went so swiftly that our country ’ s leadership came to seem like a “ soup du jour . ”
With so little respect being shown for the LDP ’ s leaders , it is no surprise that Japanese voters lost what little patience they had left for the party and its antiquated practices .
So the DPJ took power , and formed a coalition government with two smaller parties , the Social Democratic Party ( SDP ) , and the People ’ s New Party ( PNP ) .
The DPJ ’ s only reason for being , however , is its anti-LDP stance , while the SDP has long opposed the Japan-US Security Treaty , and the PNP strongly opposes the privatizations of the Koizumi era .
That does not amount to a coherent government program , and Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama ’ s administration quickly revealed the DPJ ’ s fundamental hollowness .
But the biggest problem with Hatoyama ’ s government is that the DPJ took power without a coherent national security policy .
This should not have surprised anyone .
The DPJ was established in 1998 as a “ jambalaya ” party , consisting of people who had abandoned the LDP , including Hatoyama himself , and the former Socialist Party .
One of the DPJ ’ s major campaign pledges was “ change , ” which , at its core , meant anything but the LDP .
But should opposing the LDP really mean undoing 50 years of work on national security ?
Although that now seems to be the case , the DPJ gave only a few lines to national security in its election manifesto , thereby avoiding infighting between the party ’ s left-wingers , who oppose the Japan-US Security Treaty , and its right-wingers , who support it .
Quite a few members of Hatoyama ’ s cabinet are as much “ anti-Japan ” as they are anti-US .
For example , Yoshito Sengoku , Minister of State for Government Revitalization , was once a member of Shaseidou , a left-wing youth group that is reflexively anti-American , as was Hirotaka Akamatsu , Minister of Agriculture , Forestry , and Fisheries .
As a result , Hatoyama ’ s administration seems to be trying to emulate South Korea ’ s former Roh Moo-hyun administration , which foolishly sought to distance that country from its main defensive partner , the US .
Indeed , many in the DPJ cabinet are baby boomers influenced by the radical student groups that opposed the Japan-US Security Treaty 50 years ago .
But , as these would-be radicals play politics with Japan ’ s national security , serious tensions are mounting in our region .
China continues its military build-up , and North Korea remorselessly pursues nuclear weapons while refusing to resolve or even explain its abduction of dozens of Japanese citizens over the years .
Instead of dealing with these concrete threats to Japan , Hatoyama continues to act like an opposition politician by attacking the LDP and undermining one of the proudest achievements of LDP rule , the deep and trusting alliance with the US .
Of course , disagreements do arise in the Japan-US relationship .
A realignment of US military forces in Japan is needed , with priority given to relocating the Futenma US Marine Corps base on Okinawa , which houses half of the 47,000 US troops in Japan .
It makes no sense to have that base located in the middle of a densely populated town , making it one of the most visible and tempting targets in the world .
Hatoyama ’ s administration , however , is attempting to reverse the current plan , which the LDP administration and the US had agreed upon after long and intense discussions .
The problem is that Hatoyama , in backing away from the agreed plan , has no viable alternative to offer .
One day Hatoyama suggests relocating the base outside of Japan , perhaps to Guam , and then next he suggests only moving it outside Okinawa , giving an impression to the world of a feckless national security strategy .
In November , when US President Barack Obama visited Japan , Hatoyama uttered the words “ trust me ” in an attempt to settle the issue .
The next day , he said things that completely contradicted what he had just told Obama – stunning the US government and ordinary Japanese alike .
Since then , his administration ’ s approval rating has dropped from 80 % to 50 % .
People are discovering that Hatoyama is incapable of making – and sticking with – a decision .
To be sure , finding an alternative location for the US base is extremely difficult , as Japanese are as prone to NIMBY ( not in my backyard ) reactions as anyone else .
Moving the base to the lightly populated Henoko District in the northern part of Okinawa – a solution agreed by both governments – is the only realistic choice .
Yet Hatoyama dithers , undermining the most important pillar of peace and security in the Pacific , the Japan-US alliance .
This is not a favorable situation for Japan , the US , or , indeed , the entire world .
