AIPAC in Decline
MADRID – The American Israel Public Affairs Committee ’ s lobbying power in the United States is undeniable .
But AIPAC ’ s supposed ability to control US policy decisions is a Potemkin village myth , cultivated by friends and rivals alike .
In fact , thanks to Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu , AIPAC ’ s influence is under threat – though Netanyahu himself will be just fine .
Claims about AIPAC ’ s clout have long shaped analysis of US foreign policy .
For example , Steve Walt and John Mearsheimer , in their notorious essay “ The Israel Lobby , ” asserted that AIPAC manufactured the Iraq War .
But the reality is far less sinister : in that case , AIPAC merely surfed on the pro-invasion wave unleashed by President George W. Bush , with his Messianic urges , and Vice President Dick Cheney , a one-man war lobby .
The truth about AIPAC – that it is influential , but far from invulnerable – has recently been revealed , both to the public and to the group itself .
Having been pushed by Netanyahu into an unwinnable fight against US President Barack Obama ’ s administration over its nuclear deal with Iran , AIPAC is now crumbling under the weight of its own hubris .
In fact , AIPAC has never overcome resolute opposition from an American president , particularly in a matter of US national security .
It failed to stop Jimmy Carter from selling F-15 Eagle fighters to Saudi Arabia in 1978 , or to prevent Ronald Reagan from supplying AWACS reconnaissance planes to the Saudis three years later .
And its 1991 battle with President George H.W. Bush over the linkage of US loan guarantees for Israel with Prime Minister Yitzak Shamir ’ s support of the 1991 Madrid peace conference – one of Bush ’ s key legacies – ended in defeat .
Against this background , AIPAC should have known that its attempt , in close cooperation with Obama ’ s Republican opponents , to block the Iran nuclear deal ( one of Obama ’ s most important achievements ) would fail .
Indeed , Obama even used a tactic similar to that of George H.W. Bush to win the day .
Just as Bush openly denounced the “ thousand lobbyists ” working the halls of the US Congress against a vital national interest , Obama said in a conference call that his critics “ would be opposed to any deal with Iran , ” and called out AIPAC ’ s $ 20 million advertising campaign against the agreement .
He also put AIPAC in the same category as the Republicans who “ were responsible ” for leading the US into the Iraq war .
For AIPAC – which has traditionally relied on a broad coalition of social and political forces in the US that view Israel ’ s security as both a moral cause and a vital national interest – this is not any old defeat .
The Republican-backed crusade against a key agreement negotiated by a Democratic president , with his party ’ s overwhelming support , has threatened the bipartisan foundations of Israel ’ s cause in America .
Of course , the nuclear deal involved more than just the US and Iran .
AIPAC was opposing an international agreement that six major world powers – China , France , Germany , Russia , the United Kingdom , and the US – had already signed and that the United Nations had approved .
Even some of Israel ’ s staunchest supporters in Congress were unlikely to deal a potentially devastating blow to America ’ s international credibility , and the idea that the negotiating countries would all agree to reopen the talks to produce a “ better deal ” was sheer fantasy .
Yet that is the objective that Netanyahu set for AIPAC .
The row over the Iran deal is bound to be a watershed moment for American Jews , among whom sharp divisions have formed .
Indeed , the American Jewish Committee 2015 Survey of American Jewish Opinion reports the emergence of “ two diverging Jewish sub-communities , ” with a growing number of Jews feeling alienated by the organizations that claim to represent them .
AIPAC represents a striking anomaly in the life of American Jews .
It is increasingly identified with the Republican agenda and Israel ’ s evangelical Christian supporters , even though polls have repeatedly shown that Jews are America ’ s most liberal ethnic group .
The truth is that American Jews largely opposed the Iraq war .
They overwhelmingly vote for the Democratic Party .
They define their religion as moderate and liberal , with many upholding gay rights and abortion , both anathema to evangelical Christians .
The majority of American Jews even support the creation of a Palestinian state .
And , although they are far from united on the Iran deal , the agreement ’ s supporters outnumber its opponents .
Much of the blame for the damage that has been done – to AIPAC , American Jewish communities , and even the US political process – falls on Netanyahu .
But he is unlikely to face retribution for any of it .
On the contrary , the Obama administration has already begun the discussions it promised on upgrading Israel ’ s strategic capabilities .
As Arab countries throughout the Middle East melt down – with increasingly significant spillover effects in the West – Israel continues to represent a stable regional partner for the US .
More dangerous , Netanyahu could achieve his next goal : preventing a strategic détente between the US and Iran that would enable cooperation in resolving major regional conflicts , from Yemen to Syria .
After all , Obama ’ s victory on the nuclear deal may have been inevitable , but it was far from easy .
An odd coalition of Iranian radicals , AIPAC , the Saudi-led Sunni alliance , the Israeli government , and US politicians from both parties have already compelled Obama to promise additional sanctions on Iran for its sponsorship of terrorism .
As a result , America ’ s cold war with Iran is likely to persist .
