America ’ s Oil-Spill Nationalism
LONDON – American exceptionalism , when it runs rampant , is a tsunami to be avoided .
The oil company BP is discovering that right now .
The environmental disaster destroying seaside communities around the Gulf of Mexico and killing off marine life is a globally important tragedy .
BP has to take its sizeable share of the blame .
So , presumably , should the American companies like Transocean and Halliburton , which were part of this doomed enterprise .
But their nationality seems to have let them off the hook .
BP ’ s corporate responsibility is huge .
So , too , was that of the American companies that caused the chemical disaster at Union Carbide ’ s plant in Bhopal , India ( which killed 3,000 initially and perhaps another 15,000 in later years ) , and of those that caused the Piper Alpha oil-rig accident , which killed 167 people in the North Sea in 1988 .
Corporate sin is not unknown in the US .
Before attacking the allegedly foreign BP , American politicians might also pause for a moment to reflect on the intimate links between politics and the oil industry in the United States .
This is surely one of the biggest reasons for the lax regulation of deep-sea oil drilling .
None of this excuses BP ’ s engineering mistakes and woeful public diplomacy .
Nor would I seek to downplay the full horror of what has happened .
But it does remind us that , while the US is in many respects the most globalized society in the world , it can also be surprisingly insular and nationalistic .
Americans ’ knowledge of what happens abroad is limited , and often reduced to a cartoon-strip view of the rest of the world .
Americans identify BP as a British firm , and they know that Britain is in Europe .
They also seem to think that Europe has gone down the tubes .
Its currency crumbles like its ancient buildings .
It is a historic relic , bust but still bragging .
Europe , like BP , has its share of problems .
But we shouldn ’ t allow American politicians who do not even possess passports to write us off with the same patronizing sneer that some Europeans used to reserve for President George W. Bush ’ s administration and policies .
The European Union , for all the woes of the euro , remains the largest economy in the world .
It is bigger than America ’ s , almost twice the size of China ’ s , and between four and five times the size of India ’ s .
The EU is the largest trading block in the world , and it has coped with the rise of China in the global marketplace far better than America or Japan has .
In the decade after 1999 , China ’ s share of total global exports rose from 5.1 % to 12.4 % .
Japan ’ s share fell by four percentage points , and America ’ s fell by almost seven , from 18 % to 11.2 % , while Europe ’ s share fell by only 2.4 percentage points , from 19 % to 16.6 % .
Europe has the best environmental record of all the big powers , is the largest provider of development assistance to poor countries , and is politically stable .
Europe ’ s problem is part of what it believes to be its greatest achievement .
Europeans think that we enjoy the highest quality of life in the world , combining freedom with social solidarity .
Welfare democracy goes hand in hand with pluralism , the rule of law , and a deep-rooted civilization .
Smug self-satisfaction makes us resistant to embracing the changes necessary to maintain our standard and quality of living .
Our sense of entitlement has run far ahead of our ability to pay for it .
That is why so many European countries today face such huge public-sector deficits and , with a falling birth rate and an aging population , we are likely to find that European growth rates will lag still farther behind those of Europe ’ s competitors in the next few years .
The introduction of the euro was supposed to spur the less dynamic and competitive European economies , mostly in the south of the continent , to drive down their costs and increase their competitiveness .
Then they could converge with the more efficient and prudently managed economies , like Germany .
That didn ’ t happen .
Spain , Greece , Portugal , and Ireland , in particular , allowed the low interest rates that accompanied the euro ’ s introduction to fuel domestic booms .
Far from pushing through structural reforms , they let domestic wages and costs rip , reducing their competitiveness relative to Europe ’ s better-run economies .
For example , the gap between Spain and Germany in terms of cost efficiency is probably more than 20 % .
This is the crisis that Europe now faces .
How can we push through the reforms that will cut public spending to levels that we can afford and raise our ability to compete internationally ?
We have to extend our single market to services and energy , change unaffordably generous pension arrangements , invest more in research and development , reform our universities , and channel more money to the job-creating industries of the future , like environmental technology .
European exceptionalism – the idea that we are the best at delivering values and prosperity – is as much a problem as the American kind .
We won ’ t thrive and prosper in the future by resting on past achievements .
Welcome to the twenty-first century .
Europeans have to adjust to it , rise to its challenges , and confront competition from the emerging powers .
We can ’ t live forever in the past , magnificent as its relics may be .
