Hillary Clinton in Beijing
NEW YORK – Hillary Clinton is off to China .
The US Secretary of State ’ s decision to make her first overseas trip to Asia , particularly China , was a smart one and , if done with aplomb , could yield enormous returns for the Obama administration as it attempts to re-establish world leadership .
The fact that Clinton chose to go to Asia now , when the State Department remains unsettled – with no ambassador in Beijing , many old officials having departed or leaving , and many new appointees still unseated – attests to her determination to stake out Asia as her own area .
What she brings to this task is openness and an eagerness to construct a new architecture for Sino-US relations .
But , even as a host of other issues come into play , strengthening this most important of bi-lateral relationships requires a new , underlying common interest .
Paradoxically , the challenge of climate change is a good place to look .
The Chinese government should not underestimate Clinton ’ s and Obama ’ s commitment to this issue .
As she said in a pre-trip speech at the Asia Society in New York , “ Collaboration on clean energy and greater efficiency offers a real opportunity to deepen the overall US-Chinese relationship . ”
Publicly acknowledging that the US “ has been the largest historic emitter of greenhouse gases , ” she declared that the America “ must lead efforts to cut harmful emissions and build a lower carbon-economy . ”
China has long waited to hear that .
So Clinton has set the stage for exploring a possible joint venture with China on meeting the challenge of climate change .
The receptiveness of the Chinese will reflect the degree to which both countries advance the discussion from theory to practice , as well as stabilizing their relations .
Until now , the Chinese have taken a wait-and-see attitude , as officials waited to see who Obama would appoint to deal with China and what the new emissaries would say .
This caution is understandable .
But what seemed to be missing in China was a full recognition of just how uncertain things have become in the US , and how , with a new president , almost everything is in an unprecedented state of flux .
By being more pro-active , the Chinese might have been able to influence the policies that ultimately come from the American side .
For , when it comes to China , Clinton and Obama are yizhang baizhi , “ a sheet of blank paper . ”
With Clinton in Beijing , the time is now to begin sketching out a common US-Chinese future in a deliberate and thoughtful way .
In her talk , Clinton evoked the ancient Chinese aphorism Tongzhou Gongji : “ When on a common boat , cross the river peacefully together . ”
This alludes to an ancient episode in which soldiers from the warring states of Wu and Yue found themselves on the same boat on a river in a storm and agreed to put down their arms to make a common passage .
It is an apt metaphor for the situation in which the US and China now find themselves : on a planet in the process of being dangerously warmed by our own runaway progress .
It is inevitable and right that Clinton will bring up Tibet , human rights , and other contentious issues .
But all evidence suggests that she would like to do so in the context of a re-formatted US-China relationship that places collaboration at its heart .
The Chinese leadership thus would be gravely mistaken to treat climate change as a subsidiary issue , much less as a problem imposed on developing countries like China to impede their economic progress .
China should take up Clinton ’ s call for collaboration on climate change , which could possibly become a paradigm-shifting issue in Sino-US relations , much as the united front against the Soviet Union did in 1972 , when Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger went to China to begin normalizing relations .
As they contemplate this turning point , China ’ s leaders should be aware of how malleable US foreign policy currently is .
Although they are accustomed to experiencing the US as a dominant , often censuring “ great power , ” the reality now is that the US is beginning not only a new presidential administration , but a whole chapter in its history .
And , as Deng Xiaoping famously noted of China ’ s reforms in the 1980 ’ s , “ We are feeling our way across the river over the stones . ”
It is not that the Bush administration left Sino-US relations in such bad repair , but that the possibilities for a substantial change for the better have never been greater .
Clinton ’ s openness to new approaches , and her early trip to Beijing , provides an incomparable opportunity for Chinese leaders to help make of the fight against global climate change , which is perhaps the most important challenge to confront the world in our time , a common odyssey .
