The Trumping of American Politics
WASHINGTON , DC – As Republicans and Democrats go through the long process of selecting a nominee for next year ’ s presidential election , both parties face the same question .
Will the anti-establishment – even anti-political – mood now dominating the contest last ?
For once , Labor Day ( the first Monday in September ) was not the presidential race ’ s demarcation point : the overall themes had already been set .
Revulsion at government and traditional politicians hit the presidential contest like a tornado in the summer , flattening the campaigns of some who were once seen as serious contenders .
Among Republicans this sentiment is , of course , no surprise , given their party ’ s steady rightward drift and consistent antipathy toward President Barack Obama .
But it suited a wealthy , noisy braggart who barreled into the race attacking conventional politicians as “ stupid ” and insisting that he alone could get things done .
Those who wrote off Donald Trump as a “ buffoon ” failed to see that he has shrewdly read the Republican zeitgeist , and that he knows precisely where to stick the knife into competitors .
His depiction of former Florida governor Jeb Bush as a man of “ low energy ” has done real damage to a candidate whom many had assumed – even before he formally entered the race – would be the favorite .
“ The Donald ” ( no one has better name recognition than the former TV personality ) has pitched his appeal both to American patriotism and the country ’ s dark side .
His slogan , “ Make America Great Again , ” is aimed at those who are frustrated that the US can no longer impose its will on an increasingly confusing world .
For them , and for Trump , Obama is to blame : he doesn ’ t stand up to foreign leaders ( Binyamin Netanyahu might disagree ) ; he withdrew from Iraq too soon ( though the timetable was set by his Republican predecessor ) ; he even “ apologizes ” for America .
Trump plays to America ’ s persistent veins of racism and nativism : he vows somehow to round up and deport some 11 million undocumented aliens and fortify America ’ s border with Mexico by building a wall – paid for by Mexico .
His striking narcissism ( everything he does is “ outstanding , great , terrific , the best ” ) is both his trademark and his policy .
Around mid-August , as Trump ’ s poll numbers rose even after public statements that would have brought down mere mortal candidates , it dawned on the pundits that he was no summer infatuation .
It became evident that he might win the first nominating contest , the Iowa caucuses , and that he was leading in the second , New Hampshire , and other states .
It was no longer laughable to say that he could be the Republican nominee .
But the “ anti-system ” mood of this election campaign is not confined to the Republicans .
Bernie Sanders the socialist and Donald Trump the plutocrat are addressing much the same impulse .
Speaking in clear , declarative sentences , Sanders sets forth an idealistic conception of government policy that appeals to a great many people on the growing left of the Democratic Party .
By contrast , Jeb Bush and the Democrats ’ presumed nominee , Hillary Clinton , embody traditional politics .
Both come across as focus-grouped , packaged , and cautious , whereas Trump and Sanders are seen by their followers as “ telling it like it is . ”
Sanders appeals to the popular frustration with the compromises made by America ’ s leaders , including the centrist Bill Clinton .
Hillary Clinton , trying to straddle the divide between the two wings of the Democratic Party , is increasingly leaning to the left as Sanders draws enormous crowds , something she has yet to accomplish .
Moreover , her campaign is struggling to escape the quagmire produced by revelations that she conducted official business on a private email server during her tenure as Obama ’ s Secretary of State .
Meanwhile , Trump ’ s appeal among Republicans is across the board : moderates and conservatives , college-educated , Evangelicals , men and women .
It also includes white supremacists : in June Trump was endorsed by The Daily Stormer , America ’ s largest neo-Nazi “ news ” website .
When two far-right activists in Boston beat a homeless Latino man , with one saying that they had acted in Trump ’ s name , the candidate commented that some of his followers are “ passionate . ”
A poll of Trump supporters found that 66 % believe that Obama is a Muslim , and 61 % that he was not born in the US ( a claim that Trump continued to trumpet long after it had been disproved ) .
Trump ’ s closest Republican rival , Ben Carson , a renowned neurosurgeon , also has no political experience and says outlandish things .
But Carson says them quietly , which may be why his favorability rating in Iowa is higher than that of his Republican competitors ( pulling even with Trump in one poll ) .
Carson has said , for example , that people enter prison as heterosexuals and come out gay ; that America is like Nazi Germany in suppressing ideas and opponents ; and that the president need not enforce the Supreme Court ’ s recent landmark decision legalizing gay marriage .
Trump and Carson , along with two other candidates running as political outsiders – Ted Cruz , a senator from Texas , and former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina – currently account for around 60 % of support among Iowa Republicans .
Bush and the rest of the field , including Rand Paul , Scott Walker , and Marco Rubio – all one-time darlings of the political press – are floundering .
To recover ground , some , especially Walker , have fallen into the trap of trying to out-Trump Trump .
But there ’ s only one Trump , and his candidacy is causing conniptions on the part of Republican Party officials , particularly given his campaign ’ s open hostility toward Latinos .
Following Obama ’ s re-election , in 2012 , Republican leaders commissioned a study that showed that the party ’ s nominee will have to win more Latino votes than ever to win the White House .
There is scant chance of that if Trump is the party ’ s standard-bearer .
So far , Trump has defied the laws of political gravity .
But it remains possible that his candidacy will crash as some of his rivals drop out and leave their supporters ( and wealthy backers ) to crystallize around someone they see as a more viable alternative .
That would be a relief to Republican Party leaders , who recently obtained Trump ’ s vow ( easily undone ) not to mount an independent presidential campaign should he fail to win the party ’ s nomination .
In the meantime , both party establishments have reason to be nervous .
With Sanders now polling well ahead of Clinton in New Hampshire , serious commentators have begun speculating that Americans will ultimately be asked to choose between Sanders and Trump .
