Floating Currencies are the Only Way
NEW HAVEN : Asia ’ s leaders have finished their meeting in Kuala Lumpur with all sorts of promises .
It is to be hoped that all have concluded , in the wake of a year of crisis , that fixed but adjustable exchange rates are a bad idea .
The only viable regimes , indeed , in our globalized financial world are floating exchange rates and irretrievably fixed rates .
Most developing , emerging , and transition economies should henceforth have currencies with floating rates .
East Asia ’ s victims of currency crises were , like most other nations , on fixed rates - pegged to the dollar , other major hard currencies , or baskets of currencies .
The central bank promised to redeem its own currency on demand by any holders , foreign or domestic , in prescribed amounts of hard currencies .
Often these pegs were ranges rather than precise values , and in many cases the midpoint of the bracket moved over time at a prescribed speed .
These pegged rates were not immutable .
Central banks could adjust them or abandon them at any time , violating their solemn promises .
Naturally , market participants speculate on these possibilities .
Worse , they speculate on what other currency holders will think .
This is the inherent source of the system ’ s instability .
Although everyone seems surprised when currency crises occur , they are not surprising and happen at one time or another to almost all fixed-exchange-rate currencies .
Recently , they have hit European countries ( the United Kingdom , Italy , Spain , Sweden , Finland ) , Latin America ( notably Mexico in 1994 ) , Russia and other transition economies , as well as Asia ’ s tigers .
Since 1973 exchange rates among the world ’ s three major currencies - the dollar , D-mark , and yen - have floated in free currency markets without crises .
A recent example is the gradual 50 % depreciation of the yen against the dollar .
Japan 's macroeconomic stagnation , of which the fall in the market value of the yen is one symptom , is a disaster , but it is not a currency crisis like those of its neighbors .
Floating rates worked for the Big Three currencies , forestalling traumatic crises for other currencies too .
Of course , currency values go up and down , people speculate on them , and often the fluctuations are quite unpleasant for the economies affected .
But the trauma of a discrete regime change , a default of solemn official commitments , and the bandwagon momentum these events generate are avoided by the use of floating rates .
Foreign lenders who underestimated the risk of short-term loans to Indonesia and Korea would have charged higher risk premiums in a floating-rate world .
Those sources of distrust in Asian economic and financial prospects , some fundamental and some speculative , that triggered the Asian crises would likewise have pushed down the exchange rates had they been floating , but surely not nearly as far as they plunged in the free fall following the collapse of fixed rates .
What explains the prevalence of fixed-rate regimes outside the hard currency countries ?
Through most of the period since 1945 , fixed rates were protected by capital controls and exchange restrictions .
The IMF sought to make currencies convertible in commercial transactions but tolerated regulations of capital account transactions .
Lately , economies at all stages of development were pressured by the world financial establishments - national and international , official and private -- to liberalize financial markets and make their currencies fully convertible .
In many ways these developments were advantageous , but they made currencies more vulnerable and fixed exchange rates more problematic .
Yet the same authorities pressing for financial integration maintained the pressure for fixed exchange rates .
A fixed rate was seen as a " nominal anchor " against inflation , forcing disciplined monetary and fiscal policies .
Success in maintaining a fixed rate was touted as an attraction to foreign investors .
Today these arguments ring hollow .
Recent short-term bank lending from Tokyo , New York , Frankfurt , and London to East Asian banks and businesses are an example of how financial integration and deregulation made fixed exchange rates vulnerable .
Such loans would have been unacceptable in a floating rate regime , because they threatened to move the exchange rate too far for the health of the economies .
Even with floating rates central banks will need hard currency reserves , and will at times need to use them in currency markets .
Such interventions are called " dirty floating , " but they are an essential tool of monetary policy .
Every dollar of the short-term debt of , say , a Korean bank is a claim on the Korean central bank 's dollar reserves , a claim whose origins are beyond the central bank 's control .
In the East Asian currency crises , the tough macro policies required by the IMF and the U.S. Treasury were intended to restore the confidence of international lenders and investors .
They failed to do so , and indeed the precipitous recessions that ensued had the opposite effect .
These countries had not been guilty of irresponsible and inflationary fiscal and monetary policies , for which austerity is the natural punishment and cure .
If the region ’ s currencies were overvalued , inviting speculation on devaluations , it was more the fault of Japan 's stagnation and the depreciation of the yen than of their own policies .
Structural reforms , to root out corruption and " crony capitalism , " were doubtless overdue .
But these conditions were not new .
They had long existed with remarkable economic progress and with stable currencies .
How could they suddenly be the cause of currency panic ?
Whatever the exchange rate regime , fixed or floating , which a country adopts it is surely unwise to promote or even allow net import of foreign capital in such transient liquid form as developing markets have done over the course of this decade .
Governments and central banks should use their powers to steer the import of foreign capital into direct fixed investment , equity , and to a limited extent long-term hard-currency debt .
