Getting Corruption Right
NEW YORK – I just returned from India , where I was lecturing to the Indian Parliament in the same hall where US President Barack Obama had recently spoken .
The country was racked by scandal .
A gigantic , ministerial-level scam in the mobile-telephone sector had siphoned off many billions of dollars to a corrupt politician .
But several of the MPs had also been taken aback on discovering that when Obama spoke to them , he read from an “ invisible ” teleprompter .
This had misled his audience into thinking that he was speaking extemporaneously , a skill that is highly regarded in India .
Both episodes were seen as a form of corruption : one involved money , the other deception .
The two transgressions are obviously not equal in moral turpitude .
But the Obama episode illustrates an important cross-cultural difference in assessing how corrupt a society is .
Transparency International and occasionally the World Bank like to rank countries by their degree of corruption , with the media then ceaselessly citing where each country stands .
But cultural differences between countries undermine the legitimacy of such rankings – which are , after all , based on surveys of the public .
What Obama was doing was a common enough practice in the United States ( though one might expect better from an orator of his ability ) ; it was not so in India , where such a technique is , indeed , regarded as reprehensible .
India certainly has corruption , like almost every other country .
But India also has a culture in which people commonly assume that everyone in public life is corrupt unless they prove otherwise .
Even a blind man will tell Transparency International : “ I saw him take a bribe with my own eyes . ”
Indeed , a distinguished Indian bureaucrat , a man of unimpeachable character , once told me that his mother had told him : “ I believe you are not corrupt only because you are my son ! ”
So , if you ask Indians whether their governance is marked by widespread corruption , they will answer with gusto : yes !
But their exuberance biases India ’ s global ranking relative to more empirically minded countries .
A similar bias arises from the occasional tendency to view political patronage elsewhere as being more corrupt than the same practices at home .
For example , when the East Asian financial crisis broke out , there followed a systematic attempt to pin the blame on the affected countries : “ crony capitalism ” allegedly had somehow crippled their economies !
In other words , the acquaintances and benefactors of the East Asian leaders were “ cronies , ” whereas those of US leaders were “ friends ” ?
In fact , it was clear that the culprits were the International Monetary Fund and the US Treasury , which had encouraged a shift to capital-account convertibility without understanding that the case for free capital flows was not symmetrical with the case for free trade .
But where substantial corruption can unambiguously be found , as it often can , one must recognize that it is not a cultural given .
On the contrary , often it is the result of policies that have fed it .
India in the 1950 ’ s had a civil service , and a political class , that were the envy of the world .
If that seems shocking today , the loss of virtue must be traced to the all-pervasive “ permit raj , ” with its licensing requirements to import , produce , and invest , which grew to gargantuan proportions .
High-level bureaucrats quickly discovered that licenses could be bartered for favors , while politicians saw in the system the means to help important financial backers .
Once the system had taken root , corruption percolated downward , from senior bureaucrats and politicians , who could be bribed do what they were not supposed to do , to lower-level bureaucrats , who would not do what there were supposed to do unless bribed .
Clerks would not bring out files , or get you your birth certificate or land title , unless you greased their palms .
But if policies can create corruption , it is equally true that the cost of corruption will vary with the specific policies .
The cost of corruption has been particularly high in India and Indonesia , where policies created monopolies that earned scarcity rents , which were then allocated to officials ’ family members .
Such “ rent-creating ” corruption is quite expensive and corrosive of growth .
By contrast , in China , the corruption has largely been of the “ profit-sharing ” variety , whereby family members are given a stake in the enterprise so that their earnings increase as profits increase – a type of corruption that promotes growth .
In the long run , of course , both types of corruption are corrosive of the respect and trust that good governance requires , which can undermine economic performance in its own right .
But that does not absolve us of the responsibility to define corruption properly – and to acknowledge obvious and important cultural differences in how it is understood .
