Economic Crisis and Regional Integration
PRINCETON – Everyone now knows that we are in the worst economic crisis since the 1930 ’ s .
The protectionist responses are sadly familiar : protests against foreign workers , demands for trade protection , and a financial nationalism that seeks to limit the flow of money across national frontiers .
In the 1930 ’ s , however , economic nationalism was not the only show in town .
Many people started to think of regional integration as the answer to depression .
But the sort of integration that occurs in times of economic crisis is often destructive .
The most unattractive versions of 1930 ’ s regionalism came from Germany and Japan , and represented nothing less than a practical extension of their power over vulnerable neighbors , which were forced into trade and financial dependence on the basis of Germany ’ s Grosswirtschaftsraum or its Japanese equivalent , the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere .
As a consequence of the horrors of the 1930 ’ s , there remains substantial suspicion of concepts like “ Greater East Asia . ”
In the second half of the twentieth century , Europe had the chance to build a much more benevolent form of regionalism .
But today , the European Union is stymied by having squandered the chance to build stronger institutions when times were better and tempers less strained .
The EU is suffering from a number of problems that have been widely discussed for many years , but never seemed to be that urgent .
Suddenly , in the face of the economic crisis , these problems have become major sources of political instability .
There is a common monetary policy in the euro-zone countries , and an integrated capital market with financial institutions that are active across national frontiers .
But banks are regulated and supervised nationally – as they must be , because any rescue in the event of a large bank failure becomes a fiscal issue , with the cost borne by taxpayers in individual states rather than by the EU as a whole .
But this set-up makes little sense in the face of the economic logic of European integration .
The second obvious problem is the smallness of the EU ’ s budget relative to those of the member states .
The vast part of government activity takes place on a national level .
But different governments have different degrees of fiscal room for maneuver .
Italian , Greek , or Portuguese public debt is so high that any attempt to use fiscal spending as part of a strategy to combat the economic crisis is doomed to fail .
But Ireland , with previously modest deficit and debt levels , also suddenly and unexpectedly faces the same kind of issue , owing to the government ’ s need to take over private debt from the banking sector .
France and Germany , by contrast , have an inherently strong fiscal position .
So only the EU ’ s strongest countries can really do anything against the sharply worsening recession .
Moreover , the whole idea of Keynesian demand stimulus was developed , again in the 1930 ’ s , in the context of self-contained national economies .
Keynesians filled up the warm water of fiscal stimulus in a national bathtub .
When the national bathtub has holes , and other people benefit from the warmth , the exercise loses its attraction .
In any case , it only ever worked for the larger states .
The smaller states could not do Keynesianism in a hand basin .
There are ways to fix both the banking and the fiscal problem .
Control of banking is the simplest .
The European Central Bank clearly has the technical and analytical capacity to take on general supervision of European banks , using the member central banks as information conduits .
The fiscal problem could be dealt with by issuing generally guaranteed European bonds , which might be a temporary measure , restricted to the financial emergency .
Both bank regulation and fiscal policy require a great deal more Europeanization .
The most obvious way is to use existing mechanisms and institutions , in particular the ECB or the European Commission .
The difficulty with such a suggestion is that it would imply a relative weakening of the national states , including the largest , Germany and France .
They would most likely resist , and try to stay in their own bathtubs .
Indeed , the crisis has turned France and Germany once more into the key players of the European process .
But the more the crisis affects them , the more they think largely in national terms .
From the perspective of Berlin or Paris , there should be no systematic Europeanization .
Instead , the large states are now promoting informal groupings to look for worldwide solutions .
Overtones of the 1930 ’ s are amplified , clearly exposing the Union ’ s predicament , because of an odd coincidence : the Czech Republic now holds the EU ’ s rotating presidency .
The Czechs , probably the people with the most vivid historical memory of the bad regionalism of the 1930 ’ s , succeeded France , the European country that today is the least constrained in asserting its national interest .
The clash of two visions of Europe is eroding the political stability of an area that once represented the best model and greatest hope for benign regionalism .
