Hard Financial Questions about Soft Development Money
Achieving the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ’ s ) by 2015 is a tremendous challenge facing the international community , and there is widespread agreement that additional external aid is required to meet it .
So the question now is not whether to increase aid , but how best to finance it .
The search for additional and more stable funding to meet the MDG ’ s has led to various proposals for innovative financing mechanisms and debt relief , in particular by British Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown .
But the broad range of proposed schemes to bolster resources for development assistance raises hard questions about the appropriate balance between objective needs and sound and effective financing .
Donors as well as recipients must ensure consistency between financing and absorptive capacity .
They must also ensure that additional official financing and debt relief will not distort incentives or create moral hazard .
New money should go to good performers , not just to those who are experiencing debt distress .
In addition to these issues , financing proposals to achieve the MDG ’ s should be discussed from a central banker ’ s perspective .
The best solutions include sufficient increases in rich countries ’ foreign aid allocations and more ambitious trade liberalization .
But such policies seem politically untenable in the short term , even though – according to the World Bank ’ s estimation – an appropriate conclusion of the current trade round under the auspices of the World Trade Organization could contribute $ 350 billion a year to developing countries by 2015 .
Similarly , when it comes to increasing foreign-aid budgets , politicians want solutions that are not “ felt ” by taxpayers ( that is , voters ) and that can remain outside of national budgets .
However , opaque solutions designed to avoid critical public scrutiny do not seem particularly democratic .
“ Innovative ” financing solutions might also undermine the clear assignment of responsibilities for raising and using public money .
Indeed , the term “ innovative financing mechanism ” conjures the idea that there is an easy way to meet the MDG ’ s .
But , in the end , there are only three ways to secure additional financing for development aid or debt relief : higher taxes , increased indebtedness ( that is , higher taxes for future generations ) , and / or monetary expansion .
One proposal calls for taxing national and international financial transactions . Others call for allocating Special Drawing Rights ( SDR ’ s ) from the IMF , or for using the IMF ’ s gold resources .
But none of them appears desirable .
To be effective , any tax on financial transactions would have to be implemented on a global scale , which currently does not seem realistic .
Moreover , taxation would increase costs ( passed on to borrowers ) and reduce the volume of transactions , thereby fueling market volatility amid decreasing liquidity .
Allocating new SDR ’ s also is inappropriate .
Above all , SDR ’ s represent liquidity and can be allocated only if and when there is a “ global need , ” which would currently be difficult to prove given highly liquid and “ easy ” international capital-market conditions .
Even if a “ global need ” were recognized , SDR ’ s , as a component of countries ’ official foreign-exchange reserves , should not be available for budgetary spending .
Financing development aid with SDR ’ s – or even to replace budget-financed aid with such allocations – is comparable to financing budget deficits with central bank money .
In any case , new SDR allocations require the support of 85 % of votes within the IMF ’ s board , which appears unachievable in the foreseeable future , as major shareholders are opposed .
Even the special one-time issuance of SDR ’ s , agreed upon in 1997 to ensure that all Fund members receive an “ equitable ” share of cumulative SDR allocations , has still not been activated , owing to insurmountable opposition .
Finally , the proposed “ better use ” of the IMF ’ s gold holdings to finance the costs of debt relief seeks to raise up to $ 8 billion .
At the current market price , this would require selling about a quarter of the Fund ’ s holdings of 103.4 million fine ounces .
However , these reserves represent an important “ hidden ” asset that lends strength to the Fund ’ s balance sheet .
The IMF ’ s creditors consider it a necessary safeguard against increased risks in the Fund ’ s credit portolio .
This is because the Fund has experienced exceptionally high access and prolonged use of its resources by a few large economies in the last decade .
Moreover , the IMF ’ s share in crisis countries ’ total external debt has reached unprecedented and systemically problematic levels .
As a result of both tendencies , there is a high concentration of credits on a few large borrowers .
To use IMF gold for further debt relief in the face of increased risk threatens the Fund ’ s financial integrity and contradicts the recent decision to increase the IMF ’ s precautionary balances .
Development aid has to be financed in “ real terms , ” or in a reputable manner , not by spending central bank money or by jeopardizing the IMF ’ s financial integrity .
Aid should preferably be financed out of donor countries ’ national budgets in a transparent , democratically accountable way .
“ Innovative ” must not become a euphemism for non-transparent , ineffective , or unsound .
