From Christian Democracy to Muslim Democracy ?
BUDAPEST – This summer , Turkey ’ s ruling Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) narrowly escaped being banned by the country ’ s constitutional court .
State prosecutors alleged that the party was trying to “ Islamicize ” the country and ultimately introduce theocracy .
Not only did AKP supporters celebrate after the decision , but those in the West who view it as a prototype “ Muslim Democratic ” party also breathed a sigh of relief .
The clear model for a moderately religious party – one committed to the rules of the democratic game – are the Christian Democratic parties of Western Europe and , to a lesser extent , Latin America .
Yet opponents of the idea of “ Muslim democracy ” argue that European Catholics only turned to democracy under orders from the Vatican , and that since Muslims do not have anything like a Church hierarchy , Christian Democracy is an irrelevant example .
But history shows that political entrepreneurs and liberalizing Catholic intellectuals were crucial to the creation of Christian Democracy .
This suggests that Muslim reformers , given the right circumstances , might be similarly capable of bringing about Muslim democracy .
Christian Democratic parties first emerged in Belgium and Germany toward the end of the nineteenth century as narrowly focused Catholic interest groups .
The Vatican initially regarded them with suspicion , perceiving parties participating in elections and parliamentary horse-trading as signs of “ modernism . ”
A breakthrough came with the Italian Popular Party ’ s founding in 1919 .
Its leader , Don Luigi Sturzo , wanted it to appeal to tutti i liberi e forti – all free and strong men .
The Vatican , having prohibited Italian Catholics from participating in the political life of newly united Italy for almost sixty years , lifted its ban .
But Mussolini soon outlawed the Popolari ; in any event , the Vatican had had a strained relationship with the party and appeared more comfortable supporting pro-Catholic authoritarian regimes in countries like Austria and Portugal .
But while Christian Democracy got nowhere politically between the World Wars , momentous changes were initiated in Catholic thought .
In particular , the French Catholic thinker Jacques Maritain developed arguments as to why Christians should embrace democracy and human rights .
During the 1920 ’ s , Maritain was close to the far-right Action Française .
But the Pope condemned the movement in 1926 for essentially being a group of faithless Catholics more interested in authoritarian nationalism than Christianity .
Maritain accepted the Pope ’ s verdict and began a remarkable ideological journey toward democracy .
He criticized France ’ s attempts to appear as a modern crusader , incurring the wrath of Catholics in the United States in particular .
More importantly , he began to recast some of Aristotle ’ s teachings and medieval natural law doctrines to arrive at a conception of human rights .
He also drew on the philosophy of “ personalism , ” which was highly fashionable in the 1930 ’ s , as it sought a middle way between individualist liberalism and communitarian socialism , and insisted that “ persons ” always had a spiritual dimension that materialistic liberalism supposedly failed to acknowledge .
After the fall of France , Maritain decided to remain in the US , where he happened to find himself after a lecture tour ( the Gestapo searched his house outside Paris in vain ) .
He authored pamphlets on the reconciliation of Christianity and democracy , which Allied bombers dropped over Europe , and he never tired of stressing that the Christian origins of America ’ s flourishing democracy had influenced him .
Maritain also insisted that Christians , while they should take into account religious precepts , had to act as citizens first .
Acceptance of pluralism and tolerance were thus central to his vision and forbade any one-to-one translation of religion into political life . He was in fact rather skeptical of exclusively Christian parties .
Maritain participated in the drafting of the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights , and the Second Vatican Council eventually approved many of the ideas that he had been propounding since the 1930 ’ s .
He also influenced the Christian Democratic parties that governed after 1945 in Germany , Italy , the Benelux countries , and , to a lesser extent , France , and which consolidated not only democracy , but also built strong welfare states in line with Catholic social doctrine .
While still emphasizing family values and traditional morality , they lost the whiff of incense that had clung to the Christian Democratic parties at the beginning of the century – by the 1970 ’ s , they even began to stress that one didn ’ t have to be a believer to join .
Maritain ’ s example disproves the claim that the analogy between Christian and Muslim democracy fails .
It wasn ’ t the Vatican that took the lead in creating Christian Democracy – it was innovative philosophers like Maritain ( who never served in the Church hierarchy , though he was briefly French ambassador to the Vatican ) and political entrepreneurs like Sturzo ( a simple Sicilian priest ) .
Of course , Muslim democracy will not be brought about by intellectuals alone .
After all , Christian Democracy ’ s success is also explained by its strongly anti-communist stance during the Cold War – and , in Italy , by the benefits of widespread corruption .
Nevertheless , some body of thought that makes democracy attractive for believers – and reassures non-believers that the faithful have accepted pluralism – had to be available . True , some of the philosophies used in the European Catholic transition to democracy – such as personalism – were rather nebulous , although it was probably their vagueness that helped to bring as many believers as possible on board .
But the point remains that ideas matter .
So the creation of a liberalized Islam by self-consciously moderate and democratic Muslim intellectuals is crucial .
