Finally Some Good Political News from Russia and Ukraine
CAMBRIDGE : Amazing but true : there is , at long last , good political news from Russia and Ukraine .
Both countries held elections recently ( for President in Ukraine , and parliament in Russia ) ; both produced centrist governments .
Even more remarkable , for the first time , the executive branch in each country is poised to find parliamentary support for its governmental program .
This could be the beginning of effective democratic rule for the first time in these countries .
Democratic rule , in turn , could give a decisive boost to true economic reform .
We must acknowledge , of course , that the political situation in both countries remains far from ideal .
Both the Presidential elections in Ukraine and the Parliamentary elections in Russia were not quite fair and free .
In both countries , the presidential administrations used their heavy muscle to dominate television , thereby limiting the ability of opposition candidates to make their case to the public .
Ukraine ’ s President Leonid Kuchma won re-election despite the misery of a decade of economic paralysis and widespread corruption .
President Boris Yeltsin ’ s favored parties won strong support in the Duma in large part because of the popularity of the brutal war that Russia is waging in Chechnya .
The good news , nonetheless , dominates the bad news .
Immediately after the elections , an interesting thing happened in both countries .
In Ukraine , a newly re-elected President Kuchma had to nominate a new Prime Minister for approval by the parliament .
He first re-nominated the existing , lackluster Prime Minister , who was justifiably voted down by the Parliament .
The President then put forward for Prime Minister an impressive reformer , Central Bank Governor Viktor Yushchenko .
Remarkably , Yushchenko won strong backing in the parliament , receiving confirmation by a vote of 296 deputies out of 450 members .
Yushchenko immediately declared his intention to pursue privatization , land reform , and a consolidation of bloated state finances .
The omens are good .
In Russia , Prime Minister Vladimir Putin , though a dour and tough-talking state security officer and former spy in East Germany , who has masterminded the renewed Chechen war , was also impressive in democratic politics following the Duma elections .
Immediately after the Duma elections , in which the two main Kremlin-backed parties in combination far exceeded the communist party vote , Prime Minister Putin went to the Duma to forge a parliamentary majority for the government ’ s program .
This was a deft move , and a promising one for future reforms , especially since many of the leading economic reformers are working closely with Putin .
This utterly normal scene of a Prime Minister winning Parliamentary support is actually extraordinary in the context of Russia and Ukraine .
In both countries , the President and executive branch ( headed by a Prime Minister selected by the President ) have basically waged war with Parliament during most of the post-Soviet era since 1991 .
Both countries adopted mixed Presidential – Parliamentary systems , with strong presidential roles .
Such systems are always complicated ( look at the tensions that affected France at various points of so-called “ cohabitation , ” when President and Parliament were headed by different parties ) , but the systems were especially problematic in post-Soviet Russia and Ukraine , where democratic traditions were non-existent .
In both countries , the Parliaments were hostile to the Presidents , and the Presidents tried to ride roughshod over the Parliaments , ruling by decree and essentially ignoring hostile parliaments .
In both countries , ongoing Presidential – Parliamentary feuding led to utter political stalemate for years , and even to violent confrontation in Russia in October 1993 .
In all this , the West played an unhelpful role .
The International Monetary Fund would ride into Kiev or Moscow , negotiate with the Government over the terms of a loan , and then expect the Government to impose the IMF ’ s conditions on the Parliament .
The IMF ’ s idea , of course , was to strengthen the hand of the reformers , but the IMF ’ s crude way of imposing its conditions more often led to backlash by the parliament , and to a degeneration of the democratic process .
Governments treated their parliaments as potential barriers to IMF plans , and therefore as nuisances to be evaded , not places to create coalitions of national political support .
Both countries now may be grasping for a democratic way out of crisis , but both still face high hurdles .
The Ukrainian Government is broke , and will most likely have to default , or to reschedule its foreign debts , or to borrow new funds to repay the old , in 2000 .
The West should certainly not force Ukraine into an intense and destabilizing austerity program in a misguided attempt to collect on debt service .
Russia is not only strapped for cash but also at war , and war can always unleash demons , and has already unleashed terrible violence and massive civilian death .
In addition , Russia will also face new and crucial Presidential elections next summer .
In both Russia and Ukraine , the West should back off from imposing programs made in Washington , and should certainly refrain from demanding excessive and self-defeating austerity .
Instead , the West should encourage governments to work with their parliaments to find their way towards more representative rule .
History has shown that legitimate , democratic governments can do wonders in pushing tough and needed social and economic reforms .
