Fixing the IMF and the World Bank
CAMBRIDGE : As usual , the IMF and World Bank congratulated themselves at their annual meeting in Washington , just concluded .
Beneath the self-congratulation , however , was the widespread feeling that both institutions are failing badly , and need fundamental reform .
Some reforms – if only partial – are already in sight .
Poor countries received a commitment for much deeper debt cancellation .
President Clinton , indeed , announced 100 % cancellation of debts owed to the U.S. by the poorest countries .
The IMF also promised it would care more about poverty ( ! ) .
And rich countries agreed to meet more regularly with the poorer countries in a new group called the G-20 : which includes eight rich countries , ten developing countries ( mainly the big ones , such as Brazil , China , India , and South Africa ) , plus a representative of the IMF / World Bank and one from the European Union .
The main order of business of the G-20 , which will meet at the level of finance ministers in Berlin in December , should be the fundamental repair of international institutions .
Most of these institutions are doing the wrong job , and all of them need fixing .
Take the IMF .
It mangled and mishandled Russia very badly .
It has performed poorly in Africa for twenty years ( admitted , in effect , by its " new " willingness to focus on poverty ) .
It failed to stop financial crises in world markets , which have been worse than ever in the past three years .
Moreover , though it takes credit for " recovery " in East Asia , the truth is that Asia 's collapse in 1997 had a great deal to do with IMF mismanagement in the first place , since the IMF helped to stoke financial panic .
The IMF should be given little credit for renewed economic growth in East Asia , since East Asia grew for decades without much IMF help !
The real lesson about the IMF is simple .
The IMF is trying to run much of the world , and of course it can 't do that effectively .
It has programs in more than 60 countries , and virtually dictates economic policies ( or tries to ) in these countries .
This is an impossible and foolish task .
The IMF has no special expertise in the transition societies of the former communist world , or in African economic development .
It has failed miserably in those places .
It is time that the IMF returns to its basic and needed function : monitoring the international monetary system , and perhaps making a few emergency loans .
There should be five IMF programs per year , not fifty .
The situation with the World Bank is no better .
It , too , is trying to run the world , or at least the poorest part of the world .
It , too , is remarkably overextended .
No single institution can hope to define the " right " strategy for economic development .
Yes , all countries need vigorous private-sector led growth as well as social programs , but there are many ways to reach those goals .
And much of World Bank project lending can be done by the private sector .
The World Bank should be cut back sharply – to focus on the generation of systematic data ; to support new scientific efforts directed at poor-country problems ( like the development of vaccines for malaria ) ; and to study long-term global issues , like man-made climate change .
Perhaps the country lending activities of the World Bank should be almost completely eliminated , with the private sector , and the regional development banks such as the Asian Development Bank and Inter-American Development Bank , picking up the slack .
Other institutions , to the contrary , need a boost in their budgets and their international roles .
This applies to institutions charged with international public health – like the World Health Organization , UNICEF , and the United Nations AIDS Program .
Similarly , the United Nations Development Program , which monitors basic human development conditions around the world , needs an increased mandate .
In any event , these are the kinds of issues that the G-20 should urgently explore .
When the G-20 meets later this Fall , it should therefore demand an independent and thorough review of the IMF and the World Bank , as well as other international agencies .
The review should be led by independent experts from developing and developed countries .
This review panel should be encouraged to make very bold recommendations .
We need international institutions that work .
Without a fundamental fix-up of the IMF and World Bank and other key institutions , the cause of international development will continue to suffer .
