Higher Education Misconceived
CAMBRIDGE – Ever since economists revealed how much universities contribute to economic growth , politicians have paid close attention to higher education .
In doing so , however , they often misconceive universities ’ role in ways that undermine their policies .
For example , US President Barack Obama has repeatedly stressed the need to increase the percentage of young Americans earning a college degree .
This is undoubtedly a worthwhile aim that can contribute to national prosperity and help young people realize the American Dream .
Yet economists who have studied the relationship between education and economic growth confirm what common sense suggests : the number of college degrees is not nearly as important as how well students develop cognitive skills , such as critical thinking and problem-solving ability .
Failure to recognize this point can have significant consequences .
As countries embrace mass higher education , the cost of maintaining universities increases dramatically relative to an elite system .
Given that governments have many other programs to support – and that people resist higher taxes – finding the money to pay for such an effort becomes increasingly difficult .
Universities must therefore try to provide a quality education to more students while spending as little money as possible .
Accomplishing all three objectives – quality , quantity , and cost efficiency – simultaneously is difficult , and the likelihood of compromise is great .
With graduation rates and government spending easy to calculate , educational quality , which is difficult to measure , is likely to be the objective that slips .
No one need know – and thus no one can be held accountable – when graduation rates rise but the hoped-for economic benefits fail to materialize .
A second misconception by policymakers is that the only important benefit from a college education is the opportunity that it gives graduates to find a middle-class job and contribute to economic growth and prosperity .
But , while this contribution is important , it is not the only one that matters .
Apart from finding a first job , college graduates seem to adapt more easily than those with only a high school degree as the economy evolves and labor-market needs change .
They also tend to vote at higher rates , engage in more civic activities , commit fewer crimes , educate their children better , and get sick less frequently by adopting healthier lifestyles .
Researchers estimate that these additional benefits are worth even more than the added lifetime income from a college degree .
If policymakers overlook them , they run the risk of encouraging quicker , cheaper forms of education that will do far less to serve either students or society .
These misconceptions are clearly evident in government leaders ’ speeches over the past two decades .
As former President Bill Clinton remarked in his State of the Union address in 1994 : “ [ W ] e measure every school by one high standard : Are our children learning what they need to know to compete and win in the global economy ? ”
Since then , George W. Bush and Obama have echoed similar sentiments when speaking about their educational-policy goals .
The same attitudes are manifest in other countries as well .
A telling example is the shift in jurisdiction over British universities since 1992 from the Department of Education and Science to the Department for Education and Employment , and , in 2009 , to a new Department for Business , Innovation , and Skills .
This shrunken conception of the role of higher learning is unprecedented .
It ignores what were long regarded as the most essential aims of education : strengthening students ’ moral character and preparing them to be active , informed citizens .
In light of this tradition , the recent shift to material objectives comes as something of a surprise .
John Maynard Keynes prophesied in the 1920 ’ s that as countries grew wealthier , people ’ s preoccupation with money and possessions would diminish .
Instead , just the opposite has occurred .
Granted , democratic political leaders must be responsive to the people , and money and jobs are clearly on people ’ s minds .
According to a recent survey , among first-year university students in the United States in 2012 , 88 % cited getting a better job as an important reason for attending college , and 81 % listed “ being very well off financially ” as an “ essential ” or “ very important ” goal .
But it is also true that 82.5 % of these freshmen sought “ to learn more about things that interest me ” as an important reason for attending college , and 73 % wanted “ to gain a general education and appreciation of ideas . ”
Among the objectives they considered “ essential ” or “ very important , ” 51 % mentioned “ improving my understanding of other countries and cultures , ” 45.6 % cited “ developing a meaningful philosophy of life , ” and substantial fractions listed such goals as “ becoming a community leader , ” “ helping to promote racial understanding , ” and “ becoming involved in programs to clean up the environment . ”
In the end , surveys suggest that what people want most is not wealth so much as happiness and the satisfaction that comes from a full and meaningful life .
Money helps , but so do other things , such as close human relationships , acts of kindness , absorbing interests , and the chance to live in a free , ethical , and well-governed democratic society .
A stagnant economy and lack of opportunity are undoubtedly problems , but so are low voting rates , civic apathy , widespread disregard for ethical standards , and indifference to art , music , literature , and ideas .
It is the responsibility of educators to help their students live satisfying , responsible lives .
However well or badly universities perform this task , their efforts to succeed at it are worth fighting for and deserve their governments ’ recognition and encouragement .
After all , as Louis Brandeis observed : For good or ill , “ our government is the potent , the omnipresent teacher . ”
If our leaders regard education merely as a means to jobs and money , no one should be surprised if young people eventually come to think of it that way , too .
