India Shines On
MUMBAI – Every day , a small Japanese jet brings another 60 businessmen from Tokyo to sniff out new commercial opportunities in Mumbai and the heart of the Indian economy .
Naturally , there may be a touch of geopolitical calculation about this .
As Japan grows increasingly nervous about China ’ s rise , the case for increasing investment in the other Asian giant strengthens .
But there is more about this than politics .
Japanese businessmen may be a little puzzled by the creative chaos of India ; the argumentative culture can seem alien to them .
They know , however , a chance for making good profits in a rapidly expanding market when they see one .
And they see one in India ’ s glorious Technicolor – the Bollywood version of Adam Smith .
When the Japanese company Daiichi Sankyo paid $ 4.6 billion for majority control of the Ranbury pharmaceutical group in 2008 , they were placing a bet on continuing corporate success .
Given India ’ s growth rates , who would seriously question their decision ?
So the lobby of Mumbai ’ s Taj hotel , just across the road from the gateway built to welcome Britain ’ s King George V and Queen Mary on their visit to India in 1911 , is once again thronged with visitors , many of whom have arrived to see if India is living up to its image as the next great power .
The grand old Taj deserves all the business it is getting , after being the target of a terrorist attack in 2008 . The bravery of the staff in trying to protect the hotel ’ s clients deserves the applause of every world traveler .
The business leaders you meet in Mumbai , Delhi , Bangalore , Pune , and the other buzzing commercial centers of India demonstrate the challenge of building national and global brands and businesses .
No wonder they have started to crowd into the premier league table of the world ’ s rich .
There is also an uninhibited self-confidence about them .
They take double-digit growth in their own companies for granted .
The task is to push sustainable growth much higher .
Of course , they know much better than any visitor the many problems India still must tackle – social , environmental and economic , with many accompanying issues in the security domain .
If you want a novelist ’ s view of this world in Mumbai , read Vikram Chandra ’ s Sacred Games , one of the best and most exciting novels written anywhere in the last few years .
What is interesting is that Indian businesspeople no longer dwell on what India ’ s government needs to do .
They do not expect much from the state and are not surprised when it fails to deliver .
A government initiative is something that they seem to regard as an oxymoron .
This does not mean that they criticize the macro-management of the Indian economy very much .
They support the almost two decades of reform that have stripped away much of the “ license raj . ”
They recognize that India has the most economically literate leadership in the world .
They expect reforms to continue , albeit at a rather gentler pace .
They note the infrastructure improvements – airports , for example – while sighing over what remains to be done and drawing invidious comparisons with China .
But there is no impatience for a bigger government role .
It is not that they have given up on government ; they are just realistic about what it can achieve .
Indian society seems to have become more globalized than its government .
There is a marked difference in tone here from debates in much of the Western world .
In many rich OECD countries , the financial crisis and recession have made government intervention popular again .
Governments bail out banks , rush to the aid of manufacturers , and claim primacy in averting national catastrophe and personal hardship .
Although increasingly strapped for cash , governments offer the solace of public subsidy .
Gone for the moment are jokes about government being the problem , not the solution .
Tax collectors used to be Public Enemy Number One ; now bankers have usurped that role .
In India , by contrast , even when you might think that government should be expected to deliver more , expectations are not high .
India needs better and much more education , as its young population grows .
But , with terrible figures for teacher truancy in state-run schools – as high as 25 % , according to the World Bank – families increasingly turn to the private sector to educate their children .
Many successful businessmen are putting some of their wealth into foundations that run schools and colleges .
Two big issues remain for government , in addition to keeping reform moving forward .
First , as India ’ s middle class expands , more must be done to ensure that economic growth is inclusive .
This is bound to involve greater redistribution if the hundreds of millions of Indians who remain extremely poor are not to become alienated from their country ’ s success story and pulled toward populist extremism .
The second challenge is today ’ s violent manifestation of this alienation : the Naxalite insurrection in rural central and eastern India .
Interior Minister Palaniappan Chidambaram , a tough reformer , has this problem in his sights , but it cannot be solved by better policing alone .
Ending the insurrection will also require better government , whatever the low expectations of business leaders .
And , to be fair , Nitish Kumar , the chief minister of Bihar , a poor state that previously was a byword for corruption and incompetence , has shown what can be done by beginning a serious transformation of his state in just five years .
If India ’ s other states – and the central government – can follow this example , then the polish of India will not lose its shine .
