Is Central Bank Independence All It ’ s Cracked up to Be ?
Alan Greenspan attained an almost iconic status as Governor of the Federal Reserve Board .
So , as his term draws to a close and his mantle of infallibility is passed on to his successor , it is worth examining whether his legacy will measure up and what we can expect from the new Fed chief , Ben Bernanke .
Few central bank governors have the kind of hagiography lavished upon them , especially in their lifetime , that Greenspan has had .
But what makes for a great central bank governor in our modern societies , great institutions or great individuals ?
In economics , we seldom have a clearly defined counterfactual : Would the economy have performed even better or a little differently if someone else had been at the helm ?
We can ’ t know , but there is little doubt that those “ managing ” the economy receive more credit than they deserve , if sometimes less blame .
Many forces behind the boom of the 1990 ’ s , including advances in technology , were set in motion before Bill Clinton took office ( just as the legacy of President George W. Bush ’ s deficits will be felt long after he leaves ) .
So Greenspan cannot be given credit for the boom .
But , while no central bank governor can ensure economic prosperity , mismanagement can cause enormous harm .
Many of America ’ s post-World War II recessions were caused by the Fed hiking interest rates too fast and too far .
There is little doubt that Greenspan had great moments , when one could at least imagine a less deft governor doing the “ wrong ” thing with disastrous consequences .
One such moment was the stock market crash of 1987 .
Perhaps another occurred in 1998 , when the Fed lowered interest rates in the face of what appeared to be an impending global financial crisis .
These successes , combined with the 1990 ’ s boom and the seeming durability of price stability , reinforced Greenspan ’ s exalted status .
But they also led many to forget less successful moments .
The Fed failed to avert the economic downturn of 1990 , and a reading of Greenspan ’ s testimony to Congress during that period makes clear that the basic nature of the economy ’ s problems was not well understood .
But the real problem for Greenspan ’ s legacy concerns what happened to the American economy in the last five years , for which he bears heavy responsibility .
Greenspan supported the tax cuts of 2001 with the most specious of arguments – that unless something was done about America ’ s soaring fiscal surpluses , the national debt would be totally paid off within , say , ten to fifteen years .
According to Greenspan , immediate action needed to be taken to avert this looming disaster , which would impede the Fed ’ s ability to conduct monetary policy !
It says a great deal about the gullibility of financial markets that they took this argument seriously .
More accurately , tax cuts were what Wall Street wanted , and financial professionals were willing to accept any argument that served that purpose .
Of course , if , say , by 2008 the disappearing national debt really did appear to pose an imminent danger , Congress would have happily obliged in cutting taxes or increasing expenditures .
Greenspan ’ s irresponsible support of that tax cut was critical to its passage .
The fault was not only in the magnitude of the tax cut , but also in its design ; by directing the cuts at upper-income Americans , it provided little economic stimulus .
But soaring deficits did not return the economy to full employment , so the Fed did what it had to do – cut interest rates .
Lower interest rates worked , but not so much because they boosted investment , but because they led households to refinance their mortgages , and fueled a bubble in housing prices .
In short , as Greenspan departs , he leaves behind an American economy burdened with high household and government debt and fragile balance sheets – a legacy that is already contributing to global financial instability .
It is still not clear what led Greenspan to support the tax cut .
Was it a massive economic misjudgment , or was he currying favor with the Bush administration ?
The most likely explanation is a combination of the two , for he and Bush were pursuing the same “ starve the beast ” political strategy , which calls for tax cuts to be used to reduce revenues , thereby forcing the public sector to be downsized .
The traditional argument for an independent central bank is that politicians can ’ t be trusted to conduct monetary and macroeconomic policy .
Neither , evidently , can central bank governors , at least when they opine in areas outside their immediate responsibility .
Greenspan was as enthusiastic for a policy that led to soaring deficits as any politician ; but the fig leaf of being “ above politics ” gave credence to that policy , engendering support from some who otherwise would have questioned its economic wisdom .
This , then , is Greenspan ’ s second legacy : growing doubt about central bank independence .
Macroeconomic policy can never be devoid of politics : it involves fundamental trade-offs and affects different groups differently .
Unemployment harms workers , while the lower interest rates needed to generate more jobs may lead to higher inflation , which especially harms those with nominal assets whose value is eroded .
Such fundamental issues cannot be relegated to technocrats , particularly when those technocrats place the interests of one segment of society above others .
Indeed , Greenspan ’ s political stances were so thinly disguised as professional wisdom that his tenure exposed the dubiousness of the very notion of an independent central bank and a non-partisan central banker .
Unfortunately , many countries have committed themselves to precisely this illusion , and it may be a long time before they take heed of Greenspan ’ s most important lesson .
Stressing the new Fed chief ’ s “ professionalism ” may only delay the moment when this lesson is learned again .
