Don ’ t Blame it on Rio
PARIS – We are little more than a decade into the twenty-first century , but a terrible precedent has already been set : all of the major international negotiations and cooperative efforts initiated in this century thus far have ended in failure .
With regard to the environment , the fight against global warming has come to a standstill , with the United Nations ’ last three annual climate-change conferences , in Copenhagen , Cancún , and Durban , failing to renew the Kyoto Protocol .
Similarly , although last year ’ s conference in Paris to review the Non-Proliferation Treaty , and subsequent nuclear-disarmament talks between US President Barack Obama and Russian President Dmitri Medvedev in New York , made positive inroads , the results were a far cry from ensuring a future free of nuclear arms .
The list goes on : events in the Middle East have killed all prospects for peace in the region ; the measures taken to aid global recovery – ampnbsp ; including regulatory improvements , such as separation of retail and investment banking , elimination of tax havens , and cracking down on rating agencies ’ conflicts of interest – ampnbsp ; have been feeble ; and the last two G-20 meetings have been gross failures .
The causes and parties responsible for these failures are diverse , but there is one constant : in recent years , nationalistic , even xenophobic , rhetoric has intensified dramatically .
Patriotism and sovereignty are now stressed ever more insistently , while expressions of distrust of “ others ” have appeared everywhere – even in the Arctic Ocean , where Canada and Russia are engaged in what one expert has called “ Cold War lite . ”
The consequence of the international community ’ s increasing balkanization is that consensus-oriented conferences tend to end in impasses .
These failures do not mean that most people around the world do not see eye-to-eye on these issues , or that they are unprepared to make timely , even courageous , decisions .
Unfortunately , ordinary people ’ s sentiments rarely triumph when governments meet .
The conclusion is unavoidable : it is the quest for absolute consensus – unanimity – that is undermining progress on major global concerns .
Consensus-oriented negotiations can work when a treaty is being struck between victors and vanquished – ampnbsp ; the strong and the weak .
After World War I , the Allied Powers tried to promote international peace by creating the League of Nations .
But the League ’ s unanimity requirement effectively gave all members veto power , and the United States Senate ’ s refusal to ratify its Covenant condemned the effort to a premature death .
The League ’ s abject failure to prevent World War II resulted in a second effort to build international comity after the fighting ended .
The new UN was much better structured than its predecessor , and the world gained an institution that fosters debate and deliberative decision-making much more vigorously than is possible in consensus-driven organizations .
But a shift that contradicts the UN Charter ’ s spirit has occurred .
In an effort to avoid resolutions or measures that expose their disagreements , the world ’ s great powers have adopted the habit of organizing worldwide debates and conferences that revert to decision-making by consensus .
According to the UN Charter , the primary focus of the General Assembly and the Security Council is to promote international security .
But the UN has become the “ general operator ” for global conferences , acting as administrator and furnisher of services and facilities ( such as locations and interpreters ) for events that are not officially part of its core operations .
As a result , the UN is increasingly taking the blame for these conferences ’ failures , which not only leave the issues unresolved , but also undermine the UN ’ s authority .
The Rio + 20 conference , which will examine the progress made since the first “ Earth Summit ” in Rio de Janeiro 20 years ago , will take place there this June .
Designed with a wide range of objectives , including a focus on both the green economy and sustainable development , the conference seems destined to fail .
Without consensus , no action can be taken , and consensus will be impossible .
Of course , there is a chance that the world will recognize its quandary at Rio .
If a majority of the countries present dares to declare that demanding consensus is equivalent to enforcing paralysis , and if they insist upon following the voting procedures enshrined in the UN Charter , we could see enormous progress .
Global warming and economic crisis are threatening international security .
This alone justifies referring these issues to the UN General Assembly , which , unlike the Security Council , knows no veto power .
A strong declaration and a call for binding measures to address these issues would then be possible .
The economic and environmental crises before us are too urgent to play games that give the appearance of international unanimity .
It is past time to address not only global warming and the economic crisis , but also the international decision-making process .
Why not start with Rio ?
