Who Loves China ?
NEW YORK – Tens of thousands of people have been “ occupying ” the tear-gas-filled streets of Hong Kong ’ s Central district to fight for their democratic rights .
Many more may soon join them .
Though some businessmen and bankers are annoyed by the disruption , the demonstrators are right to protest .
China ’ s government has promised Hong Kong ’ s citizens that they can freely elect their Chief Executive in 2017 .
But , given that candidates are to be carefully vetted by an unelected committee of pro-Chinese appointees , citizens would have no meaningful choice at all .
Only people who “ love China ” – that is , love the Chinese Communist Party ( CCP ) – need apply .
One can almost understand why China ’ s leaders should be baffled by this show of defiance in Hong Kong .
After all , the British simply appointed governors when Hong Kong was still a crown colony , and nobody protested then .
Indeed , the deal that Hong Kong ’ s colonial subjects appeared to accept – leaving politics alone in exchange for the opportunity to pursue material prosperity in a safe and orderly environment – is not so different from the deal accepted by China ’ s educated classes today .
The common opinion among British colonial civil servants , businessmen , and diplomats was that the Chinese were not really interested in politics anyway ; all they cared about was money .
Anyone with the slightest knowledge of Chinese history knows that this view was patently false .
But , for a long time , it seemed to be true in Hong Kong .
There was , however , a significant difference between Hong Kong under the British and under China today .
Hong Kong was never a democracy , but it did have a relatively free press , a relatively honest government , and an independent judiciary – all backed by a democratic government in London .
For most Hong Kong citizens , the prospect of being handed over in 1997 from one colonial power to another was never an entirely happy one .
But what really invigorated politics in Hong Kong was the brutal crackdown in Beijing ’ s Tiananmen Square and in other Chinese cities in 1989 .
Huge demonstrations took place in Hong Kong to protest the massacre , and massive commemorations of the event are held every June , keeping alive a memory that is repressed and fading in the rest of China .
It was not simply humanitarian rage that galvanized so many people in Hong Kong to act in 1989 .
They recognized then that under future Chinese rule , only genuine democracy might safeguard the institutions that protected Hong Kong ’ s freedoms .
Without any significant say in how they were to be governed , Hong Kong ’ s citizens would be at the mercy of China ’ s leaders .
From the point of view of China ’ s Communist rulers , this seems perverse .
They regard Hong Kongers ’ democratic demands as a misguided effort to mimic Western politics , or even as a form of nostalgia for British imperialism .
Either way , the demonstrators ’ agenda is considered “ anti-Chinese . ”
The way China ’ s rulers see it , only firm control from the top and the CCP ’ s unquestioned supremacy can create the conditions needed for a rich and powerful China to emerge .
Democracy , in their view , leads to disorder ; freedom of thought causes popular “ confusion ” ; and public criticism of the Party tends toward the breakdown of authority .
In this sense , the CCP is rather traditional .
But , though Chinese government always was authoritarian , it was not always as corrupt as it is now .
Nor were China ’ s politics always as lawless .
China traditionally had institutions – clan associations , religious communities , business groups , and so on – that were relatively autonomous .
Imperial rule may have been authoritarian , but there were large pockets of independence from central control .
In that sense , Hong Kong is perhaps more traditional than the rest of China , excluding , of course , Taiwan .
Today , the CCP ’ s political supremacy places it above the law , which encourages corruption among Party officials , whether at the local or national level .
Strict Party control of religious , academic , artistic , and journalistic expression stifles the dissemination of necessary information and creative thought .
The lack of an independent judiciary undermines the rule of law .
None of this benefits future development .
When Hong Kong was formally handed back to China 17 years ago , some optimists thought that the former colony ’ s greater freedoms would help to reform the rest of China .
The example of a clean bureaucracy and independent judges would strengthen the rule of law throughout the country .
Others , for the same reason , regarded Hong Kong as a dangerous Trojan horse that could seriously undermine the Communist order .
So far , there is no evidence that the protesters in Hong Kong ’ s Central district have any ambition to undermine , let alone topple , the government in Beijing . They have their hands full just standing up for their own rights in Hong Kong , and the chance that they will succeed appears to be slim .
Chinese President Xi Jinping is anxious to show how tough he can be .
Compromise would smack of weakness .
His aim seems to be to make Hong Kong more like the rest of China , rather than the other way round .
And yet , there is every reason to believe that China would benefit greatly from the opposite course .
Less official corruption , more trust in the law , and greater freedom of thought would make China a more stable , more creative , and even more prosperous society .
In the short term , this probably will not happen .
But the people who truly “ love China ” are more likely to be found in the streets of Hong Kong than in the closed government compounds of Beijing .
