Where Has Global Warming Gone ?
SEATTLE – For the last quarter of the twentieth century , the average temperature at the surface of the earth edged inexorably upward .
Then , to the surprise even of scientists , it stopped .
The concentration of carbon dioxide in the earth ’ s atmosphere continued to rise ; indeed , it is higher today than it has been for centuries .
And yet , for the last 15 years , according to the conventional way of measuring global warming , the planet does not seem to have become any hotter .
What explains this unexpected turn of events , and what does it mean for future climate policy ?
The pause in the rise of surface temperatures is real .
It can be observed in surveys of the surface of the sea and in satellite measurements of the troposphere .
But the reason it has occurred is not that our greenhouse-gas emissions are no longer changing the earth ’ s climate ; it is that surface temperature is a poor metric for human-induced warming .
Indeed , what scientists have figured out is that , instead of warming the surface , the excess heat that is being generated has gone to the deeper oceans .
This calls into question some of the international strategies for combating climate change that are currently being negotiated , such as those aimed at preventing the global temperature at the earth ’ s surface from rising more than 2º Celsius above the pre-industrial average .
Scientists probably did not adequately convey to the public that their projections for future warming are based on models that account only for the so-called “ forced response ” in global mean surface temperatures – that is , the change caused by greenhouse-gas emissions .
But what is observed at the surface includes unforced , or natural , variations , such as the El Niño and La Niña fluctuations from year to year , and the 60-70 year cycle from the fluctuations of the Great Ocean Conveyor Belt in the Atlantic .
In fact , this cycle is now thought to bury heat deep in the oceans periodically .
And , because it existed even before humans put significant carbon into the atmosphere , it is likely natural .
Given the oceans ’ massive heat-storage capacity , determining how much of the warming remains at the surface over the course of decades is a very difficult task .
Though the challenge is beginning to be appreciated , current projections of the dreaded two-degree warming have yet to take into account variable ocean cycles .
To be sure , surface temperatures remain important .
They are a better measure of the threats posed by climate change than heat sequestered underwater .
But some of the threats that scientists ( and economists ) deduce from the surface temperature also reflect natural climate change , and thus cannot be mitigated through the reduction of CO2 emissions .
The total amount of heat contained in oceans responds to changes in emissions , and is therefore a better metric for measuring such responses .
Indeed , it has continued to warm as expected , even as the surface temperature has stopped rising .
The oceans ’ heat content is measured by a network of more than 3,000 free-drifting robotic floats spread out across the world ’ s waters , where they routinely dive 2,000 meters beneath the surface .
The temperature they measure is transmitted to orbiting satellites and made available online to anyone in near-real time .
For ease of interpretation , the oceans ’ heat content can easily be converted to a mean temperature after dividing by a constant .
In time , models could demonstrate how to relate this new global metric to emissions ’ regional climate impact .
The intensive scientific search for an explanation for the pause in global warming at the earth ’ s surface has led to a better understanding of the complex functioning of the climate .
It confirms the long-held theory that the earth has an energy budget that is affected by radiative perturbations at the top of the atmosphere , though partitioning that energy between the surface and the deeper oceans has been difficult .
Nobody knows how long the current pause will last .
Nonetheless , at some point , the natural cycles will shift ; the oceans will cease to absorb the bulk of the planet ’ s warming ; and surface temperatures will begin to climb again .
When they do , we can expect the increase to resume the rapid pace observed during the late twentieth century , when surface temperature rose by about 0.17 degrees Celsius every ten years .
In the meantime , whether the overall risk to our environment has been reduced by the pause remains an open question .
Some argue that what went down will eventually come back up .
The sloshing back and forth of warm and cold waters – El Niño and La Niña – in the shallow layer of the equatorial Pacific Ocean will continue to produce fluctuations in surface temperatures every year .
Over longer periods , however , the risk that the heat currently stored in the deep ocean will resurface is remote .
One thing is clear .
Monitoring surface temperatures does not give us an accurate enough representation of human-induced global warming .
As long as we lack a clear understanding of the relationship between our cumulative greenhouse-gas emissions and the temperature of the earth , it will remain difficult to assess the potential for damage related to climate change caused by humans – or develop the right strategies to minimize it .
