Eternal Hong Kong
I have been a part of Hong Kong ’ s civil service for more than three decades .
Throughout my entire career I have worked with many people whose driving impulse has been to serve Hong Kong .
That remains as true today as it did almost 40 years ago , when I first entered government .
The past couple of weeks have been among the most momentous periods since our reunification with China in 1997 , and it has left me in the hot seat as Hong Kong ’ s Acting Chief Executive .
It is not easy to describe the enormous level of responsibility I feel .
What sets Hong Kong apart is our ability to sustain social stability and economic growth .
One key element of our success is the institutions that buttress our development .
These include our legal system , which is underpinned by an independent judiciary , our legislature , and our civil service .
Each operates independently but is an integral part of the whole .
In short , ours is a system of government like many others .
However , Hong Kong has some distinguishing features , including a very internationally minded and outward-looking government , owing to our close integration into world markets long before globalization became a catchphrase .
Within the ranks of our civil service and judiciary are nationals from Britain , Australia , the United States , Canada , and India .
Moreover , our Court of Final Appeal calls on some of the most esteemed minds of the common-law world .
We have a large foreign population and one of the world ’ s largest consular corps .
International chambers of commerce play a very active and vital role in government consultations .
Our Basic Law even allows for foreign nationals to be elected to one-fifth of the seats in our legislature .
Hong Kong ’ s cosmopolitanism long ago planted the seeds of tolerance and respect in our approach to government .
As a result , we are committed to dialogue and compromise as the only way to balance the many competing demands and opinions that pervade public affairs .
Good government is not a competition .
It ’ s not about winning or losing , or whose view or will prevails .
It is about making the best decisions for the community as a whole .
Inevitably , this will often involve compromise .
Indeed , as Hong Kong ’ s society has grown more sophisticated , it has also become more complex , multi-faceted , and pluralistic .
This means that government can no longer afford to view issues in isolation ; its operations need to be de-compartmentalized and flattened , as well as streamlined .
This is a difficult task , given that some of our systems have been in place for many years , often entrenched in law .
Of course , pragmatism has its limits , because good government is also about upholding core values .
I have often referred to what I call the four pillars of Hong Kong ’ s success : the rule of law , a level playing field for business , a clean and efficient civil service , and the free flow of information .
These are values that we simply will not compromise .
To do so would mark the beginning of the end for Hong Kong .
Since reunification with our motherland , we have the added safeguard of the Basic Law , which gives effect to the principles of “ one country , two systems ” and “ Hong Kong ’ s people running Hong Kong with a high degree of autonomy . ”
Good government also requires sharing a vision of the future – the purposes and thinking behind public policies – with the community .
Our vision is to develop Hong Kong as Asia ’ s world city .
This is an all-encompassing brief , covering everything we do as a community and an economy in areas ranging from international trade to art , culture , and tourism .
The Basic Law embodies this vision , laying the foundations for our development over a 50-year period and providing the freedom and the power for us to position ourselves as Asia ’ s world city – and to do it on our own .
At the same time , it also embodies the depth of the central government ’ s support for Hong Kong .
It is thus crucial to the good governance of the Hong Kong Special Administration Region .
In many areas – financial services , infrastructure , communications technology , and tourism – I would say we have reached our goals for Hong Kong .
Hardly a day goes by when we don ’ t read something in the local press that refers to our status as Asia ’ s world city .
Even when people feel we have not lived up to the standards expected of a world city , we are glad to be held to a high benchmark , because it keeps us on our toes .
That may sound disingenuous to some , but Hong Kong ’ s officials share a common mission to maintain the stability and prosperity of our city .
Our duty is to make Hong Kong a better place for us all , without hidden agendas or quid pro quos .
It is an onerous and solemn undertaking , uplifting one day and extremely frustrating the next .
But , above all , it is an honor and a privilege to play such a role in our society , and I know that the vast majority of officials , legislators , judges , and civil servants with whom I ’ ve worked would agree .
