How to Fight the Islamic State
CAMBRIDGE – The Islamic State has captured the world ’ s attention with gruesome videos of beheadings , wanton destruction of antiquities , and skilled use of social media .
It has also captured a large part of eastern Syria and western Iraq , proclaimed a caliphate based in Raqqa , Syria , and attracted foreign jihadists from around the world .
US President Barack Obama says that the Islamic State must be degraded and ultimately defeated .
He has appointed General John Allen to lead a coalition of some 60 countries in the task , relying on air strikes , special forces , and training missions .
Some critics want him to send more American troops ; others say that the United States should settle for a doctrine of containment .
In the current US presidential campaign , some candidates are calling for “ boots on the ground . ”
They are right : boots are needed .
But the soldiers who wear them should be Sunni Arabs and Turks , not Americans .
And that says a lot about the nature of the triple threat that the US and its allies now face .
The Islamic State is three things : a transnational terrorist group , a proto-state , and a political ideology with religious roots .
It grew out of al-Qaeda after the misguided US-led invasion of Iraq ; and , like al-Qaeda , it appeals to extremist Sunni Islamists .
But it has gone further , by establishing a caliphate , and is now a rival to al-Qaeda .
Its possession of territory creates the legitimacy and capacity for offensive jihad , which it wages not only against infidels but also Shia and Sufi Muslims , whom it considers “ takfir , ” or not true Islamic monotheists .
The Islamic State extols the purity of seventh-century Islam , but it is extremely adept at using twenty-first-century media .
Its videos and social-media channels are effective tools for attracting a minority of Muslims – primarily young people from Europe , America , Africa , and Asia – who are struggling with their identity .
Disgruntled , many are drawn to “ Sheikh Google , ” where Islamic State recruiters wait to prey upon them .
By some estimates , there are more than 25,000 foreign fighters serving in the Islamic State today .
Those who are killed are quickly replaced .
The tripartite nature of the Islamic State creates a policy dilemma .
On the one hand , it is important to use hard military power to deprive the caliphate of the territory that provides it both sanctuary and legitimacy .
But if the American military footprint is too heavy , the Islamic State ’ s soft power will be strengthened , thus aiding its global recruiting efforts .
That is why the boots on the ground must be Sunni .
The presence of foreign or Shia troops reinforces the Islamic State ’ s claim of being surrounded and challenged by infidels .
So far , thanks largely to effective Kurdish forces , who are overwhelmingly Sunni , the Islamic State has lost some 30 % of the territory it held a year ago .
But deploying additional Sunni infantry requires training , support , and time , as well as pressure on Iraq ’ s Shia-dominated central government to temper its sectarian approach .
After the debacle in Libya ( where the Islamic State supports jihadist militias and has announced the creation of three “ distant provinces ” ) , Obama is understandably reluctant to overthrow Syrian President Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime , only to see the Islamic State take control of more territory , accompanied by genocidal atrocities against Syria ’ s many non-Sunnis .
But Assad is one of the Islamic State ’ s most effective recruiting tools .
Many foreign jihadists respond to the prospect of helping to overthrow a tyrannical Alawite ruler who is killing Sunnis .
The US diplomatic task is to persuade Assad ’ s supporters , Russia and Iran , to remove him without dismantling the remains of the Syrian state structure .
A no-fly zone and a safe zone in northern Syria for the millions of displaced people could reinforce American diplomacy .
And providing massive humanitarian assistance to the refugees ( at which the American military is very effective ) would increase US soft power enormously .
As it stands , the funding and coordination of America ’ s soft-power strategy is inadequate .
But we know that hard power is not enough , particularly to contest the cyber territory that the Islamic State occupies – for example , by developing a capacity to take down botnets and counter hostile social-media accounts .
Even if the US and its allies defeat the Islamic State over the coming decade , we should be prepared for a similar Sunni extremist group to rise from the ashes .
Revolutions of the type the Middle East is experiencing take a long time to resolve .
The sources of revolutionary instability include tenuous post-colonial boundaries ; arrested modernization ; the failed “ Arab Spring ” ; and religious sectarianism , exacerbated by the interstate rivalry between Sunni-ruled Saudi Arabia and Shia-ruled Iran .
In Europe , wars of religion between Catholics and Protestants lasted for nearly a century and a half .
The fighting ended ( with the Peace of Westphalia in 1648 ) only after Germany lost a quarter of its population in the Thirty Years ’ War .
But it is also worth remembering that the coalitions of that time were complex , with Catholic France aiding Dutch Protestants against Catholic Habsburgs for dynastic rather than religious reasons .
We should expect similar complexity in today ’ s Middle East .
Looking ahead in a region where the US has interests as varied as energy , Israel ’ s security , nuclear non-proliferation , and human rights , American policymakers will need to follow a flexible strategy of “ containment plus nudging , ” which implies siding with different states and groups in different circumstances .
For example , whether or not Iranian policy becomes more moderate , sometimes Iran will share US interests , and sometimes it will oppose them . In fact , the recent nuclear agreement may open opportunities for greater flexibility .
To seize them , however , US foreign policy toward the Middle East will have to develop a higher level of sophistication than the current debate reveals .
Joseph S. Nye recently co-chaired an Aspen Strategy Group discussion on the Islamic State and radicalism in the Middle East .
