Europe , An Engine of Peace
Critics of European monetary integration often point out that , in the absence of political union , monetary union is doomed to fail .
I agree with the critics ’ conclusion , but not with their premise , for the success of the single currency so far has been due precisely to the political commitments of the Union ’ s member countries .
In other words , it is not true that the European Union does not constitute a political union .
European economic integration – in all its aspects – reflects the desire to integrate Europe politically , which , at least in my view , implies that European economic and monetary integration is irreversible .
This has been true from the outset of the European integration process in 1952 , when six countries established the European Coal and Steel Community ( ECSC ) .
The aim of the ECSC was explicitly political : to remove control of the two most important raw materials for the production of heavy weaponry from states that had just fought the bloodiest war in history .
This drive for peace remained , quietly , the key motivation behind further steps toward Europe ’ s economic integration , which was regarded as the vehicle for achieving political integration . & nbsp ;
In 1951 , French Prime Minister Rene Pléven proposed establishing a European Defense Community ( EDC ) alongside the ECSC .
He failed , but the idea did not vanish .
Later that year , Robert Schumann – the French foreign minister at the time and a founding father of European integration – explicitly identified the ECSC with the drive for peace .
He described it as a means for creating a “ fusion of interests … that will be the leavening from which may grow a wider and deeper community between countries long opposed to one another by bloody conflicts . ”
These words were echoed on the eve of the introduction of the single currency .
In particular , Germany under Chancellor Helmut Kohl often linked monetary integration with the objective of political union .
Kohl once referred to the single currency ’ s success as a matter of “ war and peace . ”
For this reason , I do not agree with those who argue that Germany ’ s support for European monetary integration was the price it paid for Europe ’ s acceptance of German reunification .
On the contrary , the historical record shows that Germany made the case for a parallel drive to monetary and political integration well before the fall of the Iron Curtain .
Of course , there are other motives behind support for economic integration .
The EU ’ s leaders are convinced that achieving the so-called four freedoms – i.e. , freedom of movement of goods , services , capital , and people – will optimize the well-being of Europe ’ s population .
They also aspire to increase the Continent ’ s strategic power .
But peace was the principal driving force in the minds of people like Schumann and Jean Monnet at the beginning of the European integration process , as it was for Helmut Schmidt and Valéry Giscard d ’ Estaing when they laid the foundations of the single currency and today ’ s European Central Bank .
For half a century , the process of European integration proceeded – sometimes with setbacks , sometimes with giant steps forward – joining formerly separate markets by creating very close trade relations .
Over time , this stimulated ever-greater economic convergence .
Of course , Europe ’ s economies have not become “ look-alikes , ” nor has GDP per capita been fully equalized .
But the differences between Europe ’ s economies were never so dramatic as to form an insurmountable barrier to embarking upon the most ambitious project of all : adopting a common currency .
Understanding this history is vital , because Europe ’ s Union once again stands at a threshold : should it keep its promise to start membership talks with Turkey ?
In the wake of the defeat of the EU ’ s Constitutional Treaty in France and the Netherlands this spring , many say that Europe ’ s decade-old promise cannot and should not be kept .
What strikes me as dangerous is that the issue of peace – the motor that has driven European integration from the start – rarely comes up in the debate about what to do in the wake of these events .
On the contrary , responsible statesmen and party leaders have come out openly against Turkish membership .
I would have hoped that these people had learned from Schumann and Monnet what really matters for Europe and its future ; sadly , this does not seem to be the case .
Of course , I do not fear some sort of military clash between Turkey and the EU .
After all , Turkey has been and remains a loyal member of NATO .
But an increasingly virulent and violent clash of cultures is emerging in Europe – particularly in France , Germany , Spain , and the Netherlands – between Islam and the humanitarian , Christian , and Jewish traditions .
For me , Europe ’ s integration of Muslim Turkey into its political union is the same sort of question of peace that Schumann and Monnet successfully confronted .
Today , Europe needs peace between cultures as much as it once needed peace between nations , and it is for this reason that we must welcome Turkey into our midst .
