Abdullah Out On A Limb
Crown Prince Abdullah ’ s peace proposal was born in Saudi Arabia but some allege that it was conceived in the US . Revealed to a visiting American journalist during a private dinner with the Crown Prince , the plan centers on a “ full normalization ” of relations between Israel and all Arab countries , in return for an Israeli withdrawal from all the Palestinian territories it occupied in 1967 . The proposal may get a boost when Abdullah meet President Bush in Texas later this spring , but its early survival depends first on its reception at the upcoming Arab summit in Beirut .
The suspicions which surround Abdullah ’ s peace initiative , and which dismiss it as stillborn , are founded in the belief that it was conceived to appease Saudi Arabia ’ s American critics and to divert them from focussing on Saudi domestic tensions . Since September 11th , Saudi Arabia has felt intense pressure to explain ( and explain away ) its links to Osama bin Laden ’ s al-Qaeda terrorist network because fifteen of the nineteen plane hijackers were Saudis ( indeed , the majority of prisoners held by the US at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba are said to be Saudi citizens ) and Saudis are often viewed as a major source of al-Qaeda ’ s finances . Moreover , it is alleged that the Saudi government has become preoccupied with appeasing America , despite the beginning of the second Palestinian intifada , and Israel ’ s ongoing occupation of Palestine .
At the same time , Saudi public opinion has been inflamed , mostly because of their rulers ’ apparent apathy toward the plight of the Palestinian people , particularly when contrasted with Osama bin Laden ’ s lethal propaganda . Since the terrorist attacks of September 11th , Saudi leaders have felt pressed to accommodate public revulsion about the mistreatment of the Palestinians , but worry that doing so may even further jeopardize their now brittle relations with America .
Crown Prince Abdullah ’ s initiative provoked widespread surprise , not because the idea is so startlingly new , but because of its source and timing . A proposal for “ full normalization ” with Israel coming from an Islamic regime that bases its legitimacy on the austere Islamic doctrines of the Wahhabi seems both peculiar and progressive . But Saudi Arabia ’ s long-cultivated image of stability , benevolence , and mystical communal harmony has given way under the endless glare of the American press . Its educational system , too , is increasingly portrayed as a breeding ground for hatred of the West . Something had to give .
America ’ s seemingly hostile attention gave rise to the speculation that Crown Prince Abdullah ’ s initiative really denotes a Saudi public relations counteroffensive , hatched in the Saudi embassy in Washington to cover over the rift with the US . Indeed , the subsequent , deafening silence by other Saudi leaders to the proposal appears to confirm it as a public relations move for which they need not risk any of their own domestic political capital .
Although Abdullah is usually referred to in the West as Saudi Arabia ’ s ruler , the debilitated King Fahd ’ s six full brothers are the ones who truly represent the real power in the Kingdom . Almost nothing , neither in support nor in opposition , has been uttered by the King and these other brothers , collectively known as the “ Sudairis . ”
The Sudairis , it seems , have apparently left their half brother alone to twist in the wind . Abdullah ’ s proposal could weaken his position domestically , particularly in relation to the country ’ s powerful Islamists .
For although Crown Prince Abdullah has his own loyal entourage , including the National Guard , he confronts opposition from senior figures in the religious establishment .
The idea of normalizing relations with Israel has incited fierce hostility among some imams in the mosques as well as on the Internet .
As a result , Abdullah ’ s initial proposal has been diluted , so much so that , by the time of the Arab foreign ministers meeting held in Cairo on 8 March , the phrase “ full normalisation ” was watered down to the more amorphous phrase “ full peace , ” the meaning of which no one knows .
Does it mean an Israeli Star of David flag flying in Riyadh , or that Abdullah will visit Jerusalem to be greeted with a kiss from Ariel Sharon ? No one knows , but the very fact that such questions are being raised in Saudi Arabia poses a serious risk to Abdullah .
Objections are also voiced against the fact that the Crown Prince ’ s plan does not mention the right of exiled Palestinians to return to their homes in the West Bank and Gaza , as well as Israel proper , and that Arabs must tailor their diplomatic initiatives to the taste of the American media . To the average Saudi , the initiative appears as either a sell-out or the prelude to a fresh Arab humiliation . In either case , it is widely feared that either of these outcomes is intended simply to appease America .
Reactions in the Middle East reflect longstanding rivalries for leadership , as well as fears about American and Israeli intentions . Egypt ’ s leaders deem the proposal a mere conversation , something not nearly as serious as a written diplomatic initiative . Libya offered its own supposedly more “ encompassing and comprehensive ” proposal .
Hizbollah ’ s leader Mohammed Fadlallah defined the initiative as one of Arab submission , while Syria demanded a guarantee of its interests in the Golan Heights .
Arab League officials approved the proposal .
Crown Prince Abdullah ’ s initiative is meant to be made official during a speech at the Arab League summit in Beirut of 27-28 March .
How it is received may not only determine the state of Israel-Palestine negotiations for a considerable time to come , but Saudi Arabia ’ s domestic peace as well .
