One Hundred Years of Relativity
STOCKHOLM – This year marks the centenary of Albert Einstein 's general theory of relativity , his masterwork describing gravity as the curvature of space and time .
Yet , as is often true in science , Einstein 's insights have provided physicists with as many questions as they have answered .
Finding solutions that fulfill Einstein 's equations – space-times that describe the curvature of our universe – is difficult , so his theory was slow to catch on .
Scientists carrying out early studies and the first crucial tests were forced to use approximations .
It took decades to develop techniques to classify and derive new solutions .
Today , however , many solutions are known , and other thorny problems , such as the gravitational field of two colliding stars , can be explored using computers to carry out the numerical calculations .
Einstein 's theory not only describes our universe , from the Big Bang to black holes ; it has also taught physicists the relevance of geometry and symmetry – lessons that spread from particle physics to crystallography .
But , despite the similarities that Einstein 's theory has with other theories in physics , it stands apart by its refusal to fit together with quantum mechanics , the theory that explains the dominant behavior of matter at the atomic and subatomic scale .
According to Einstein 's theory , gravity , unlike all other physical forces known to man , is not quantized .
It is not subject to Heisenberg 's famed uncertainty principle .
The electromagnetic field of a particle that passes through a double slit can pass through both slits at once .
Its gravitational equivalent cannot .
This mismatch between our understanding of gravity and the quantum theories of matter poses a huge conundrum for theoretical physicists , because it leads to mathematical contradictions .
Clearly , there is something about the combination of quantum theory and gravity that remains unknown , and our understanding of space , time , and matter hinges on unraveling this connection .
Finding a description of gravity that is compatible with our understanding of quantum physics would revolutionize cosmology , yield new insights into the first moments of our universe , and provide a deeper understanding of the theories on which all of modern physics is based .
But , despite the enormous potential impact of such a breakthrough and the efforts of generations of physicists to achieve it , we still do not know which theory is the right one .
Contrary to how it may feel when you try to get out of bed in the morning , gravity is by far the weakest fundamental force of all we have identified .
It takes only the static repulsion of a few electrons to make your hair stand up , overcoming the gravitational pull of the entire planet .
In the atomic and subatomic world , gravity is irrelevant compared to what else is going on , all of which can be described by quantum theories .
Gravity 's weakness makes it very difficult to measure its quantum effects ; as a result , we have no experimental data to guide theoretical physicists in the development of the missing theory .
Detecting a “ graviton " – the hypothetical particle making up part of a gravitational field – would require a particle collider the size of the Milky Way or a detector with a mass of the planet Jupiter .
These experiments are so detached from our technological capabilities that physicists have focused on trying to remove the mathematical contradictions first , developing approaches like string theory , loop quantum gravity , and asymptotically safe gravity .
But to know which theory describes physical reality , experimental tests must eventually be developed .
That is why , over the last decade , physicists have begun to look for indirect evidence of quantum gravity .
Rather than seeking to detect a quantum of the gravitational field , researchers are looking for other effects that would imply that gravity is quantized .
These tests work much like those that use the stability of atoms as indirect evidence for the quantization of the electromagnetic force .
For example , some scientists are searching for evidence of quantum fluctuations of space-time that could blur images of distant stars or lead to systematic distortions .
Others are looking for violations of certain symmetries that could enable normally forbidden particle decays , unexplained noise in gravitational wave detectors , or inexplicable loss of quantum coherence .
So far , these attempts have failed to detect the sought-after evidence .
Nonetheless , they have led to important developments , because the negative results have ruled out some plausible hypotheses .
And , though researchers may not have found results supporting any one theory , they have advanced the cause of science by better defining the observational criteria any quantum theory of gravity will have to take into account .
As we commemorate Einstein 's achievement , we should also seize the opportunity to celebrate the unrelenting spirit of those who are pushing ahead and trying to answer the questions his theory left us .
That quest has blossomed into astonishingly fruitful research areas like cosmology , numerical general relativity , and quantum gravity .
General Relativity has brought us wormholes , evaporating black holes , and the Big Bang theory ; it underlies the discovery that the universe is expanding and that so-called exoplanets are much more common than anybody thought ; and it has utterly redefined the way we think of our own place in the universe , ultimately even calling into question whether this universe is the only one .
None of these advances would have been possible had researchers been operating according to the three-year plans that characterize much of current academia .
So this year is perhaps a good moment to appreciate the visionaries who have understood that sustainable progress relies on the development of new and better theories whose impact may not be fully grasped for decades – indeed , that may continue to ramify 100 years later .
