Why the Fed Buried Monetarism
LONDON – The US Federal Reserve ’ s decision to delay an increase in interest rates should have come as no surprise to anyone who has been paying attention to Fed Chair Janet Yellen ’ s comments .
The Fed ’ s decision merely confirmed that it is not indifferent to international financial stress , and that its risk-management approach remains strongly biased in favor of “ lower for longer . ”
So why did the markets and media behave as if the Fed ’ s action ( or , more precisely , inaction ) was unexpected ?
What really shocked the markets was not the Fed ’ s decision to maintain zero interest rates for a few more months , but the statement that accompanied it .
The Fed revealed that it was entirely unconcerned about the risks of higher inflation and was eager to push unemployment below what most economists regard as its “ natural ” rate of around 5 % .
It is this relationship – between inflation and unemployment – that lies at the heart of all controversies about monetary policy and central banking .
And almost all modern economic models , including those used by the Fed , are based on the monetarist theory of interest rates pioneered by Milton Friedman in his 1967 presidential address to the American Economic Association .
Friedman ’ s theory asserted that inflation would automatically accelerate without limit once unemployment fell below a minimum safe level , which he described as the “ natural ” unemployment rate .
In Friedman ’ s original work , the natural unemployment rate was a purely theoretical conjecture , founded on an assumption described as “ rational expectations , ” even though it ran counter to any normal definition of rational behavior .
The theory ’ s publication at a time of worldwide alarm about double-digit inflation offered central bankers exactly the pretext they needed for desperately unpopular actions .
By dramatically increasing interest rates to fight inflation , policymakers broke the power of organized labor , while avoiding blame for the mass unemployment that monetary austerity was bound to produce .
A few years later , Friedman ’ s “ natural ” rate was replaced with the less value-laden and more erudite-sounding “ non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment ” ( NAIRU ) .
But the basic idea was always the same .
If monetary policy is used to try to push unemployment below some pre-determined level , inflation will accelerate without limit and destroy jobs .
A monetary policy aiming for sub-NAIRU unemployment must therefore be avoided at all costs .
A more extreme version of the theory asserts that there is no lasting tradeoff between inflation and unemployment .
All efforts to stimulate job creation or economic growth with easy money will merely boost price growth , offsetting any effect on unemployment .
Monetary policy must therefore focus solely on hitting inflation targets , and central bankers should be exonerated of any blame for unemployment .
The monetarist theory that justified narrowing central banks ’ responsibilities to inflation targeting had very little empirical backing when Friedman proposed it .
Since then , it has been refuted both by political experience and statistical testing .
Monetary policy , far from being dissipated in rising prices , as the theory predicted , turned out to have a much greater impact on unemployment than on inflation , especially in the past 20 years .
But , despite empirical refutation , the ideological attractiveness of monetarism , supported by the supposed authority of “ rational ” expectations , proved overwhelming .
As a result , the purely inflation-oriented approach to monetary policy gained total dominance in both central banking and academic economics .
That brings us back to recent financial events .
The inflation-targeting models used by the Fed ( and other central banks and official institutions like the International Monetary Fund ) all assume the existence of some pre-determined limit to non-inflationary unemployment .
The Fed ’ s latest model estimates this NAIRU to be 4.9-5.2 % .
And that is why so many economists and market participants were shocked by Yellen ’ s apparent complacency .
With US unemployment now at 5.1 % , standard monetary theory dictates that interest rates must be raised urgently .
Otherwise , either a disastrous inflationary blowout will inevitably follow , or the body of economic theory that has dominated a generation of policy and academic thinking since Friedman ’ s paper on “ rational ” expectations and “ natural ” unemployment will turn out to be completely wrong .
What , then , should we conclude from the Fed ’ s decision not to raise interest rates ?
One possible conclusion is banal .
Because the NAIRU is a purely theoretical construct , the Fed ’ s economists can simply change their estimates of this magic number .
In fact , the Fed has already cut its NAIRU estimate three times in the past two years .
But there may be a deeper reason for the Fed ’ s forbearance .
To judge by Yellen ’ s recent speeches , the Fed may no longer believe in any version of the “ natural ” unemployment rate .
Friedman ’ s assumptions of ever-accelerating inflation and irrationally “ rational ” expectations that lead to single-minded targeting of price stability remain embedded in official economic models like some Biblical creation myth .
But the Fed , along with almost all other central banks , appears to have lost faith in that story .
Instead , central bankers now seem to be implicitly ( and perhaps even unconsciously ) returning to pre-monetarist views : tradeoffs between inflation and unemployment are real and can last for many years .
Monetary policy should gradually recalibrate the balance between these two economic indicators as the business cycle proceeds .
When inflation is low , the top priority should be to reduce unemployment to the lowest possible level ; and there is no compelling reason for monetary policy to restrain job creation or GDP growth until excessive inflation becomes an imminent danger .
This does not imply permanent near-zero US interest rates .
The Fed will almost certainly start raising rates in December , but monetary tightening will be much slower than in previous economic cycles , and it will be motivated by concerns about financial stability , not inflation .
As a result , fears – bordering on panic in some emerging markets – about the impact of Fed tightening on global economic conditions will probably prove unjustified .
The bad news is that the vast majority of market analysts , still clinging to the old monetarist framework , will accuse the Fed of “ falling behind the curve ” by letting US unemployment decline too far and failing to anticipate the threat of rising inflation .
The Fed should simply ignore such atavistic protests , as it rightly did last week .
