A general \ u0027s trial
BUCHAREST : As Chile ’ s former dictator , General Augusto Pinochet , under house arrest outside of London , awaits a final decision on whether he is to be extradited to Spain to face charges of having committed crimes against humanity , Romania has tried and convicted one of its own military leaders for his role in the massacre of civilians in the city of Timisoara ten years ago .
The confused reaction to this verdict should , perhaps , give pause to all those who think that putting the past on trial is a straightforward thing .
Generals Atanase Stanculescu and Mihai Chitac were found guilty of ordering the killings of dozens of innocent people in Timisoara in 1989 .
Both were sentenced each to long prison terms .
The rulings were met with fierce criticism by some journalists and politicians but were enthusiastically welcomed by others .
Undoubtedly , these verdicts will remain divisive in a society not yet able to come to terms with its past .
The story of General Stanculescu , sentenced to 15 years in prison , reads like a cheap novel , with treason thrown into the mix .
The tall , good-looking officer was among Nicolae Ceausescu ’ s closest aides .
As the uprising against the Ceausescu regime broke out in December 1989 in Timisoara , Stanculescu ( together with General Chitac ) was dispatched to the city and ordered to suppress all demonstrations by any available means .
He carried out these orders ruthlessly , his troops shooting down over 100 unarmed street demonstrators .
Summoned back to Bucharest two days later , Stanculescu apparently had second thoughts about his loyalty to the dictator .
He recognized that Ceausescu was doomed .
Pretending to have a broken leg , he stalled in making his reappearance .
Then , on the 22 December , as crowds stormed the Central Committee headquarters in Bucharest , Stanculescu arranged for a helicopter to rescue Nicolae and Elena Ceausescu from the building ’ s roof terrace .
Minutes before the helicopter took off , Elena told the General , who was wearing a fake plaster cast around his leg : “ Dearest Victor , look after my children ! ”
By then , however , the General had turned coats : he had joined " the people " and the newly-born National Salvation Front .
The helicopter was taking the dictator and his wife to prison , not freedom .
Within days , Stanculescu was among those masterminding the show-trial of the Ceausescus which ended with their being sentenced to death and executed on the spot .
Film of Stanculescu at the time show that he had dispensed with his plaster cast .
Stanculescu ’ s career boomed .
He was appointed industry minister by the new , revolutionary government .
A few months later , he supported a group of young officers who called for army reform and the ouster of General Militaru , the then Defense Minister and a suspected KGB agent .
Militaru was sacked , but when Stanculescu became minister he cashiered the young officers who had helped him .
Reform of the army was put off .
One year later Stanculescu gave up politics and government altogether .
He set up a highly profitable arms trading company .
Soon he became one of the country 's richest tycoons .
Now , it seems that the tide has turned against him .
But has it ?
General Stanculescu has appealed to the Supreme Court to quash his conviction .
A big part of public opinion seems to be behind him , believing his trial politically motivated .
Of course , many people and especially those who took to the streets against Ceausescu in 1989 feel vindicated his conviction .
But many politicians defend Stanculescu ; among them , the current Defense Minister Victor Babiuc , former President Ion Iliescu , and most top army officers .
In the wake of the Stanculescu conviction , the Interior Minister reiterated his proposal for a general amnesty for all soldiers involved in the violence of 1989 .
Supporters of this view argue that General Stanculescu , unlike President Pinochet , was carrying out orders he could not refuse .
Later , they add , he voluntarily joined the " Revolution " , fought its enemies and contributed to its victory .
Many Romanian Army officers are unhappy with the notion of soldiers being tried for crimes committed while defending the dying communist regime .
Yet , this is what every one of Romania ’ s post-revolutionary governments have promised at one time or another .
But these officers ( and those who share their views ) believe that you cannot assess the deeds of one regime by the standards of another .
Again as in Chile , they suggest that , while political regimes are transient , the heart and honor of a nation always rests with its Army .
A soldier has a duty just to carry out the orders of his chiefs , no matter who they are and no matter what orders they give .
Stanculescu did just that in 1989 at Timisoara , and he did so again , a few days later , at Ceausescu ’ s trial .
These officers dismiss and mistrust the requirements of universal justice , as embodied in the Nuremberg rulings .
Because democratic institutions in Romania have frittered away much of their standing during the almost ten years of postcommunist transition , many politicians tend either to embrace the views of the generals , or , at least , avoid going publicly against them .
After all , opinion polls reveal that the Army and Orthodox Church – two hierarchical and traditional organizations – are , by far , the most trusted Romanian institutions .
Time and again , people seek to learn the truth about Romania ’ s past .
But , as that past becomes unearthed and its crimes exposed , many recoil from the consequences .
The " original sin " of the Romanian Revolution always looms : most postcommunist institutions were created and later run by people deeply involved in the crimes of the communist regime .
Of course , people , at first , love seeing the truth uncovered and powerful wrongdoers punished .
But many would like to see all this while watching TV rather than experience it in real life .
Romania will have to decide whether or not it actually wants to have a past before its people can begin to confront and live with theirs .
