Hong Kong \ u0027s Threat to China
Last month 's massive demonstrations in Hong Kong , when over half a million residents poured into the streets in protest against the government of Chief Executive Tung Chee-hwa , continues to echo .
Never in Hong Kong 's history has popular opposition--uniting investment bankers , street hawkers , off-duty civil servants , and artists , among others--been so loud .
China 's communist rulers are dithering about how to respond .
One objective of the demonstrators was to voice their desire to select Hong Kong 's future leaders through universal suffrage .
Today , 800 electors handpicked by the mainland Chinese government -- who mostly represent big business -- choose Hong Kong 's Chief Executive .
The unpopularity of Hong Kong 's incompetent and sycophantic Chief Executive , chosen by China for a second five-year term that will only end in 2007 , creates a grave dilemma for the country 's communist rulers .
Before July 's protests , they hoped that Hong Kong would provide so attractive an example of the idea of " One Country , Two Systems " that Taiwan would be lured into accepting the sovereignty of the government in Beijing .
Now Taiwan 's leaders point to Hong Kong as a failed model of a flawed concept .
Indeed , Mr Tung 's anticipatory subservience to the real or imagined wishes of China 's rulers exposed the congenital flaw in the political architecture of uniting a liberal society with a dictatorship .
That flaw infects the heart of the " One Country , Two Systems " notion : the idea that genuine autonomy can exist in a country whose supreme leaders do not believe in rule by consent .
Now China 's communist rulers find themselves trapped in a bind .
If they back Tung unconditionally for the rest of his term , they can look forward to the collapse of their long-term strategy to re-absorb Taiwan , for the alternative to peaceful reunification with Taiwan is coercion .
But any resort to coercion increases the likelihood of military confrontation with the US , Taiwan 's protector .
In this context , the steady build-up of China 's short- to medium-range missile capability is a cause for alarm , such missiles being the principle threat against Taiwan .
As the US Defense Department 's " Annual Report on the Military Power of the People 's Republic of China " recently put it , " The primary driving force for China 's military modernization is Beijing 's perceived need to prepare credible military options in any potential conflict in the Taiwan Strait . "
Such a nightmare scenario isn 't at all likely in Hong Kong , but a steady rot of Hong Kong 's vitality is .
For if the frustrations of ordinary Hong Kong citizens are allowed to fester without a genuine commitment by China to allow for universal suffrage by 2007 , a far more serious eruption of social and political unrest beckons .
Such frustrations are growing .
Unemployment now stands at 9 % --unimaginable before the handover in 1997 , when both Tung and China promised that Hong Kong would do even better under Chinese sovereignty than under British rule .
In fact , many observers believe that Hong Kong 's real rate of joblessness is much higher , and fear that the trend is not encouraging .
China 's leaders , and their handpicked servants in Hong Kong may still believe that Tung 's popularity will revive if and when the economy does .
So they comfort themselves with the thought that demands for democratization reflect Hong Kong 's economic woes , nothing more .
But six years of divisive as well as dismissively haughty misrule by Tung 's administration , which pits one group against another as its preferred method of governance , suggest that Hong Kong 's problems are much deeper .
Hong Kong is now an acrimoniously divided society harking back to the days when Chinese communists routinely classified their own citizens as either " the people " or " enemies of the state . "
Most of Hong Kong 's people now recognize that their stagnating economy is not merely a matter of bad policy .
It also results from deeply flawed political structures .
In an oligarchic economy such of that of today 's Hong Kong , the costs of stagnation and the fruits of growth are distributed in grossly unfair ways .
This cynical structure must be changed if people are to have enough confidence in the future for the economy to recover .
If China 's rulers heed the wishes of Hong Kong 's seven million people to have the right to elect their own leaders through direct elections , however , they face the prospect that China 's 1.3 billion people will demand the same right .
Perhaps so .
But a political system is only ever truly put at risk when leaders consistently misrule .
Indeed , democracies are so stable because they allow misrule to be ended through regularly scheduled elections .
Because stability is their great goal , China 's communist rulers , if they are wise , will allow Hong Kong to show the way to a system in which Chinese govern themselves democratically , peacefully , and prosperously .
Taiwan has already done so .
Hong Kong , linked physically to the mainland , provides a more intimate case study for China 's people to watch and one day follow .
But if the goal is merely for the communists to retain their monopoly on power , in both Hong Kong and China , then the rot that has settled into Hong Kong 's polity and its economy may begin to infect the mainland .
At that point , China might wish it had never heard of Tung Chee-hwa .
Indeed , it might wish it had never secured Hong Kong 's return .
