Dreaming of a New Edo Era
SEOUL – In mid-November , all eyes will shift to Seoul , when G-20 leaders convene for the first time in the South Korean capital .
The choice is long overdue , as South Korea is a remarkable success story : in one generation , the South Koreans , formerly pummeled by civil war , under constant threat from their Northern communist brethren , long mired in poverty , and ruled by military dictators for 40 years , have built the world ’ s 13th largest economy and Asia ’ s most vibrant democracy .
Historically squeezed between its two giant neighbors , China and Japan , South Korea had long been perceived as an underdog with a fuzzy cultural identity .
In Asia , however , Japan ’ s leaders are not waiting for the Seoul summit to take a closer look at South Korea .
South Korea was formerly a Japanese colony ( 1910-1945 ) , and the natives were treated like an inferior race .
Today , South Korean ’ s economy has been growing annually by 5 % on average for ten years , whereas Japan grew by 0.42 % per year during the same period .
One could argue that South Korea is not yet a mature economy and is only catching up with a more advanced Japan .
This was the case in the 1970 ’ s , but no more .
Whereas China ’ s growth is fueled by low-cost labor as millions of peasants enter the industrial economy , this is not the South Korean recipe for success , which has been driven by private entrepreneurship , innovation , and quality products : Samsung and Hyundai , not cheap wages , are South Korea ’ s growth engines .
Another key to South Korea ’ s success story is the well-balanced relationship between stable governments and the private sector .
This was clearly demonstrated late last year when a South Korean consortium won a contract to build four nuclear reactors in the United Arab Emirates late last year , beating out the French .
The Japanese knew how to coordinate state and private-sector goals in the 1970 ’ s , but then lost their way .
“ We should now emulate the South Koreans , ” says Eisuke Sakakibara , a leading Japanese economist , who was one of the architects of the Japanese “ miracle ” of the 1980 ’ s .
Japanese in search of a miracle now travel to Seoul .
“ In Japan , 1990 to 2000 was called the ‘ lost decade , ’ ” says the free-market economist Fumio Hayashi .
Now Japan is completing its second lost decade .
Hayashi and Sakakibara – indeed , most Japanese economists – more or less agree on the fundamental reason for such spectacular stagnation : the Japanese have stopped working hard .
Fewer hours worked , longer vacations , and a declining population ( since 2005 ) have , predictably , undermined Japanese growth .
To turn this situation around , says Sakakibara , “ the Japanese should work more , have more children , and allow immigration . ”
But the incentives to make any of this happen are just not there .
The Japanese still live comfortably , better by one-third than the South Koreans , thanks to their past investments .
Japanese companies abroad remain profitable and Japan is still the global leader in high-tech niches like electronics or carbon fibers .
For example , Apple ’ s iPhone and Boeing ’ s latest airplane rely heavily on Japanese-patented innovations .
These comparative advantages may keep Japan above water for a while , but only until China or South Korea catch up .
One would thus expect Japan to be anxiety-ridden , but it is not .
True , new forms of poverty and unemployment are rising , but they remain well hidden behind family solidarity or corporate customs .
Companies reduce their superfluous employees ’ annual bonuses , but do not get rid of them .
Young Japanese tend not to work before their 30 ’ s , and married women stay at home .
Political parties that rely on an aging constituency are not tempted to call for change . The sort of shaky short-term political coalitions that rule Japan nowadays prefer to buy time through so-called public stimulus , or to preserve inefficient companies with subsidies .
Twenty years of such shortsighted policies , whatever the party in power , have fueled government debt , hindering private investment .
More strikingly , stagnation has found its promoters in Japan itself .
A leading public intellectual Naoki Inose , who is also Tokyo ’ s vice governor , has declared that “ the era of growth is over . ”
When Japan was threatened by Western imperialism , he says , the country had to open up ( in 1868 ) and modernize .
This process has been completed .
Japan is now ready to reconnect with its own tradition of social harmony and zero growth .
Referring to the 1600-1868 period , Inose calls this future the New Edo era : “ a smaller population will enjoy the sufficient wealth that has been accumulated , and , from now on , it will invest its creativity in refining the culture . ”
The first Edo collapsed when the United States Navy opened up the Japanese market with the arrival of Commodore Perry ’ s “ black ships ” in 1853 .
Will the second Edo be able to resist Chinese ambitions ?
“ The New Edo era needs a strong Japanese army , ” admits Inose .
This second Edo era may sound like a poetic utopia , but it has some influence : Sakakibara observes that Japanese students do not study abroad anymore , and that “ nobody learns English . ”
At a time when South Koreans are becoming more globalized , learning English , and welcoming a growing number of immigrants , Japan is entering a “ de-globalization process . ”
That is a worrying trend , and not only for Japan : South Korea can hardly stand alone as the lone Asian democracy .
If the Japanese do not wake up from their Edo dream , Asia might very well become a Chinese empire .
Will this be debated at the G-20 ?
Not openly , but certainly in the corridors .
