History ’ s Ghosts in Iran
Using historical analogies to interpret the present is both tempting and dangerous , for history never truly repeats itself .
Yet , to understand the difficulty of responding to the problems that Iran ’ s nuclear ambition and anti-Israel obsession now pose , it might be helpful to analyze the three analogies that are most commonly used .
Some compare the Iranian regime to Nazi Germany .
Others believe that the only useful analogy is to Europe ’ s old balance-of-power games .
And still others combine the two , pointing to the “ balance of terror ” during the Cold War .
In other words : is Iran to be treated as Hitler ’ s Germany in 1938 , Prussia in 1756 , or Stalin ’ s Soviet Union ?
Each analogy contains an element of truth , but none , of course , corresponds to the realities of the challenges Iran represents .
Above all , each analogy , if taken seriously , should lead to a specific course of action , and this is far from being the case today .
Let us start with the analogy between Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and Hitler .
Ahmedinejad pursues a dual objective with his anti-Zionist obsession : to de-legitimize Israel and to re-legitimize Iran ’ s claim to speak for Muslims over the heads of their more cautious governments .
He very probably means what he says about Jews and Israel , but is he a latter-day Hitler , and is today ’ s Iran the equivalent of Germany in the 1930 ’ s ?
Hitler came close to developing the nuclear bomb , but never had it , whereas Iran very well might .
But Hitler ’ s power over Germany was much more absolute than Ahmadinejad ’ s power over Iran .
The results of Iran ’ s recent municipal elections were humiliating for Ahmadinejad and his supporters .
Those elections would have been unthinkable in Nazi Germany .
Although the Iranian regime ’ s rhetoric may be totalitarian , political power there is much more diffused .
The analogy with Hitler ’ s Germany is also problematic because , if it were regarded as true , the only sensible course of action would be a preventive strike on Iran and the removal of Ahmadinejad .
Given the evolution of American strategic thinking after Iraq ( and now Afghanistan ) , and of Israel ’ s strategic thinking after Lebanon , a preventive strike is highly unlikely .
The second analogy , to the old balance-of-power system in Europe , is especially popular among Israeli and American diplomats .
According to this view , if Iran wants to de-legitimize Israel and ultimately unite Moslems against the West , the only answer is to isolate Iran in the Middle East , and to create alliances against Iran with moderate Sunni Arab regimes .
Before the 1979 Iranian revolution , some in Israel advocated an alliance between Israel , Turkey , and Iran , the Middle East ’ s three non-Arab powers .
Today , many in the United States and Israel dream of a moderate Arab front , with countries such as Saudi Arabia and Egypt containing and isolating “ radical ” Iran .
That diplomatic project is far from absurd .
The rise of Hamas in Palestine and Hezbollah in Lebanon as instruments of Iranian ambitions can only worry moderate Arab regimes .
But such an alliance has a price : the resumption of negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians , with serious territorial concessions on Israel ’ s part to match the Palestinians ’ absolute recognition of Israel .
Moderate Arab regimes will not dare to engage in an open and serious process of rapprochement with Israel in the absence of real progress over the Palestinian issue .
But are the two parties ready for it ?
Could the US , a wounded power mired in Iraq , implement the part of the Baker report that suggests “ Peace in Baghdad goes through Jerusalem ” ?
While Israel ’ s non-victory in Lebanon and the Palestinians ’ bloody divisions mean that both sides have been humbled , a breakthrough , though possible , remains unlikely .
The third analogy is reflected in Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert ’ s recent references to Israel ’ s nuclear deterrent , which may have been a mistake , but probably indicate the evolution of Israeli strategic thinking .
Olmert seemed to be reminding the Iranians of the hard realities of nuclear deterrence : Iran may join the nuclear club someday , but it will return to the Stone Age if it uses those weapons against a country that has a far more advanced nuclear arsenal .
The comparison here is to the Cold War period .
But can today ’ s Iran be compared to the Soviet Union ?
The success of the “ balance of terror ” presupposed a mixture of confrontation and dialogue between two “ rational actors . ”
Can Iran under Ahmadinejad be considered a rational actor ?
The dilemma concerning Iran is whether a power imbued with an “ absolute ” ideology can be allowed to be in control of an “ absolute ” weapon .
Since a military solution is highly improbable , what are the serious alternatives ?
Can we have a productive dialogue with Iran while rejecting the mad ideology of its president ?
As the shortcomings of the three most popular historical analogies suggest , the answer is far from obvious .
