Evolution ’ s New Frontiers
MISHIMA – Recent breakthroughs in our understanding of molecular mechanisms have revolutionized many fields of biology , including cell biology and developmental biology .
So it is no surprise that these advances are providing valuable insights into the field of evolutionary biology as well , including evidence supporting the nearly neutral theory of molecular evolution that I developed in 1973 .
As is typical in science , each new discovery in evolutionary biology raises as many questions as it answers .
Indeed , my field is now going through one of the most dynamic periods in its 150-year history .
For roughly a century after the publication of Charles Darwin ’ s On the Origin of Species , scientists believed that genetic mutations were governed by a process similar to that described by the father of natural selection .
The idea was that individuals with superior genetic variants would be more likely to survive , reproduce , and pass on their genes than those without them .
As a result , harmful mutations would quickly die out .
Beneficial ones would spread until the entire species carried them .
Evolutionary changes , including morphological ones , were thought to be the result of the accumulation and distribution of beneficial mutations , and the genetic makeup of populations was believed to be close to homogeneous , with only a few rare , random mutations creating differences between one individual and another .
That view was challenged by the discovery of DNA .
As it became possible to analyze an individual ’ s genetic makeup , it become apparent that there was much more variation within populations than prevailing evolutionary theory predicted .
Indeed , individuals could have similar traits but very different gene sequences .
This appeared to contradict the principles of natural selection .
One of the first attempts to square the theory with the evidence was proposed by my late colleague Motoo Kimura , who posited the existence of neutral mutations – gene variants that are neither advantageous nor harmful to an individual , and therefore not influenced by natural selection .
Kimura examined the rate of evolutionary change of proteins and proposed the neutral theory of molecular evolution in 1968 .
His theory – which held that evolutionary changes at the molecular level are caused not by natural selection , but by random genetic drift – provided a good explanation for the genetic variation that researchers had discovered .
Kimura ’ s theory was simple and elegant , but the classification of mutations into the distinct classes – beneficial , neutral , or harmful – seemed too simple to me .
My own work showed that borderline mutations , those with very small positive or negative effects , could be very important in driving evolutionary changes .
This insight was the basis of the nearly neutral theory of molecular evolution .
The explosion of data on genomes and population genetics in the twenty-first century has not only lent new support to my 42-year-old theory ; it has also uncovered broad new areas of research .
Our knowledge of the structure and function of proteins , for example , has been greatly expanded through the discovery of dynamic folding processes .
These are thought to provide flexibility in how proteins function , in a way that may be connected to nearly-neutral mutations .
Among the most interesting challenges in evolutionary biology is the attempt to identify the molecular mechanisms of gene expression that drive morphological evolution .
The field is in the process of gaining a better understanding of a host of complex systems within individual cells .
These molecular-level systems are at the heart of epigenetics – the study of changes in genetic function that cannot be explained by differences in DNA sequences .
Epigenetics is crucial for comprehending the link between the genetic composition , or genotype , and the traits we can actually observe .
In higher organisms – such as humans – epigenetic processes are controlled by chromatin , a complex of macromolecules inside cells consisting of DNA , protein , and RNA .
The way chromatin works is , in turn , shaped by genetic and environmental factors , making their functioning difficult to grasp .
These rapidly evolving , highly variable macromolecules are well worth studying , however , as they may be the cause of some human diseases .
Another factor in the relationship between genetic composition and observable traits is the way that proteins can sometimes be modified .
For example , protein enzymes can be turned on and off , thereby altering their function and activity .
This process , like other forms of genetic expression , seems to be driven by a combination of innate and environmental factors .
No single mechanism , it seems , can be studied in isolation ; at a very basic level , factors like selection , drift , and epigenetics work together and become inseparable .
The deeper we dive into what we once thought were straight-forward evolutionary processes , the more wondrous and complex they are revealed to be .
