Europe ’ s Katrina-in-Waiting
As Europeans watched President Bush stumble over the death , destruction , and chaos wrought by Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans , some could not help patting themselves on the back and saying , “ Thank God for our social solidarity . ”
True , no European country worth its salt would ever allow its citizens to fall into such dire poverty that they literally could not escape from their homes in the face of a natural disaster .
And all Europeans – not only those on the left – were truly shocked and appalled by Katrina ’ s vivid demonstration that there apparently is no bottom for America ’ s poor .
But this concern and sensibility is a little too self-congratulatory , for it allows Europeans to gloss over the very real problems they now have with their own vaunted social solidarity .
For one thing , while Europe ’ s doctrine of social solidarity preaches fairness and equality , it masks an “ insiders ’ society ” that is spectacularly unjust at the upper end of the income spectrum .
Welfare-state elites typically get the best doctors , the best concert seats , the best flats in the best neighborhoods , and so on , because of Europe ’ s stubborn refusal to use prices and the market mechanism to allocate key goods and services .
Outsiders find it difficult to compete when “ who gets what ” depends on knowing the right people .
Surprisingly , the treatment of elites in Europe may not be all that different from America .
America favors its elites by giving them tax cuts .
Europe favors them by bumping them to the head of waiting lists and giving tax breaks to capital .
Second , while the shame of New Orleans could never happen in Europe , European social solidarity nonetheless is failing lower-income groups by not sufficiently delivering to them the benefits of economic growth .
This is perhaps the welfare state ’ s most glaring weakness .
Though social solidarity and economic growth are by no means incompatible , Europeans – quite unwisely – have opted for an inefficient variety of the welfare state .
“ The labor market is the key , ” says Bundesbank President Axel Weber , a Social Democrat recently appointed to his post by Gerhard Schroeder . “ In Europe we need to have more flexible labor markets and more structural reforms . ”
But European social solidarity too often has pursued its objectives through economically costly direct interventions in labor markets rather than in more market-neutral ways .
For example , in order to protect workers ’ jobs , Europe ’ s welfare state has made it difficult for firms to fire them .
But he who can ’ t be fired won ’ t be hired , and he who won ’ t be hired won ’ t quit .
This means that the unemployed can ’ t find jobs ( even though there is useful work for them to do ) , and that workers who have jobs will not move to potentially better ones .
The inevitable result is persistent high unemployment and labor immobility .
It doesn ’ t have to be this way .
Social redistribution can be effected through fiscal measures rather than by direct intervention in the labor market .
That ’ s how it was done in the early days of the welfare state .
But as the “ revolution of rising entitlements ” took hold in the 1960 ’ s and 1970 ’ s , trade unions have adopted the position that labor is entitled not only to a job , but to a job in the region and firm of its choice .
This version of the welfare state has proved devastating for Europe ’ s employment and economic growth .
Finally , while Europe ’ s left may be boastfully proclaiming in Katrina ’ s wake , “ Thank God for our social solidarity , ” there is considerable doubt even about what “ our ” actually means .
The homogeneity of Europe ’ s nation states is decreasing , with immigrants posing a growing challenge for social solidarity , while the European Union as a whole faces a similar dilemma : is a Dutchman in Amsterdam supposed to feel as much solidarity with a Greek in Athens as with a fellow Dutchman in Rotterdam ?
Which brings us back to Katrina .
A lot has been said and written in the wake of the disaster about how little Americans seem to care for one another .
And it certainly can ’ t be denied that it is hard to get people in New York , Maine , or Utah to spend enthusiastically on levees in New Orleans – at least until a horrific crisis occurs .
But is it really so different in Europe ?
Will the Dutch enthusiastically finance public infrastructure in Greece ?
Will Greeks fund water control projects in the Netherlands ?
If one takes the EU as one ’ s term of reference , social solidarity between member states would appear to be not that different from social solidarity between American states .
No doubt , the United States has very real – and growing – problems with the fairness of its income distribution .
But Europeans should temper their criticism with the realization that Europe has similar problems of its own .
