India \ u0027s Bollywood Power
The world has heard much about India ’ s extraordinary transformation in recent years , and even of its claims to a share of “ world leadership . “ Some of that is hyperbole , but in one respect , India ’ s strength may be understated .
What makes a country a world leader ?
Is it population , military strength , or economic development ?
By all of these measures , India has made extraordinary strides .
It is on course to overtake China as the world ’ s most populous country by 2034 , it has the world ’ s fourth-largest army and nuclear weapons , and it is already the world ’ s fifth-largest economy in terms of purchasing power parity and continues to climb , though too many of its people remain destitute .
All of these indicators are commonly used to judge a country ’ s global status .
However , something much less tangible , but a good deal more valuable in the twenty-first century , may be more important than any of them : India ’ s “ soft power . ”
Take Afghanistan , for instance – a major security concern for India , as it is for the world .
But India ’ s greatest asset there doesn ’ t come out of a military mission : it doesn 't have one .
It comes from one simple fact : don ’ t try to telephone an Afghan at 8 : 30 in the evening .
That ’ s when the Indian TV soap opera “ Kyunki Saas Bhi Kabhi Bahu Thi ” , dubbed into Dari , is telecast on Tolo TV , and no one wishes to miss it .
& quot ; Saas & quot ; is the most popular television show in Afghan history , with a 90 % audience penetration .
It ’ s considered directly responsible for a spike in the sale of generator sets and even for absences from religious functions which clash with its broadcast times .
“ Saas ” has so thoroughly captured the public imagination in Afghanistan that , in this deeply conservative Islamic country where family problems are often literally hidden behind the veil , it ’ s an Indian TV show that has come to dominate ( and sometimes to justify ) public discussion of family issues .
That ’ s soft power , and its particular strength is that it has nothing to do with government propaganda .
The movies of Bollywood , which is bringing its glitzy entertainment far beyond the Indian diaspora in the United States and the United Kingdom , offer another example .
A Senegalese friend told me of his illiterate mother who takes a bus to Dakar every month to watch a Bollywood film – she doesn ’ t understand the Hindi dialogue and can ’ t read the French subtitles , but she can still catch the spirit of the films and understand the story , and people like her look at India with stars in their eyes as a result .
An Indian diplomat in Damascus a few years ago told me that the only publicly displayed portraits as big as those of then-President Hafez al-Assad were of the Bollywood superstar Amitabh Bachchan .
Indian art , classical music and dance have the same effect .
So does the work of Indian fashion designers , now striding across the world ’ s runways .
Indian cuisine , spreading around the world , raises Indian culture higher in people 's reckoning ; the way to foreigners ’ hearts is through their palates .
In England today , Indian curry houses employ more people than the iron and steel , coal and shipbuilding industries combined .
When a bhangra beat is infused into a Western pop record or an Indian choreographer invents a fusion of kathak and ballet ; when Indian women sweep the Miss World and Miss Universe contests , or when “ Monsoon Wedding ” wows the critics and “ Lagaan ” claims an Oscar nomination ; when Indian writers win the Booker or Pulitzer Prizes , India ’ s soft power is enhanced .
Likewise , when Americans speak of the IITs , India ’ s technology institutes , with the same reverence they accord to MIT , and the “ Indianness ” of engineers and software developers is taken as synonymous with mathematical and scientific excellence , India gains in respect .
In the information age , as Joseph Nye , the guru of soft power , argues , it is not the side with the bigger army , but the side with the better story , that wins .
India is already the “ land of the better story . ”
As a pluralist society with a free and thriving mass media , creative energies that express themselves in a variety of appealing ways , and a democratic system that promotes and protects diversity , India has an extraordinary ability to tell stories that are more persuasive and attractive than those of its rivals .
And there 's the international spin-off of India just being itself .
India ’ s remarkable pluralism was on display after national elections in May 2004 , when a leader with a Roman Catholic background ( Sonia Gandhi ) made way for a Sikh ( Manmohan Singh ) to be sworn in as Prime Minister by a Muslim ( President Abdul Kalam ) – in a country that is 81 % Hindu . No strutting nationalist chauvinism could ever have accomplished for India ’ s standing in the world what that one moment did – all the more so since it was not directed at the world .
There ’ s still much for India to do to ensure that its people are healthy , well fed , and secure .
Progress is being made : the battle against poverty is slowly ( too slowly ) being won .
But India ’ s greatest prospects for winning admiration in the twenty-first century may lie not in what it does , but simply in what it is .
