France Is Back In Europe , But On What Terms ?
When Nicolas Sarkozy became President of France , he declared that his country was back in mainstream Europe .
Since then , Sarkozy has thrown himself into the European political fray .
His energy – combined with the negotiating talents of German Chancellor Angela Merkel – overcame antagonism toward the new reform treaty that EU leaders just ratified in Lisbon , putting the European Union back on its feet after two years of crippling indecision .
But this triumph marked only a partial return by France to the European fold .
The French must now resolve their own ambiguous attitudes about Europe , which have affected national policies for decades .
For half a century , France has mixed two radically different approaches to Europe .
Some French see the EU as a community where national interests inexorably converge .
At the other extreme is the Gaullist belief that the EU is nothing more than a “ power multiplier ” for France to defend its own national interests .
Rather than using Europe to project French ideas across the continent , France needs to develop a culture of genuine power-sharing and compromise .
Such a sea change would have profound implications for French policies across a broad spectrum , from internal EU issues and economics to foreign policy and Europe ’ s role in the world .
Consider the French executive .
The president and government ministers treat Europe as their political preserve .
Yet the prime minister never attends EU meetings and the foreign minister systematically leaves internal EU decisions to a junior secretary of state or a diplomatic representative .
Meanwhile , other ministers circumvent government instructions to get from Brussels what has been refused in Paris .
Clearly , a better EU policymaking system needs to be found .
For a start , the French parliament must be given a greater role and government ministers must drop their habit of blaming Brussels whenever they want to introduce unpopular economic or social reforms .
Sarkozy is particularly eager for France to be heard on economic policy .
His election victory relied heavily on his plans to reform the labor market and to promote work and innovation .
But if France is to be taken seriously by the rest of Europe , Sarkozy will have to deliver more than just growth and jobs .
He will need to demonstrate that France no longer treats Europe as a scapegoat for its own economic troubles – a ploy that merely marginalizes France in economic debates .
Thus , polemics against the European Central Bank ’ s independence and the damaging effect of “ the high euro ” will have to stop .
France ’ s financial credentials also will have to improve if ministers ’ views on EU monetary issues are to be taken seriously .
For years , France has funded some of the highest public spending in Europe through budget deficits , despite its commitment to balance the books as part of the EU ’ s Stability and Growth Pact .
Many EU members fear that Sarkozy ’ s government will again break French budget promises , as his demands for growth-boosting tax cuts imply pushing back the deadline for eliminating France ’ s deficit until 2012 .
Similarly , French prudence will be under scrutiny during discussions of a new European financial framework , which will test France ’ s capacity to view EU budgets as something other than a means of redistributing EU cash , particularly to farmers .
The Common Agricultural Policy still accounts for more than 40 % of Community expenditure , even though the farm sector accounts for only 2 % of employment .
As for global security , it is clear that EU countries can exert international influence only when they speak with one voice .
France must sort out its relations with NATO and the role it intends to play in transatlantic forums .
This means dropping anti-American rhetoric and talk about “ European power , ” which is meaningless for the majority of EU states .
French and German disagreements with the United States in 2003 generated deep divisions in the EU .
But recent changes in political leadership in the Britain , France , and Germany , together with the arrival of a new US administration in early 2009 , could improve transatlantic cooperation .
Next , France and the EU must find a new model for dealing with Russia .
Here , the Union is confronted with a dilemma .
Does it consider Russia a powerful partner or a hostile neighbor ?
If France wants to take the lead on EU relations with Moscow , it must become far more sensitive to eastern and central European fears about Russia .
French politicians underestimate the negative impact they have in these countries when they repeatedly refer to a Paris-Berlin-Moscow axis and criticize “ excessive ” enthusiasm for the transatlantic alliance .
Sarkozy will need to take all this into account if he wants France to play a full part in shaping the EU ’ s future .
France ’ s elites need to own up to the mistakes of the past and find better ways to confront today ’ s challenges .
Ordinary French people also have much to consider : our attitudes toward the market , our relations with the rest of Europe , and our views about the world beyond the EU ’ s borders .
If we come to terms with today ’ s complex realities , France could be back in Europe .
