A Very Tolerant Christmas
LONDON – Christmas is coming – and has been , it seems , since mid-autumn .
And just in case there was any sign of flagging , we now have Black Friday , an export from the United States , when we are all encouraged to drink deep of the modern Christmas spirit and shop until we drop .
In my old-fashioned way , I rather disapprove of celebrating “ God rest you merry merchants ” day .
Since when were we happy for Christmas to dawn in early November ?
Festivals should happen only when they turn up on the calendar .
When I was a boy , Christmas arrived on its eve , December 24 .
We went to mass at midnight .
Afterward , my dad carried me home .
We woke up the following morning to open presents and prepare for our turkey lunch .
The day after Christmas was a public holiday with cold turkey and ham to sustain us .
Then it was back to work on December 27 .
That was that .
Christmas was over , until December 24 the following year .
These days , whether you are Christian or not , the feast to mark the birth of Jesus Christ has turned into a winter bacchanal and a huge retailing orgy .
Of course , there was always a commercial side to Christmas , if only for breeders of poultry and makers of greeting cards .
But in most countries today , even those with few Christian citizens , the festival offers the chance for a holiday and a binge .
Sometimes , the symbols of the event become very confused .
It is reported that one Tokyo department store marked the time of year for shoppers by hanging a huge crucified Father Christmas in its entrance hall .
Apocryphal or not , the story gives us some idea of the cultural confusion that this midwinter religious feast can cause .
It is all a long way from the stable in Bethlehem that we read about in the New Testament – a location now ringed by Israel Defense Forces barbed wire .
Of course , there are places where any sign of celebrating Christmas would trigger immediate persecution .
In any part of Mesopotamia presently controlled by the Islamic State ( ISIS ) , practicing Christians would lose their heads .
At its worst , intolerance is literally murderous .
But there are other forms of intolerance , infinitely less horrifying than that of jihadist bigots , that kill no one but demean us all .
Think of all those who don ’ t like to write or say “ Happy Christmas , ” lest they offend those who are not Christians .
This self-censorship is rather insulting to Jews , Hindus , and Muslims .
What cause for offense should they have when Christians celebrate their December feast ?
Does the celebration of Diwali , Eid , or Passover offend Christians ?
It certainly should not , although we can recall terrible periods of Christian intolerance and bigotry .
In Britain , we recently experienced an example of alleged political correctness that went well beyond such questions .
The Church of England filmed various Christian groups saying the Lord ’ s Prayer , one of the foundations of Christian worship .
The film was to be shown among the advertisements in cinemas .
But the cinema proprietors banned the film on the grounds that it might give offense .
Even well-known atheists criticized this mindless act of censorship .
Intolerance grows , and not just in societies run by jihadists and religious fanatics .
Across university campuses , particularly in the US but also in Britain , students claim the right to deny others free speech or to rewrite history that offends them – a complete denial of what universities should be all about .
Censorship and assertions of sensitivity eviscerate scholarship and , with it , the very idea of a university where pluralism defines the meeting of minds .
Disagreement is the heart of educated debate .
Destroy that and you destroy the hallmarks of liberal order .
As the great political philosopher Karl Popper argued , the only thing that we should not tolerate in an open society is intolerance .
The most extreme example of such intolerance today – which much of the world is now fighting – is the religious totalitarianism of ISIS .
The extent to which this extremism is a product of Saudi Arabia ’ s energetic promotion of its Wahhabi ideology is for Muslims to debate themselves .
But it is increasingly difficult for the outside world to overlook the impact of the Kingdom ’ s main export , alongside oil .
The best present we could give to the world this Christmas ( regardless of whether we celebrate it religiously or not ) , would be to dedicate ourselves to championing tolerance everywhere .
This will require us to address the inverted narratives of victimhood , which are often recruited to justify intolerance .
The suffering from past wrongs does not justify current and future cruelty .
This Christmas , the open society is endangered not only from without , by the likes of ISIS , but also by ( admittedly far smaller ) threats at home – a gloomy reflection , I admit , as we prepare in churches and in high streets to enjoy another year ’ s winter party .
So , in the spirit of tolerance : Happy Christmas , whether you are Jewish , Muslim , Hindu , Sikh , atheist , agnostic , consumerist , or Christian .
As the Irish comedian Dave Allen used to say , “ May your God go with you . ”
