Hamas Takes on the Radicals
GAZA CITY – The recent shoot-out in a Gaza mosque between Hamas security officers and militants from the radical jihadi group the Warriors of God brought to the surface the deep tensions that divide Palestinian Islamists .
Twenty-two people died , including the Warriors of God ’ s leader , Abdel Latif Moussa .
But Palestinian security officials doubt that these will be the last casualties .
With Hamas in control for more than two years , the Gaza Strip has long been considered much more traditional and conservative than the West Bank .
Nevertheless , in Gaza ’ s political milieu , Hamas is a moderate Islamic group that opposes al-Qaeda-style extremism .
But such extremist Islamic groups have been gaining support in Gaza , and Hamas has noticed .
The shoot-out in the mosque shows that Hamas will be ruthless in taking them on .
Various Salafi extremist groups have been operating in Gaza for years .
Salafis , whose name is derived from the Arabic phrase for “ righteous ancestors , ” known as “ Salaf al-Salih , ” insist on a return to what they consider the purity of the practices of the first Muslims .
Hamas has , in the past , cooperated with some of the Salafis , assuming they would stand behind Hamas ’ s leadership .
The Army of Islam joined in the raid that abducted the Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit in June 2006 .
The group also took responsibility for the 2007 kidnapping of the BBC ’ s Gaza correspondent Alan Johnston , who was later released after negotiations led by Hamas .
The Warriors of God is one of a handful of radical , al-Qaeda-inspired groups to have appeared in the Gaza Strip in recent months , first coming to public attention in June after claiming responsibility for a failed horseback attack on Israel from Gaza .
Their Web site shares images , language , and music with al-Qaeda and other jihadi groups .
In a recent declaration , the group made favorable mention of al-Qaeda leaders Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri .
The Warriors of God demands a pure form of Islamic practice throughout the Gaza Strip , including the implementation of Sharia religious law and a rejection of democracy .
Indeed , the confrontation at the mosque followed the declaration of an Islamic Caliphate in Gaza , a flagrant rejection of Hamas ’ s authority .
Many young men in Gaza have become increasingly radicalized .
Pakistani-style dress has become common , as is the long hair that is thought to resemble the style of the Prophet Mohammad .
At the same time , violence against “ law-breakers ” is on the rise . Internet cafes have been bombed , institutions with Christian affiliations burned down , foreign schools attacked , and wedding parties assaulted .
There are substantial ideological differences between Gaza ’ s Salafi al-Qaeda affiliates and Hamas .
As a ruling party , Hamas has insisted that its sole concern is the Palestinian people , not a global Islamic revolution .
Hamas has not imposed Islamic law in the Gaza Strip .
The Salafi groups , however , appear increasingly influenced by the growth of radical al-Qaeda-style extremism in Pakistan , Iraq , and Afghanistan .
While traditional Salafi movements have stayed away from politics , the younger groups see activism and violence as the best means of realizing their goals .
But Hamas ’ s failure to establish and implement Islamic law is not the only issue that rankles .
One of the reasons for these groups ’ increased appeal is the de facto cease-fire between Israel and Hamas , which has led some in Gaza to charge that Hamas has been neutralized as a resistance force .
With the border closed under Israeli blockade for more than two years , levels of poverty , unemployment , and despair have grown , with young men increasingly interested in joining the global jihad as it comes to Gaza .
Indeed , Hamas ’ confrontation with Salafi groups comes as Israel is charging that dozens of foreign terrorists have crossed into Gaza from the Sinai Desert to join the violent underground .
Hamas ’ s crackdown thus highlights its desire to maintain control over its conflict with Israel .
The threat of Salafi extremism in Gaza is far from over .
Salafis have threatened to retaliate against Hamas , particularly the security brigades that led the counter-attack on the mosque .
A new Salafi group called the Brigade of Swords of Righteousness has declared its obedience to the Warriors of God , and has warned Gazans to stay away from government buildings , security headquarters , mosques attended by Hamas leaders , and other official buildings .
The group now considers these legitimate targets .
With hundreds of tunnels connecting the Gaza Strip and Sinai , it is very difficult to control the flow of arms , ammunition , and possibly foreign fighters .
Hamas ’ s battle with these radicals , who detonated suicide bombs and killed six Hamas security men during the mosque fight , is just beginning .
Residents are afraid that Gaza could become another Iraq , with bombings and mass killings a daily occurrence .
Hamas will use all means necessary to protect its power , and to break the jihadi groups now spreading in Gaza .
In the process , Hamas hopes to win the international legitimacy that it has long sought .
