Don ’ t Blame the Poor for Poverty
CAMBRIDGE : The divisions of income between the world ’ s rich and the poor are wider than at any time in world history .
Rich countries , eager not to be held accountable for poverty in the rest of the world , hold the view that the poor have only themselves to blame for their condition .
The theory goes that if poor countries simply adopt the right policies , and if they follow the advice of rich countries via institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank , all will be right .
This strategy is doomed to fail , however , because it misunderstands many of the root causes of impoverishment .
Perhaps the most urgent item on the world agenda is a more realistic view of the global development challenge .
Here are the facts .
According to 1997 classifications of the World Bank for countries with populations more than 1 million people , there are 26 high-income economies in the world , with an average income per person ( in 1995 ) of $ 24,930 , and a combined population of 902 million people .
At the same time , there are 107 low-and-middle-income economies in the world , with an average income per person of $ 1,090 , and a combined population of 4.8 billion people , or 84 percent of the world ’ s population .
The gap is actually a bit narrower than this , since the dollar price of goods is lower in poorer countries , so that each dollar of income buys more than in rich countries .
Once we take into account the purchasing power of dollars , the gap in incomes is approximately seven times between the rich and the poor countries .
Some poor countries have achieved rapid progress , and have narrowed the gap with the rich countries , at least to some extent .
Fortunately , the two largest countries , India and China both fall within that category .
If we leave out India and China , however , the rest of the developing world — on average — is falling further and further behind the rich countries .
Indeed , between 1985-95 , the low-income economies other than China and India had average annual decline of 1.4 percent per year in GDP per person , while the rich countries had average annual growth of 1.9 percent per year .
The middle-income countries had a decline of 0.7 percent per year .
Thus , the gap widened between the rich and the poor in most of the world .
And now with the collapse of several fast growing emerging-market economies in the past year , the gap between rich and poor is widening still further .
Why don ’ t the poor countries grow more rapidly ?
The World Bank and the IMF have been peddling their cures for decades , but nothing seems to work .
Each failure , in fact , brings new complaints against the poor countries themselves .
The most popular charge is that it is all a matter of " bad governance , " Washington ’ s code word for corruption .
This theory is dubious for several reasons .
First , in most cases , poverty breeds poor governance at least as much as poor governance breeding poverty .
Thus , the Washington diagnosis often confuses cause and effect .
Second , and even more important , many very well-meaning governments in the developing world , in places ranging from Bolivia to Kyrgyzstan , have had a very hard time generating sufficient economic growth .
It ’ s not just a matter of will power or policy choices .
More and more research suggests that the poor are suffering in large part because of tremendous biological , ecological , and geographical obstacles not faced in the rich countries .
In fact , the distribution of poverty in the world is amazing .
There are , in essence , only three groups of poor countries : those in tropical , sub-tropical , or desert climates ; those that are landlocked in the center of poor regions , and therefore cut off from world trade ; and those that are escaping from the nightmare of communism .
In general , the non-socialist , temperate-zone countries are all fairly rich .
The advantages of the rich countries therefore lie more in nature and geography than in the their supposed cultural or political superiority .
The tropical countries have several severe disadvantages .
These include : susceptibility to infectious diseases such as malaria , transmitted by insects that thrive in the tropics ; poor soils ; vulnerability to extreme natural disasters such as tropical cyclones ( of the kind that killed around 11,000 people in Central America ) ; and low agricultural productivity due to the effects of excessive heat on plant growth , and other causes .
Scientists are still in the process of unraveling the biological mysteries that underlie the poor tropical productivity .
The IMF and the World Bank have acted unscientifically in their advice , saying what is convenient for the rich countries , not what is scientifically accurate .
The result is a misdirection of foreign aid .
Instead of lecturing so much about governance , the rich countries should do much more to promote a serious scientific understanding of the tropical environment -including infectious diseases , energy use , agricultural productivity , climate change , and natural disasters - as the real source of help for the 87 percent of humanity living in the poor countries of the world .
The sooner we understand the scientific and technological underpinnings of prosperity and poverty , the sooner we will be able to promote successful long-term economic development .
