Hooray for Europe ?
CAMBRIDGE : Europe 's economy is clearly on the upswing : growth forecasts run at 3 % and even higher rates are quite possible .
The world economy looks better and even inside Europe , demand is rising .
Plenty of reason , therefore , to be optimistic : say good-bye to global crisis , forget the risk of a stagnant Europe .
But there is even more good news , promising perhaps to turn the current upswing into something more durable .
For this , thank the often abused Euro , for it has anchored the once profligate nations of the Mediterranean in German-style monetary discipline .
But the most interesting new fact in European economics is surely the belief , hope , and perhaps reality , of economic restructuring on a variety of fronts .
Governments have undertaken a few privatizations with radical consequences for competition .
Take the case of Deutsche Telecom and the price wars it has incited .
Young people are increasingly recognizing the dramatic importance of modern information technology and are finding their way both to the Internet and the Neumarkt , Germany 's bid to inspire American-style venture capitalists .
Big companies , too , are in the game .
Europe is abuzz with mergers not only to take advantage of Europe 's broader economic space but also to confront tough competition in world markets .
In sum , the old Continent is hot .
No one can say how deep the changes will go , nor how fast they will shift Europe into the fast lane .
Germany is ablaze as its mammoth corporations are performing mating rites . In France big strategic plays are underway in banks and fashion ;
Italy is seeing its major players position themselves on a European and world scale . In smaller countries , too , appropriately downsized in terms of scope and excitement , a lot is happening also .
Just what does all this mean for European growth and prosperity ? Could it be that despite all the gripes about the American model , a little imitation of the American success story is now underway in Europe ?
No !
Such claims are vastly overstated , the beginnings are relatively minor — privatizing telecoms is accomplished in every third world country and does not make them rich overnight ; getting on the Internet is routine from Bolivia to China .
As to corporate mergers , it remains to be seen how many are simply the vanity plays of bosses who do not face tough stockholder scrutiny .
Three reasons stand out as to why all this is not transforming Europe fast and deep .
First , it takes a long time to change an economic culture and existing business organizations from mere administration to profitable management .
In the US , large companies were fat and lazy until a new generation of bosses like Jack Welch at General Electric took over and played rough .
Twenty years later the benefits are patent but it took a long time to get there despite the fact that much of what was done was right from the start .
Next , European governments remain mostly uncooperative , nowhere more so than in Germany .
The Kohl government did nothing to reform and the Schroeder government is equally lazy .
It talks , and talks but shies away from decisive moves to change the economic landscape .
Chancellor Schroeder talks like Tony Blair , but neglects the fact that Britain had a decade of Thatcherism before turning to " New Labour . "
Worse , a country where 70 % of the members of parliament are teachers and bureaucrats , as is the case in Germany , cannot hope to get dramatic legislative change .
The cultural orientation of bureaucrats and teachers is deeply anti-market , anti-risk taking and in love with the status quo .
No chance of a regulatory revolution here .
There is another reason to be circumspect on the pace of change in Europe .
Unlike the United States , Northern Europe has a culture not of entrepreneurship , experimentation , risk taking and deal making .
Rather , the State tells everyone what to do , the State and business authorities tell everybody what position to play .
Of course , there are exceptions , but the dominant mode is a passive one : " Nobody told me to " .
All this sounds pretty pessimistic but is not meant to be ; it is meant to calibrate that change takes a lot of time , more so if it is tentative and reluctant .
But change is taking place at last and , who knows , it might just become a new wave .
Europe has accomplished an extraordinary move forward with the Euro , so why not in other areas ?
The Euro was not a politically expensive step to take , except in Germany where it ran into every sort of prejudice .
What must follow for Europe to become dynamic will be much harder because a lot of toes need to be stepped on as an inefficient status quo is jettisoned .
Normally , crisis brings the legitimacy needed for dramatic moves , but Europe is not in crisis ; hence the slow pace of progress .
But there is one great source of optimism : today Germany is the loser in Europe , viewed by the French and even Italians as the losers — overweight and immobilized by bureaucracy and regulation .
Germany had its turn at the head when hard money was the issue of the day ; today it is trailing because the restructuring mode does not accord well with its traditions of pay without work and disciplined followers without courageous leadership .
Nothing better could happen to Europe than just this discussion ; perhaps it generates the kind of shock that propels more ambitious changes forward .
In the meantime , the significant upturn in growth makes radical change far less important and it is a short step from there to putting change on the back burner .
