Europe \ u0027s Coming Crisis with Turkey
LONDON : By the end of the second week of December the European Union will finally have decided which countries will be asked to enter membership negotiations .
Most people expect that invitations will go out to six countries ( Cyprus , the Czech Republic , Estonia , Hungary , Poland and Slovenia ) , because this was the list recommended by the European Commission earlier this year .
In Eastern Europe , the EU choice will no doubt be well received by the fortunate five .
In the case of Cyprus , unfortunately , the EU commitment to negotiate now looks more and more like a lethal political detonator , with explosive but incalculable consequences for the future of the European Union , and major dangers for the political and security order in the Eastern Mediterranean .
The problem is that the officially-recognised government of Cyprus does not really represent the whole island .
Cyprus has long been divided between the Greek Cypriot majority in the south and the Turkish Cypriot minority in the north ; it is thus in some sense a miniature of the larger and long-standing conflict between Greece and Turkey .
But for the past two decades the division of Cyprus has been physical and military , ever since the Turkish government in 1974 sent troops to the north , and helped create a separate so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus ( TRNC ) .
As far as the United Nations is concerned , the Greek Cypriot government in the south is the sole internationally recognised government for the whole island ; only Turkey recognises the existence of the government of the TRNC .
But the fact remains that , in any negotiations with the European Union , the Greek Cypriot government will not be able to speak for the whole of Cyprus .
So it is not really clear how these negotiations can take place , or what kind of treaty commitments the Cyprus government can realistically put its name to .
Even worse beckons . The Turkish government is now threatening to turn the question of Cyprus into a major crisis over the relationship between Turkey and the European Union , or even perhaps between Turkey and Nato and the Western world in general .
At the very least , the Turks have threatened that , if the EU opens negotiations with the existing Greek Cypriot government , then the government of Ankara will make the division of Cyprus permanent , by incorporating northern Cyprus into Turkey .
Indeed , the Turks have made clear that the Cyprus question is really a sub-plot of the much larger question of the whole relationship between Turkey and Europe .
Ever since Kemal Ataturk founded the republic of Turkey in 1923 , in the troubled aftermath of the First World War and the collapse of the Ottoman Empire , the Turks have aspired and claimed to be part of Europe and the West .
But this Turkish aspiration has not been reciprocated by the Europeans .
When the Cold War was at its height , and the threat from Russia at its most extreme , the West seemed to welcome Turkey 's advances .
In 1952 Turkey ( like Greece ) became a member of Nato ; in 1963 Turkey became an associated state of the European Community .
In 1987 , however , when Turkey applied for full membership of the European Community , the Commission gave it the thumbs down : Turkey was too poor and too populous ( before the unification of Germany , it was bigger than any member state ) ; its human rights record was unacceptable ; and it was disqualified by its invasion of northern Cyprus in 1974 .
Now the Turks are saying that the Cyprus issue will put the question of Turkey 's relationship with Europe and the West on the line .
What they really want is a firm commitment by the Europeans to offer EU membership to Turkey .
At present this seems inherently extremely unlikely , because the objections are just as serious today as when the Commission formulated them 10 years ago .
If the EU goes ahead with membership negotiations with Cyprus , however , then the Turks in retaliation may block any enlargement of Nato into Eastern Europe .
Some people even fear that the present war of words over Cyprus could lead to a shooting war in earnest between Greece and Turkey .
Earlier this year the Greek-Cypriot government announced the purchase of S-300 anti-aircraft missiles from Russia .
Since these missiles could in theory attack Turkish aircraft in Turkish airspace , the Turks in response have implied that their deployment might be a casus belli .
It is not easy to see how a crisis can now be avoided , or how the European Union can get out of what is really a primitive and atavistic conflict between Greeks and Turks .
Some experts argue that , even if the EU does open membership negotiations with the Greek-Cypriot government of Cyprus , as it is virtually bound to do , it must make clear that they cannot be completed without a settlement of the Cyprus question .
No amount of finessing of the Cyprus question will dispose of the much larger question of Turkey 's relationship to Europe .
In the past 50 years Turkey used to be seen as an essential link in European security .
But now the European Union 's security , in the south-east Mediterranean , is in jeopardy to the fact that Turkey ( a member of Nato ) and Greece ( a member of the EU and of Nato ) are at daggers drawn .
