Germany \ u0027s Economic Malaise
A month before his re-election last month , Chancellor Gerhard Schröder seemed a certain loser .
People resented his failure to keep his promise from 1998 to reduce unemployment .
Now , with Schröder back in power , it 's Germany 's economy that seems the certain loser .
Chancellor Schröder 's job , as everyone now recognizes , was saved by floods in eastern Germany and his opportunistic crusade against America 's Iraq policy .
Each allowed him to preen successfully as a crisis manager .
But the price of switching the terms of the debate away from economics is that the Chancellor now lacks a mandate to undertake serious labor market and other reforms .
Indeed , Mr. Schröder committed himself strongly to trade union demands during his campaign .
At the beginning of his first term , Schröder appeared to be a modern social democrat who understood business .
When he ousted his first finance minister , Oskar Lafontaine , Germans became optimistic about reform and an economic upswing .
Those hopes have vanished .
Germany 's vital small and medium-size businesses--the famous " mittelstand " --has not only lost its dynamism , but investment in this sector is grinding to a halt .
Together with today 's weak consumer demand , this is a recipe for economic malaise .
Equally troubling , Schröder embraced the misguided reform proposals put forward by the " Hartz Commission , " a panel of representatives from industrial and trade union interest groups .
Its proposals are based on the illusion that a key factor in German unemployment is an ineffective labor market bureaucracy that fails to match those searching for jobs with the many jobs on offer .
In reality , German unemployment is primarily a problem of a lack of jobs for low-skilled workers .
Germany 's welfare system effectively creates a minimum wage for the low skilled that is so far above the market price that it effectively prices such workers out of jobs .
Implementing the " Hartz Reforms " has now become a primary government commitment that will distract attention and political will from the reforms that are really needed , namely an overhaul of Germany 's social support system .
Making Germany 's economic prospects even gloomier is a looming round of tax hikes .
An increase in gasoline taxes is set for January 2003 .
Income tax relief due in 2003 has been postponed .
Post-election talk abounds about higher wealth taxes , business taxes , and an increase in value-added tax--precisely the opposite of what Germany 's economy needs .
Tax hikes will not solve the government 's fiscal problems , because weakening growth ultimately means less tax revenues .
Finance Minister Eichel 's policy is bound to become as erratic as the fiscal policies pursued by the last Kohl government .
Efforts to find new revenues will chase spending cuts that in recent years have led to a decline in public-sector investment and education spending and a shift in responsibility for welfare spending from the federal to local governments .
Eichel 's commitment to balancing the budget is certainly important , but balancing the budget is no substitute for a medium and long-term strategic perspective for fiscal policy that promotes sustainable growth and recognizes the need to invest in Germany 's ailing education system .
In many German schools today the youngest teachers are well beyond their mid-forties , while universities find it increasingly hard to attract young researchers and faculty .
Europe 's experience over the past 10 years teaches that fiscal consolidation must be supported by growth-friendly tax and spending policies .
Both spending and taxes must be used to strengthen the incentives to work , invest , and innovate .
Even if Schröder wants to push for reform , his political position will make such efforts difficult .
His thin majority in the lower house of the Bundestag faces an upper house dominated by the opposition Christian Democratic Union / Christian Social Union ( CDU / CSU ) .
So any proposal will be subject to tricky negotiations and the need to cater to the special interests of länder governments , further reducing the prospect of serious reforms being undertaken .
This last point has broader implications .
Germany 's political center , where elections are won and lost , remains undefined and unstable concerning policy priorities .
So long as the campaign 's focus was on economics , Schröder 's government was a clear loser .
When the focus shifted to flood relief and foreign affairs , a majority in the center embraced Schröder 's disregard of international commitments and alliances .
This suggests that a majority of Germans still do not yet perceive economic weakness as more important than other , more short-term issues .
It also signals , correctly , that both main opposition parties did not appreciate the implications of Schröder 's victory in 1998 .
For much too long , they saw it as an unhappy accident to be corrected at the first opportunity .
So neither the CDU / CSU nor their liberal allies , the Free Democrats , offered convincing policy prescriptions for dealing with Germany 's economic problems .
Indeed , Edmund Stoiber 's economic policies as premier of Bavaria were ( and are ) no less interventionist than those of Schröder .
The opposition 's main campaign claim was a suggestion that the right is more competent than the left in managing the economy .
But this was merely rhetoric .
The right 's lack of clear alternative policies made it easy for voters to turn back to the Chancellor when he decided not to talk about the economy .
The next four years will challenge both the government and opposition .
Chancellor Schröder will be confronted by the need finally to address Germany 's real economic problems .
The CDU / CSU and the FDP will be forced to present convincing alternatives to Schröder 's policies .
Until one side or the other acts decisively , Germany will remain economically weak and politically unpredictable .
