America ’ s Anti-Immigrant Road Rage
Because Latin American countries enjoy the billions of dollars that their countrymen in the United States send home , they should take note of how many of their benefactors are being treated by American officials .
Despite their numbers – the Urban Institute estimates that more than nine million undocumented immigrants live in the US , a number that exceeds the entire populations of countries like Costa Rica and Nicaragua – the undocumented worker has long been North America ’ s favorite punching bag .
Damned on Sunday , they are hired for work on Monday .
Attacks on immigrants went into high gear in February , when the US Congress passed a bill that will make it illegal for any state to issue driver ’ s licenses to undocumented workers .
No one in America is even writing about this or taking much notice because few care about those who are in the US illegally .
Undocumented workers pick America ’ s crops , clean Americans ’ houses , and serve Americans their food , but their fate simply does not matter to many US citizens .
Most groups with nine million members who represent billions of dollars would be raising hell in Congress if they were targeted for ill treatment .
But the money undocumented workers earn goes abroad to build homes , start businesses , and take care of elderly parents throughout Latin America .
So the countries that benefit from this largesse have a responsibility to speak up for the constituents who help keep their economies afloat .
US Congresswoman Linda Sanchez says that if foreign presidents don ’ t speak up for their constituents in America , few others will .
If California is any indicator , a ban on driver ’ s licenses won ’ t be effective in keeping undocumented workers off the road .
It will merely make life riskier and more expensive for them , pushing them even further to the margins of society .
Gil Cedillo , a California state senator who has been trying to reverse earlier legislation that in 1994 made it illegal for undocumented workers in California to drive , wrote in a recent policy paper , “ While the number of immigrant drivers may be minimally reduced , most simply drive without being trained , tested , licensed , and insured . ”
Unlicensed drivers , he found , are nearly five times more likely to be in a fatal crash .
In addition to all the deaths , the net result of this , Cedillo found , was that unlicensed drivers cost Californians some $ 831 million a year in uninsured motorist coverage .
In some neighborhoods of Los Angeles where undocumented immigrants are concentrated , roughly 90 % of drivers are uninsured .
Immigrants need to get to work and so they buy , sell , drive , and abandon cars in a parallel market .
When I talked to immigrants in Oakland , they called their license “ tu licencia con dios , ” or “ your license with God . ”
A benevolent God keeps the immigrant from being stopped by the police .
Undocumented workers thus enter the cycle of those who live and drive with nearly throwaway cars that cost between $ 200 and $ 700 .
When it breaks down , the car of an unlicensed driver is towed to a lot , where it is rarely claimed .
It is then put up for auction and repurchased by agents who in turn sell it to another unlicensed immigrant .
The trick for an immigrant is to always buy cheap , because he never knows how long it will be before a car breaks down .
It is time for Latin America ’ s leaders to stand up for citizens who mean so much for their countries ’ economies .
For example , fighting the Congress ’ s proposed nationwide ban on driver ’ s licenses for undocumented immigrants could be a high priority while negotiating new trade agreements with the US .
In any case , the time to act is now : once the ban is passed by Congress and signed by the president , it is unlikely to be lifted any time soon .
The California experience is a case in point .
Probably no other state governor has the political clout to win against the tide of activists who regard offering an undocumented immigrant a driver ’ s license as tantamount to offering them work , which they already have , and legitimacy , which they apparently don ’ t need to work .
While repealing one law to satisfy his voters – and get elected – Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger promised new legislation that would restore undocumented workers ’ ability to obtain a driver ’ s license .
But the anti-immigrant vitriol of the 1990 ’ s , which pushed California ’ s legislature to impose the ban , remains strong , and not even the immigrant Terminator can muster the courage to fight it .
Instead , Schwarzenegger , like other Americans , makes laws in the belief that nine million undocumented workers do not matter .
