Exiting International Justice
I recently took part in a conference in Belgrade entitled “ Dealing with the Past in ex-Yugoslavia . ”
Although the rest of postcommunist Europe confronted such questions a decade ago , the Balkan wars of the 1990 ’ s left both perpetrators and victims stuck in a time warp of justice delayed .
As the conference ’ s participants made their way into Belgrade ’ s Hyatt Hotel , an angry band of mostly older protesters bearing posters that read , “ Free Milosevic ” greeted them .
In a flurry of media and security , they confronted Carla Del Ponte , chief prosecutor at the International Criminal Tribunal for former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) in The Hague .
Del Ponte is pressing Serbia ’ s government to cooperate in the still unresolved cases of Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic , who ordered , implemented , and oversaw the massacre of 7,000 Muslim men and boys at Srebrenica in 1995 .
The protesters are not unrepresentative of Serb opinion .
Almost a decade after the start of the ICTY ’ s work , debate still rages over responsibility for war crimes , with little agreement on even the most basic facts of the conflicts in Bosnia , Croatia , and Kosovo .
Serbian Prime Minister ( then President ) Vojislav Kostunica ’ s attempt in 2001 to set up a truth commission was doomed from the outset by allegations of bias , and was disbanded within a year .
The ICTY is also in trouble .
To be sure , Milosevic is on trial in The Hague for war crimes , crimes against humanity , and genocide .
But comparisons to the post-WWII Nuremberg tribunal have worn thin : as the proceedings drag on , observers wonder why it has taken so long to establish criminal liability .
After all , at Nuremberg , the top rung of the Third Reich was tried and convicted within months .
By contrast , Milosevic has taken advantage of the ICTY ’ s procedures to delay his trial , while challenging its jurisdiction and legitimacy .
This plays well back home , where indicted war criminals are still touted as war heroes .
Indeed , Serbia ’ s last presidential election became something of a referendum on Milosevic – and hence on Serbia ’ s relations with the West and the wider world .
The pro-Milosevic candidate , Tomislav Nikolic , lost , but he received 46 % of the vote .
Despite his campaign promises , Serbia ’ s President Boris Tadic has so far failed to cooperate with the ICTY by assisting in turning over Mladic ( Karadzic is probably not in Serbia ) , who would surely testify against Milosevic .
One understands his trepidation : the first post-Milosevic prime minister , Zoran Djindjic , cooperated with the tribunal , and paid for it with his life .
Such foot-dragging exposes the ICTY ’ s fundamental weakness : unlike the Nuremberg tribunal , the international community convened it
This continues to impede the case against Milosevic , raising questions about whether there is sufficient proof directly linking him to the policy of genocidal ethnic cleansing , although this is likely to be less problematic since the charges against him turn not on “ command responsibility , ” but instead on the ICTY ’ s charter principles of individual responsibility .
These implicitly authorize prosecution of those responsible for a “ joint criminal enterprise , ” thus linking liability for criminal behavior such as deportations and removals to other foreseeable atrocities .
But time is running out . The ICTY must wrap up new indictments this year , and disband by 2008 .
It enters this end game facing diminished resources and waning political will within the international community .
What will be the Tribunal ’ s legacy ?
From the start , the ICTY ’ s aims were ambitious , having been launched under the UN Security Council ’ s peacemaking powers .
If this meant that the Tribunal was intended to deter further violence , then it failed , at least in the short run .
After all , atrocities – including the Srebrenica massacre – continued after the ICTY began operating .
What about ethnic reconciliation ?
The ICTY ’ s first chief prosecutor , Richard Goldstone , called for condemnation of ethnic persecution in order to enable all sides to transcend identity politics and move towards a more liberal political order .
Individual accountability would somehow break the chain of ethnic identity and communal vengeance .
But fostering ethnic reconciliation is a tall order for any court , and the ICTY hasn ’ t yet delivered .
A liberal political order implies a rule of law that recognizes precedents and analogical thinking .
But many Serbs hold on to their sense of historical exceptionalism and unique suffering .
Indeed , the coincidence of the NATO bombing in 1999 with the indictment of Milosevic helped convert both events into “ attacks on the Serbian people . ”
Historical denial is no less evident in Croatia , where the polarities of blame and suffering have simply been reversed .
There , too , the ICTY will not be missed .
So the talk nowadays is of the right “ exit strategy ” from international justice .
When the ICTY closes its doors , where should its unfinished cases go ?
Del Ponte has called for “ new partnerships for justice . ”
That sounds fine , but what , realistically , are the choices ?
Can the ICTY ’ s investigations and indictments really be turned over to national courts ?
So far , the picture is not promising : the few domestic trials in the region continue to reflect the fractious politics and pervasive ethnic bias that surround them .
As in many parts of the world , it may be several generations before the region ’ s crimes can be worked through .
The ICTY ’ s responsibility should be to forge and disseminate a record that limits the possibility of historical denial .
