China ’ s Bad Dream
LONDON – Since his first address as China ’ s president last year , Xi Jinping has been espousing the so-called “ Chinese Dream ” of national rejuvenation and individual self-improvement .
But the imperative of addressing the unprecedented amount of debt that China has accumulated in recent years is testing Xi ’ s resolve – and his government is blinking .
The Chinese government ’ s uncertain ability – or willingness – to rein in debt is apparent in its contradictory commitment to implement major structural reforms while maintaining 7.5 % annual GDP growth .
Given that China owes much of its recent growth to debt-financed investment – often in projects like infrastructure and housing , meant to support the Chinese Dream – any effort to get credit growth under control is likely to cause a hard landing .
This prospect is already prompting the authorities to delay critical reforms .
To be sure , China ’ s debt / GDP ratio , reaching 250 % this month , remains significantly lower than that of most developed economies .
The problem is that China ’ s stock of private credit would normally be associated with a per capita GDP of around $ 25,000 – almost four times the country ’ s current level .
There are strong parallels between China ’ s current predicament and the investment boom that Japan experienced in the 1980s .
Like China today , Japan had a high personal savings rate , which enabled investors to rely heavily on traditional , domestically financed bank loans .
Moreover , deep financial linkages among sectors amplified the potential fallout of financial risk .
And Japan ’ s external position was strong , just as China ’ s is now .
Another similarity is the accumulation of debt within the corporate sector .
Corporate leverage in China rose from 2.4 times equity in 2007 to 3.5 times last year – well above American and European levels .
Nearly half of this debt matures within one year , even though much of it is being used to finance multi-year infrastructure projects .
Making matters worse , much of the new credit has originated in the shadow-banking sector at high interest rates , causing borrowers ’ repayment capacity to become overstretched .
One in five listed corporations carries gross leverage of more than eight times equity and earns less than two times interest coverage , weakening considerably these companies ’ resilience to growth shocks .
To be sure , China ’ s situation is more extreme than Japan ’ s .
At its peak , Japanese investment stood at 33 % of GDP , compared to 47 % in China .
This is a substantial difference , especially considering that China ’ s per capita GDP amounts to only 19 % of Japan ’ s at its highest level , and that its debt has already reached 60 % of Japan ’ s .
Moreover , the accumulation of debt in China – 71 percentage points of GDP over the last five years – has been far sharper than in Japan , where the debt level grew by only 16 percentage points over the five-year period before its bust .
That is all the more reason to believe that Japan ’ s experience can provide important insight into the risks that China faces .
After Japan ’ s bubble burst , annual GDP growth , which averaged 5.8 % in the four years preceding the bust , plummeted to 0.9 % for the next four years .
With bad debt left to fester on banks ’ balance sheets , growth vanished and deflation set in .
While private debt as a share of GDP stabilized , public debt increased by 50 % in the five years after the bust .
The collapse of China ’ s credit bubble would likely cause annual GDP growth to drop to 1-2 % , on average , for the subsequent four years , assuming a 2 % annual decline in capital expenditure and a still-respectable consumption-growth rate of 3-5 % .
Consolidated public-sector debt would rise to 100 % of GDP .
This is a relatively modest prediction .
Without automatic stabilizers or a strong financial-stability framework underpinned by deposit insurance , coping with the downside risks of the potentially destabilizing financial reforms that the government is pursuing will be difficult enough ; a credit shock could prove disastrous .
China ’ s debt tipping point is to be found in its massive real-estate bubble .
According to the investment bank UBS , new urban housing supply has far exceeded marginal underlying demand from urban population growth . Indeed , almost half of the formal increase is not an increase at all , but merely recognition of rural workers who have been living and working in cities for some time .
The impact of a sharp decline in real-estate prices would be far-reaching .
After all , property collateral is the bedrock of the Chinese financial system , with estimates of banks ’ direct and indirect exposure to real estate ranging from 66 % to 89 % of GDP .
Complicating matters further is the government ’ s lack of options for stabilizing property markets .
In fact , a key part of the problem is that China ’ s response to cyclical weakness always entails more housing construction .
China ’ s lack of automatic stabilizers places the tension between reform objectives and growth imperatives in sharp relief .
The only way for the government to shore up growth in the short run is to pursue more debt-driven stimulus , as it did earlier this year .
But this will also cause China ’ s debt burden to continue to grow , with bad debt increasingly crowding out good credit .
If China ’ s leaders continue to choose debt-fueled growth over reform , they will only delay , and possibly prolong , the inevitable slowdown .
That would turn Xi ’ s Chinese Dream into a more elusive prospect .
