$ 10,000 Gold ?
SAN FRANCISCO – It has never been easy to have a rational conversation about the value of gold .
Lately , with gold prices up more than 300 % over the last decade , it is harder than ever . Just last December , fellow economists Martin Feldstein and Nouriel Roubini each penned op-eds bravely questioning bullish market sentiment , sensibly pointing out gold ’ s risks .
Wouldn ’ t you know it ?
Since their articles appeared , the price of gold has moved up still further .
Gold prices even hit a record-high $ 1,300 recently .
Last December , many gold bugs were arguing that the price was inevitably headed for $ 2,000 .
Now , emboldened by continuing appreciation , some are suggesting that gold could be headed even higher than that .
One successful gold investor recently explained to me that stock prices languished for a more than a decade before the Dow Jones index crossed the 1,000 mark in the early 1980 ’ s .
Since then , the index has climbed above 10,000 .
Now that gold has crossed the magic $ 1,000 barrier , why can ’ t it increase ten-fold , too ?
Admittedly , getting to a much higher price for gold is not quite the leap of imagination that it seems .
After adjusting for inflation , today ’ s price is nowhere near the all-time high of January 1980 . Back then , gold hit $ 850 , or well over $ 2,000 in today ’ s dollars .
But January 1980 was arguably a “ freak peak ” during a period of heightened geo-political instability .
At $ 1,300 , today ’ s price is probably more than double very long-term , inflation-adjusted , average gold prices .
So what could justify another huge increase in gold prices from here ?
One answer , of course , is a complete collapse of the US dollar .
With soaring deficits , and a rudderless fiscal policy , one does wonder whether a populist administration might recklessly turn to the printing press .
And if you are really worried about that , gold might indeed be the most reliable hedge .
Sure , some might argue that inflation-indexed bonds offer a better and more direct inflation hedge than gold .
But gold bugs are right to worry about whether the government will honor its commitments under more extreme circumstances .
In fact , as Carmen Reinhart and I discuss in our recent book on the history of financial crises , This Time is Different , cash-strapped governments will often forcibly convert indexed debt to non-indexed debt , precisely so that its value might be inflated away .
Even the United States abrogated indexation clauses in bond contracts during the Great Depression of the 1930 ’ s . So it can happen anywhere .
Even so , the fact that very high inflation is possible does not make it probable , so one should be cautious in arguing that higher gold prices are being driven by inflation expectations .
Some have argued instead that gold ’ s long upward march has been partly driven by the development of new financial instruments that make it easier to trade and speculate in gold .
There is probably some slight truth – and also a certain degree of irony – to this argument .
After all , medieval alchemists engaged in what we now consider an absurd search for ways to transform base metals into gold .
Wouldn ’ t it be paradoxical , then , if financial alchemy could make an ingot of gold worth dramatically more ?
In my view , the most powerful argument to justify today ’ s high price of gold is the dramatic emergence of Asia , Latin America , and the Middle East into the global economy .
As legions of new consumers gain purchasing power , demand inevitably rises , driving up the price of scarce commodities .
At the same time , emerging-market central banks need to accumulate gold reserves , which they still hold in far lower proportion than do rich-country central banks .
With the euro looking less appetizing as a diversification play away from the dollar , gold ’ s appeal has naturally grown .
So , yes , there are solid fundamentals that arguably support today ’ s higher gold price , although it is far more debatable whether and to what extent they will continue to support higher prices in the future .
Indeed , another critical fundamental factor that has been sustaining high gold prices might prove far more ephemeral than globalization .
Gold prices are extremely sensitive to global interest-rate movements .
After all , gold pays no interest and even costs something to store .
Today , with interest rates near or at record lows in many countries , it is relatively cheap to speculate in gold instead of investing in bonds .
But if real interest rates rise significantly , as well they might someday , gold prices could plummet .
Most economic research suggests that gold prices are very difficult to predict over the short to medium term , with the odds of gains and losses being roughly in balance .
It is therefore dangerous to extrapolate from short-term trends .
Yes , gold has had a great run , but so , too , did worldwide housing prices until a couple of years ago .
If you are a high-net-worth investor , a sovereign wealth fund , or a central bank , it makes perfect sense to hold a modest proportion of your portfolio in gold as a hedge against extreme events .
But , despite gold ’ s heightened allure in the wake of an extraordinary run-up in its price , it remains a very risky bet for most of us .
Of course , such considerations might have little influence on prices .
What was true for the alchemists of yore remains true today : gold and reason are often difficult to reconcile .
