Iran ’ s Nuclear Lies
Mohammad El-Baradei , the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) , is pressing the agency ’ s board of governors to make one last effort to find a diplomatic solution to Iran ’ s nuclear ambitions before sending the case to the United Nations Security Council for possible sanctions .
A decision to refer Iran to the Security Council could come as early as November 24 , when the IAEA ’ s board meets to discuss “ new information ” discovered by inspectors on the ground .
Thanks to the IAEA ’ s inspectors , we now have a fairly detailed picture of Iran ’ s nuclear archipelago – at least those facilities that the Iranian government has been forced to open .
We know that Iran has discovered , mined , and milled natural uranium , the basic building block of any enrichment program , without telling the IAEA .
We know that Iran built a uranium conversion facility in Isfahan to convert uranium yellowcake into uranium hexafluoride gas ( UF6 ) , the feedstock for uranium enrichment , without the required prior notifications to the IAEA .
We also know that Iran built an underground uranium enrichment plant at Natanz , hardened it against missile attack , and erected dummy buildings on the surface to conceal it from overhead surveillance .
The authorities agreed to open this facility to the IAEA only after its existence was confirmed by commercial satellite imagery , and they appear to have swept the underground halls of whatever equipment was installed before the inspectors arrived .
Once fully operational , these facilities will give Iran mastery of the entire nuclear fuel cycle .
For eighteen years , Iran ’ s government concealed these activities from the IAEA , in clear violation of its safeguards agreement .
For this reason alone , the IAEA ’ s board must refer Iran to the Security Council for further actions , as required by the agency ’ s charter .
Non-nuclear nations that sign the Non-Proliferation Treaty , as Iran has , pledge to abandon all efforts to develop nuclear weapons .
In exchange , they are given access to nuclear technologies .
But that pledges requires complete , transparent cooperation with the IAEA .
Instead , Iran has been playing cheat and retreat , in clear violation of Article II of the NPT .
“ With Iran , we realized that mastery of the fuel cycle makes you a virtual nuclear weapons state , ” a top aide to El-Baradei told me .
“ That was a wake-up call for all of us . ”
But a wake-up call that allows the IAEA ‘ s board to go back to sleep is useless .
For two and a half years , the European Union has made every effort to get Iran to cooperate fully with the IAEA and come clean about its nuclear activities , to no avail .
When the IAEA announced it wanted to inspect a suspected enrichment cascade within the Revolutionary Guards complex at Lavizan-Shian , Iran ’ s government stalled for months until it could raze the site .
When it asked to visit a suspect lab within the Parchin defense production plant , the Iranians stalled .
When they finally allowed a small team in , they limited their movements , in violation of Iran ’ s commitments .
El-Baradei has stated that the IAEA has found “ no evidence ” of a weapons program in Iran – a statement that Iranian leaders have since cited as proof of their peaceful intentions .
But the IAEA has no authority to determine whether or not a country has a nuclear weapons program .
That is up to the UN Security Council .
The IAEA ’ s job is to determine whether a nation has violated its safeguards agreement , and El-Baradei has made it abundantly clear that Iran has .
Understanding the intentions of Iran ’ s leaders is not as difficult or as ambiguous as some believe .
Eighteen years of concealment constitutes a powerful track record .
So do Iranian leaders ’ own statements .
For example , in 1986 , then-president Ayatollah Ali Khamenei gave a pep talk at the headquarters of the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran .
“ Our nation has always been threatened from outside , ” he said .
“ The least we can do to face this danger is to let our enemies know that we can defend ourselves . ”
In 1988 , Ali Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani – the supposed “ moderate ” candidate in Iran ’ s recent presidential election – spelled out what that meant in an address to the Revolutionary Guards Corps .
“ We should fully equip ourselves both in the offensive and defensive use of chemical , bacteriological , and radiological weapons , ” urging the audience to “ make use of the opportunity and perform this task . ”
At a Jerusalem Day rally at Tehran University in December 2001 , he uttered one of the regime ’ s most sinister threats .
“ The use of an atomic bomb against Israel would destroy Israel completely , while [ the same ] against the world of Islam only would cause damages . ”
Iran ’ s regime has only grown bolder since then .
Foreign Minister Kamal Kharrazi declared in June 2004 that Iran “ won ’ t accept any new obligations , ” and must “ be recognized by the international community as a member of the nuclear club . ”
Similarly , in March 2005 , Rafsanjani reiterated Iran ’ s refusal to dismantle its nuclear fuel cycle facilities , as the EU and the IAEA had demanded , insisting that “ we can ’ t stop our nuclear program and won ’ t stop it . ”
In these circumstances , the risk entailed by doing nothing far outweighs the costs of referring Iran to the Security Council .
Indeed , Iran may already be enriching uranium secretly .
If it used the centrifuges that it purchased from Pakistan ’ s nuclear impresario A.Q. Khan , it could have enough fissile material to produce 20 bombs .
With Iran continuing to shelter top al-Qaeda leaders , this raises an even graver threat : that terrorists get hold of nuclear weapons .
The dangers of allowing Iran to go nuclear ought to be obvious .
Even to El-Baradei .
