Globalization Means Westernization
MUNICH : Does globalization produce a world of democracies ?
The easy answer is a resounding " No . "
It does , however , increase the costs for autocratic regimes of not having accountable political systems .
In this respect globalization implies , like it or not , Westernization .
This is far different from the old liberal idea that trade and contact with totalitrian regimes begets democracy , sooner or later - an idea on display during President Clinton ’ s visit to China earlier this summer .
No doubt he hoped , as do many in the West , indeed in China itself , that the visit would catalyze change in the Middle Kingdom , opening up the one-party regime and introducing Chinese societies to the values of the democratic West .
If these hopes are likely to be disappointed , it is not for lack on trying by America ’ s charismatic president .
It is simply because the relationship between economic ties and democratic change are more complex .
True , trade makes any country in the age of globalization , whatever its political ideology , more dependent on all the players in the world wide marketplace .
Even if China ’ s leadership wanted to , it could no longer clock its subjects from contact with Western goods , markets , ideas .
To deduce from this , however , as Western leaders do whenever they visit places like China , Cuba , and Iran , eager businessmen in tow , that somehow greater economic interdependence will automatically encourage political reforms in their host country is reminiscent of the naiveté which gripped many in the West during the days of " Detente . "
Back then , contacts with the old USSR and its satellites were believed to promote major domestic change .
But autocratic regimes , we learned through the disappointments of detente , are unusually well equipped to stifle yearnings for freedom among their populace .
More recent evidence that the state of the economy and of the political system can be disjointed is found in Asia today .
The financial crisis gripping that region is just one year old and likely to get older .
There are many causes for this , but the most widely recognized reason for why the crisis erupted and why it refuses to die down is this : Asian countries , while opening their economic systems , kept their political structures closed .
They were active participants on international markets , attracted foreign capital , were integrated for all intents into the globalized world .
Yet while their economies blossomed , power remained opaque , screened by personal loyalties , secret deals , corrupt practices .
Economic openness and political accountability clearly can coexist without much difficulty .
Perhaps , as Asia ’ s spectacular growth prior to the crisis indicated , this combination may even have contributed to the region ’ s economic success , at least for a while .
It is , after all , not so long ago that the " Asian model " was widely celebrated as the wave of the future .
The problem with the " Asian model , " we now know , is that it is not very resilient in crisis .
Those Asian countries which had earlier opened their political structures in accordance with their economic ones , Singapore , Taiwan , the Philippines , fared much better in the current turbulence .
In other words : sustained economic success in the globalized world does not automatically lead to democracy nor does it depend on democracy - but it does depend on a political system able to avoid and weather financial and economic , not to mention political , crisis .
For many of its emotional critics , globalization just means Americanization - the invasion of American mass products and mass culture .
But that is neither unavoidable nor permanent .
Who knows , tomorrow products from countries other than America may command the allegiance of global customers .
The decisive impact of globalization lies elsewhere : it gives a crisis bonus to countries with transparent and accountable political structures .
Financial crisis are inevitable in the global marketplace .
Markets are imperfect controllers of their own fate as are all human endeavors , particularly those based on speculation and greed .
International control mechanisms of sufficient authority to police global financial markets are not in place today , with not be around for some time , and will remain imperfect even then .
Countries have to create their own safeguards to protect themselves against the kinds of upheaval that is shaking Asia .
This means to make sure that political power is controlled and political processes transparent .
Such may not yet be democracy .
It is Westernization .
It is possible , of course , to prosper without Westernization , so despots need not despair .
Their hold on power is not imperiled by economic success .
The global market does not impose Westernization .
But when global markets get out of control , the penalty for not Westernizing in time can become very high indeed .
Then both autocratic regimes and the economic achievements over which they presided are at risk .
When financial storms start blowing , despots can no longer respond by battening down the hatches and isolating their economy from the world because it has become part of the global market .
In order not to be blown away , they have to accept the interference of bodies like the IMF with the resulting weakening of their own hold on power .
And then , as Indonesia ’ s Suharto found out , it may well be too late to retain power at all .
So Westernization is promoted not by contacts , by trade , or by ideology .
It is promoted by self-interest .
It is simply a precaution against future risks .
If you want to weather the crisis of globalization , you better Westernize .
The global marketplace will punish those who act too late .
