Transatlantic Trade-Offs
LONDON – Almost two decades after the idea was first mooted , the United States and the European Union agreed last week to begin negotiating a Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership ( TTIP ) .
The partnership ’ s launch – which should occur at the beginning of 2015 – has been presented as a much-needed “ deficit-free stimulus ” that would boost US and EU GDP by 0.5 % annually , while helping to increase employment on both sides of the Atlantic .
While both parties aim to eliminate remaining tariffs on bilateral trade , they are particularly eager to reduce the thicket of non-tariff barriers – mainly competing technical and sanitary standards and regulations – that have stifled development of the bilateral economic relationship .
Closer regulatory cooperation may also help the US and the EU to confront what business leaders view as increasingly unfair competition from China both at home and abroad .
But can the TTIP live up to the hype ?
Tellingly , the High-Level Working Group on Jobs and Growth , which was tasked with identifying the policies and measures that should define the negotiations , has recommended a more conservative approach .
Indeed , the Group ’ s final report , released earlier this month , states that the agreement “ should be designed to evolve over time , ” moving “ progressively toward a more integrated transatlantic marketplace . ”
Specifically , the group recommends establishing “ an on-going mechanism for improved dialogue and cooperation ” on regulatory issues and non-tariff barriers , as well as a “ framework for identifying opportunities for … future regulatory cooperation . ”
Such caution is warranted , given that some of the main principles that drive the two parties ’ regulatory approaches are vastly different – and sometimes at odds with one another .
For example , the EU has long been committed to the “ precautionary principle , ” which prevents products that may harm human health from entering the EU market – even if the scientific evidence is not yet conclusive .
This principle underpins the EU ’ s refusal to import genetically modified ( GM ) foods from the US , where they are widely consumed .
But senior members of the US Congress have stressed that a successful agreement must include opening the EU market to all US agricultural products . & # 160 ;
Another potential area of contention – conflicting notions of personal privacy – could inhibit the two sides ’ ability to accomplish their shared goal of opening up the digital market .
In recent weeks , major US technology companies , including Google and Facebook , have been accused of aggressively lobbying the European Parliament to suspend plans to intensify privacy rules in the EU .
A third challenge is rooted in Europe ’ s deeply held skepticism of financial markets .
The day after US President Barack Obama announced the launch of the TTIP negotiations , the European Commission released its blueprint for a Eurozone Financial Transaction Tax that would impose new costs on US banks operating in EU markets .
Other cases in which barriers to transatlantic trade and investment conceal conflicting objectives and deep-rooted attitudes include France ’ s protection of its cherished audiovisual sector and America ’ s desire to continue to block European penetration of its iconic airline industry .
Negotiators will also have to overcome significant structural obstacles .
As the European Commission struggles to secure a clear negotiating mandate from all 27 member states , the US will face its own internal coordination problems .
European countries succeeded in creating the Single Market in 1992 not by harmonizing all of their standards and regulations , but by agreeing to recognize one another ’ s .
If a product is approved for sale in one EU member state , it is considered safe enough to be sold in another .
A similar policy of “ mutual recognition ” could be the key to successful US-EU trade negotiations , but only if both parties can overcome the biases that are built into their regulatory and political systems .
Such barriers are particularly pronounced in the US , where Congress oversees the legal framework within which federal regulatory agencies – such as the Environmental Protection Agency and the Food and Drug Administration – operate .
Not only do the US administration and its federal agencies have to accept that a safety standard established and tested in Frankfurt or Athens is equivalent to its US counterpart ; congressional committees must agree .
For its part , the EU would have to reconsider , for example , its policy on GM foods .
The EU overcame national biases to establish the Single Market by instituting a process of legally binding qualified majority voting , whereby individual member states could be outvoted on specific regulations .
But such an approach cannot be replicated to break the inevitable logjams of transatlantic regulatory negotiations .
Faced with such significant obstacles , it is not surprising that the High-Level Working Group has settled on a more modest measure of success for TTIP negotiations .
But this does not negate the partnership ’ s value .
Although transatlantic tariffs average only 3-5 % ( with higher peaks for some sensitive products ) , tariff elimination would have a significant impact , given that bilateral trade totals $ 650 billion annually .
Simplifying customs procedures and opening up markets for public procurement could bring further benefits .
And establishing a formal mechanism for transatlantic regulatory consultation will eventually pay off , one sector at a time .
The TTIP that is signed in 2015 may not be the revolutionary and comprehensive agreement for which many observers are hoping .
But it remains a crucial step toward a more integrated transatlantic marketplace .
