Don ’ t Fear a Rising Dollar
LONDON – The US Federal Reserve is almost certain to start raising interest rates when the policy-setting Federal Open Markets Committee next meets , on December 16 .
How worried should businesses , investors , and policymakers around the world be about the end of near-zero interest rates and the start of the first monetary-tightening cycle since 2004-2008 ?
Janet Yellen , the Fed chair , has repeatedly said that the impending sequence of rate hikes will be much slower than previous monetary cycles , and predicts that it will end at a lower peak level .
While central bankers cannot always be trusted when they make such promises , since their jobs often require them deliberately to mislead investors , there are good reasons to believe that the Fed ’ s commitment to “ lower for longer ” interest rates is sincere .
The Fed ’ s overriding objective is to lift inflation and ensure that it remains above 2 % .
To do this , Yellen will have to keep interest rates very low , even after inflation starts rising , just as her predecessor Paul Volcker had to keep interest rates in the 1980s very high , even after inflation started falling .
This policy reversal follows logically from the inversion of central banks ’ objectives , both in America and around the world , since the 2008 crisis .
In the 1980s , Volcker ’ s historic responsibility was to reduce inflation and prevent it from ever rising again to dangerously high levels .
Today , Yellen ’ s historic responsibility is to increase inflation and prevent it from ever falling again to dangerously low levels .
Under these conditions , the direct economic effects of the Fed ’ s move should be minimal .
It is hard to imagine many businesses , consumers , or homeowners changing their behavior because of a quarter-point change in short-term interest rates , especially if long-term rates hardly move .
And even assuming that interest rates reach 1-1.5 % by the end of 2016 , they will still be very low by historic standards , both in absolute terms and relative to inflation .
The media and official publications from the International Monetary Fund and other institutions have raised dire warnings about the impact of the Fed ’ s first move on financial markets and other economies .
Many Asian and Latin America countries , in particular , are considered vulnerable to a reversal of the capital inflows from which they benefited when US interest rates were at rock-bottom levels .
But , as an empirical matter , these fears are hard to understand .
The imminent US rate hike is perhaps the most predictable , and predicted , event in economic history .
Nobody will be caught unawares if the Fed acts next month , as many investors were in February 1994 and June 2004 , the only previous occasions remotely comparable to the current one .
And even in those cases , stock markets barely reacted to the Fed tightening , while bond-market volatility proved short-lived .
But what about currencies ?
The dollar is almost universally expected to appreciate when US interest rates start rising , especially because the EU and Japan will continue easing monetary conditions for many months , even years .
This fear of a stronger dollar is the real reason for concern , bordering on panic , in many emerging economies and at the IMF .
A significant strengthening of the dollar would indeed cause serious problems for emerging economies where businesses and governments have taken on large dollar-denominated debts and currency devaluation threatens to spin out of control .
Fortunately , the market consensus concerning the dollar ’ s inevitable rise as US interest rates increase is almost certainly wrong , for three reasons .
First , the divergence of monetary policies between the US and other major economies is already universally understood and expected .
Thus , the interest-rate differential , like the US rate hike itself , should already be priced into currency values .
Moreover , monetary policy is not the only determinant of exchange rates .
Trade deficits and surpluses also matter , as do stock-market and property valuations , the cyclical outlook for corporate profits , and positive or negative surprises for economic growth and inflation .
On most of these grounds , the dollar has been the world ’ s most attractive currency since 2009 ; but as economic recovery spreads from the US to Japan and Europe , the tables are starting to turn .
Finally , the widely assumed correlation between monetary policy and currency values does not stand up to empirical examination .
In some cases , currencies move in the same direction as monetary policy – for example , when the yen dropped in response to the Bank of Japan ’ s 2013 quantitative easing .
But in other cases the opposite happens , for example when the euro and the pound both strengthened after their central banks began quantitative easing .
For the US , the evidence has been very mixed .
Looking at the monetary tightening that began in February 1994 and June 2004 , the dollar strengthened substantially in both cases before the first rate hike , but then weakened by around 8 % ( as gauged by the Fed ’ s dollar index ) in the subsequent six months .
Over the next 2-3 years , the dollar index remained consistently below its level on the day of the first rate hike .
For currency traders , therefore , the last two cycles of Fed tightening turned out to be classic examples of “ buy on the rumor ; sell on the news . ”
Of course , past performance is no guarantee of future results , and two cases do not constitute a statistically significant sample .
Just because the dollar weakened twice during the last two periods of Fed tightening does not prove that the same thing will happen again .
But it does mean that a rise in the dollar is not automatic or inevitable if the Fed raises interest rates next month .
The globally disruptive effects of US monetary tightening – a rapidly rising dollar , capital outflows from emerging markets , financial distress for international dollar borrowers , and chaotic currency devaluations in Asia and Latin America – may loom less large in next year ’ s economic outlook than in a rear-view glimpse of 2015 .
