Needed : Global Leadership for the Poorest of the Poor
CAMBRIDGE : Times are tough for the world 's poorest countries .
Always marginalized in the world economic system , these countries are facing even more neglect than usual .
After a breakdown in diplomatic approaches , the rich world is busy dropping bombs on Serbia , at a cost of billions of dollars per month , and will no doubt devote billions more to cleaning up and fixing the damage from the bombs once a diplomatic settlement is made finally .
Meanwhile , the poor countries are told that there is little left for them .
Debt relief for the poorest of the poor is likely to continue at a grossly insufficient pace , even with new proposals that will be launched at the G-8 summit .
And many of the key international institutions that could actually help the poor countries are seeing their budgets relentlessly cut .
A recent spectacle in Geneva was particularly egregious .
The World Health Organization , the leading institution charged with protecting global public health , has made very important reforms in the past year under the new leadership of Dr. Gro Bruntland , the former Norwegian Prime Minister .
On the basis of those reforms , and a new WHO agenda on global health , Dr. Bruntland made the extremely modest request that the core WHO budget from the donor countries should be raised sufficiently to absorb rising costs due to inflation and exchange rate changes .
Yet even this modest request was rejected by donor governments .
The WHO will continue to be squeezed for funds , while the urgency of its mission rises by the day .
This decision , promoted mainly by the United States , reflects the sad dereliction of U.S. leadership evident in so many parts of the world .
The Clinton Administration has failed to pay U.S. back dues to the U.N. , partly because of Republican opposition in the Senate , but partly because the Clinton administration simply hasn 't been willing to champion worthy U.N. activities as a priority for the U.S. On the one side the U.S. presses for reforms at the U.N. agencies , but when they happen , as at the WHO , the reforms are met with U.S. calls for still more budget stringency .
The result is a continuing disaster for the poorest countries , where the burden of infectious disease is rising starkly , in diseases ranging from Malaria , to HIV / AIDs and Tuberculosis .
But rich countries , including the U.S. , should not kid themselves .
Microbes do not respect national borders and do not wait for passport checks .
The alarming rise in infectious diseases will burden the whole world , not just the poorest countries .
The sad irony is that recent scientific advances in biology and information technology actually make possible the development and use of innovative tools to face these killer diseases .
Vaccine technology has leaped forward in the past decade .
Vaccines for all three of these dread diseases are within scientific reach , but will requires some billions of dollars to bring through the research and development stages to actual use .
Yet even at a cost of a few billion dollars , the human benefits per dollar saved would be among the greatest contributions possible for humanity .
After all , the $ 10 billion or so in costs of bombing Kosovo this spring could probably have paid for the needed scientific work over the next few years on all three vaccines !
In area after area , including global climate change , public health , international debt relief , financial system reform , the neglect of the rich countries , and especially of the U.S. , will sadly come home to roost .
The attention span of the rich world is too focused and too limited .
Our willingness to spend money seems to be much greater for war than for peaceful and preventative solutions to the great problems facing humanity , and especially facing the poorest of the poor .
It is urgent time for international leadership on these issues .
