Bottling the Sun
LONDON – This December , world leaders will gather in Paris for the United Nations Climate Change Conference , where they will attempt – yet again – to hammer out a global agreement to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions .
Despite the inevitable sense of déjà vu that will arise as negotiators struggle to reach a compromise , they must not give up .
Whatever the political or economic considerations , the fact remains : if global temperatures rise more than 2 ˚ C from pre-industrial levels , the consequences for the planet will be catastrophic .
But the challenge does not end with reducing emissions .
Indeed , even if we make the transition to a cleaner world by 2050 , we will need to determine how to meet a booming global population ’ s insatiable appetite for energy in the longer term – an imperative that renewables alone cannot meet .
That is why we need to invest now in other technologies that can complement renewables , and provide reliable electricity for many centuries to come .
And one of the most promising options is nuclear fusion – the process that powers the sun and all stars .
Brought down to earth , nuclear fusion – a process fueled primarily by lithium and deuterium ( an isotope of hydrogen ) , both of which are plentiful in seawater and in the earth ’ s crust – could provide a major source of low-carbon energy .
A fusion power station would use only around 450 kilograms of fuel annually , cause no atmospheric pollution , and carry no risk of accidents that could lead to radioactive contamination of the environment .
But , while the fusion process has produced some power ( 16 million watts of it , to be specific ) , scientists have yet to create a self-sustaining fusion “ burn . ”
Indeed , unlike nuclear fission , which went from the laboratory to the power grid within two decades , fusion has proved a tough nut to crack .
The problem is that fusion involves joining two positively charged nuclei – and , as basic science shows , same-sign charges repel each other .
Only at extremely high temperatures – over 100 million degrees Celsius , or almost ten times hotter than the sun – do the nuclei move so rapidly that they overcome their repulsion and fuse .
Scientists have spent the last 60 years trying to figure out the best way to create these conditions .
Today , the frontrunner is a device known as a “ tokamak , ” a magnetic bottle in which the fuel , held at 100-200 million degrees Celsius , fuses , unlocking huge amounts of energy .
Of course , holding the sun in a bottle is no small challenge , especially when one considers that the systems must be engineered so that they can create electricity for a price consumers are willing to pay .
But in a sunny corner of southern France , a global megaproject is coming together that will , for the first time , test the technology on an industrial scale , creating the first controlled fusion burn .
Everything about the so-called “ ITER reactor ” is big .
It will be heavier than three Eiffel Towers ; the material for its superconducting magnets would stretch around the equator twice ; and it has a price tag of more than € 15 billion ( $ 16.8 billion ) , making it one of the largest international science endeavors in history .
The ITER partners – China , the European Union , India , Japan , Russia , South Korea , and the United States – represent half the world ’ s population .
And , if it is successful , the reactor will produce half a gigawatt of fusion power and open the way for commercial reactors .
But the tokamak is not the only game in town .
Other designs are emerging to join the race for fusion power .
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory ’ s National Ignition Facility in California is getting impressive results by firing high-powered lasers at capsules of fuel , crushing the particles together to trigger fusion reactions .
Elsewhere , particularly in the US , privately funded fusion ventures are springing up like mushrooms , each with its own concept for what some call the Holy Grail of energy .
As the most advanced design , the tokamak still looks like the safest bet , but the competition from its rivals can only spur further innovation and progress .
Some discourage investment in nuclear fusion , claiming that , given how far from being market-ready the technology is , our financial resources are better allocated to tried and tested energy options .
The critics have a point : given that fusion can be carried out only on a large scale , its investment requirements are considerable .
In the 1970s , American researchers estimated that getting fusion power on the grid would demand investment of $ 2-3 billion annually in research and development until anywhere from 1990 to 2005 ( depending on the amount of effort applied ) .
They also estimated a minimum level of investment , below which funding would never be sufficient to build a fusion power plant .
Nuclear fusion research budgets have remained below that line for 30 years .
But fusion ’ s potential is simply too great to give up .
And , in fact , the progress that has been made in recent years – despite the lack of adequate investment – belies the naysayers .
Machines all over the world are reaching fusion temperatures and extending our technological capabilities .
The ITER experiment , when it starts up in the early 2020s , will embody those advances , achieving the long-awaited fusion burn – and place us just one step away from the ultimate goal of getting fusion power on the grid in an affordable manner .
Without nuclear fusion , future generations ’ energy options will be severely limited – creating a serious problem for developed and developing countries alike .
Lev Artsimovich , the tokamak ’ s inventor , said that “ fusion will be ready when society needs it . ”
One hopes that he is right .
But , rather than depending on fusion researchers to defy the odds , the world should step up investment in the technology .
Our future may depend on it .
