Democracy in Europe
ROME – A real struggle over who will preside over the European Commission has begun .
Though the center-right European People ’ s Party won only a narrow plurality of 221 seats in the 751-seat European Parliament , center-left , green , and liberal MEPs have all rallied behind the EPP ’ s candidate , Jean-Claude Juncker , as the “ legitimate ” choice .
The opposition , led by British Prime Minister David Cameron with the support of “ sovereignists ” across Europe , particularly in Scandinavia , but also in Hungary , contends that someone whom the majority of European citizens hardly know , cannot claim any kind of political legitimacy .
German Chancellor Angela Merkel is now in a bind .
Though she endorsed Juncker before the election , she never really backed the notion that the European Parliament should have a decisive part in selecting the Commission ’ s president .
She was certain that no party would win an absolute majority , but she did not foresee that almost all representatives from moderate parties would back whichever candidate won a plurality , making it difficult to appoint anyone else .
The larger issue at stake is whether Europe is prepared to establish the common political space that is needed to manage the monetary union and strengthen the European Union ’ s influence in world affairs .
Most economists agree that in the absence of advanced fiscal-policy coordination and a real banking union , Europe ’ s monetary union cannot succeed .
This does not bother the United Kingdom , which has no desire to join the eurozone .
Among eurozone members , however , the need for greater political integration is broadly accepted , and not just by the economic and political elites .
Moreover , as Russia ’ s recent assertions of power in Ukraine and elsewhere in the former Soviet Union demonstrate , European countries need to deepen their security cooperation and develop a common energy policy .
And , though cooperation in areas such as of data privacy , financial-sector regulation , and climate change may not require the degree of political integration that a common currency does , it would benefit greatly from stronger political cohesion and a more profound sense of shared European identity .
The pan-European parties ’ nomination of Spitzenkandidaten for the Commission presidency – and the three direct debates among the nominees – marked the start of building a genuine supranational European political space .
Indeed , the endorsement of Juncker by the Social Democrats , the Greens , and the Liberals reflects their belief in the need for such a space .
The candidates , particularly Martin Schulz , the leader of the Party of European Socialists , campaigned beyond their national borders .
But Europe still has a long way to go , which is apparent from the fact that only a minority of European citizens followed the campaign .
A supra-national political space can develop only if European politics gains visibility , influence , and credibility .
For this reason , Europe ’ s leaders should reach a compromise on the next Commission president quickly and transparently , thereby dispelling the impression among ordinary citizens that European politics is shaped by a dysfunctional process of behind-the-scenes horse-trading .
As usual , Merkel has a critical role to play .
Her endorsement of a candidate whom she knew Cameron would vehemently oppose was a serious mistake , because it strengthened the hand of those in the UK who want to leave the EU .
Merkel must now determine how to forge a compromise that does not discredit the Europe-wide democratic process , which currently has more support in Germany than in any other large European country .
To this end , support from Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi – whose party won 41 % of his country ’ s vote , arguably making him the only real winner at the national level – could help .
The stakes are high – and not just for Europe .
The world needs a thriving , cohesive EU to advance democratic principles , facilitate conflict resolution , protect the global commons , promote peace , and build trust across borders .
The alternative – already gaining traction – is the resurgence of naked power politics and dangerous xenophobia .
Without a shared European political space , everyone will be much worse off .
