Let a Thousand Capitalisms Bloom
CAMBRIDGE : The global financial crisis that recently brought the world economy to its knees appears to have abated .
Time to reflect on how we ensure that similar crises do not erupt again .
Practically all discussion on institutional reform in the world economy is predicated on the idea that our objective is a functioning global capitalist system .
This approach takes it for granted that an integrated world market will deliver the goods as long as we contain its excesses and imbalances .
The policy challenge within this frame of reference is : how do we make the world safe for free trade in goods , services , and capital ?
No good answer to this question exists because the idea of global capitalism is inherently impracticable .
Capitalism is a national phenomenon .
The real policy challenge is : how do we make the world safe for different brands of national capitalism to prosper side by side ?
Until we address this question , we are not going to come to grips with the real issues and provide workable solutions to our global predicament .
Markets are not self-regulating , self-stabilizing , and self-legitimating .
That is why every functioning society has regulatory bodies that set the rules of competition , monetary and fiscal institutions that perform stabilizing functions , and social insurance schemes , transfer policies , and other social arrangements that bring market outcomes into conformity with a society ’ s preferences regarding the distribution of risks and rewards .
None of these institutions exists at the global level .
Creating supranational institutions adequate to the task would require not only a willingness to give up national sovereignty but a considerable degree of convergence in national preferences regarding what constitutes a desirable set of social arrangements .
Neither is about to happen : there are as many working models of successful capitalism as there are advanced industrial countries .
What , then , would an international system of national capitalisms look like ?
First , in common with today ’ s regime , the system would adhere to multilateral procedures and the most-favored-nation principle .
Second , the system would aim at low , but not necessarily zero levels of trade barriers in goods and services .
Governments would not be required to reduce or eliminate controls on capital flows — especially of the short-term kind .
Neither would they be asked to harmonize behind-the-border policies in such areas as industrial regulation , taxation , labor rules , or environmental standards .
Third , the rules of the game would allow countries to reimpose restrictions at the border when not doing so would jeopardize a legitimate national objective .
Concern for the environmental implications of trade , humanitarian objections , or adjustment difficulties might all constitute grounds for an opt-out of this kind .
Governments exercising this option would have to follow guidelines that would be negotiated multilaterally .
If this sounds radical , consider the fact that the monetary / trade regime of the immediate postwar period was founded on almost identical principles .
Harry Dexter White and John Maynard Keynes , the architects of the Bretton Woods system , did not contemplate a regime whose main purpose was to maximize the international flow of goods and capital .
They sought a system that would prevent nations from exporting their economic difficulties to their trading partners and which would avoid the problems of the interwar period : destabilizing capital flows , excessively volatile currencies , and an eventual descent into bilateralism and protectionism .
These international rules left enough space for national development efforts to proceed along successful but divergent paths .
Western Europe chose to integrate within itself and to erect an extensive welfare state .
Japan caught up with the West with its own distinctive brand of capitalism , combining a dynamic export sector with an inefficient and protected set of activities in services and agriculture .
China began to grow by leaps and bounds once it recognized the importance of private initiative , even though it flouted every other rule in the guidebook .
Much of the rest of East Asia generated an economic miracle relying on industrial policies that have since been banned by the WTO .
What was radical , with hindsight , was the turn that events took during the 1980s .
The Reagan and Thatcher " revolutions " presaged an era of market fundamentalism that ignored the need to embed markets in social and political institutions .
Market fundamentalism spawned a series of myths and half-truths : that freeing up international markets was the surest way to global prosperity ; that free capital flows would allocate resources efficiently around the globe ; that international financial markets would " discipline " governments to adopt more sound monetary and fiscal policies ; and that all of this could happen without significant inequities , economic instability , or disruptions to domestic social arrangements .
Neither history nor recent evidence provides much support for any of these propositions .
No matter .
Suddenly , the U.S. began to act as if the Japanese retail distribution system or its longshoremen labor practices were a matter for bilateral negotiation , on the grounds that these may have some impact on trade .
The WTO struck down U.S. import prohibitions enacted pursuant to its endangered species act because of concern that an open trading regime might otherwise be compromised .
Emerging market economies were told to remove controls on international capital flows upon joining the OECD .
Governments fell all over each other competing for foreign investors .
Trade and foreign investment began to trump everything else .
The cumulative effect has been market instability and the erosion of the public legitimacy of the international economic system .
Any set of ground rules for the world economy that is predicated on the Holy Grail of global capitalism , as a regime of complete free trade would be , is bound to disappoint badly .
It is far more productive to strive for something that has worked very well in the past and remains attainable : a regime of peaceful coexistence among national capitalisms .
