Rejecting the Power to Waste
SINGAPORE – Our ancestors preached it .
Our parents taught it to us .
The West is adopting it .
So why are we Asians abandoning it ?
Calling the municipality to get a recycling bin in the building . Not flushing the toilet at night ( that one always raises eyebrows ) .
Growing up in India in the 1980 ’ s , our lifestyle was very different from today ’ s .
There was hardly any waste generated in a typical household .
Everything was used and reused until it fell apart .
We traveled in trains .
We were reprimanded for wasting food .
When my parents visited the United States for the first time , I didn ’ t hear the end of their shock at the excess they saw – from the wastage of paper napkins and plastic cutlery at fast-food restaurants to the average household ’ s usage of cars and electricity .
At the time , as a young Indian recently relocated to the West , I didn ’ t want to be associated with stodgy parents who patiently folded used wrapping paper and stored it under their mattress .
But now a renaissance of their mindset is taking place , as climate change becomes common knowledge .
The wisdom of my parents ’ generation speaks to me again .
Losing touch with that wisdom was , perhaps , understandable .
As India ’ s economic boom has transformed it from a global laggard into one of the world ’ s key emerging powers , the new generation of Indians finally arrived – in business , science , and politics .
Indian diasporas in the United States , the United Kingdom , and Southeast Asia are among the richest communities in these countries .
We don ’ t want to reuse paper bags anymore .
We don ’ t even want to be seen conserving .
We now have the power to waste , and we want to flaunt it .
The same change in mindset can be seen in other emerging Asian economies .
Conservation is regarded as a sign of weakness in this era of rising economic wealth .
The desire to claim one ’ s rightful place under the sun – to share the planet equally – is a driving force throughout the region , from Southeast Asia to Korea and China .
Why should we conserve ?
The West was responsible for all the pollution and waste in the first place .
It is our turn now to ruin the planet , and no one should try to stop us .
Unfortunately while we are queuing up for our BMWs , the rules of the game changed .
The new lifestyle is no longer sustainable .
It ’ s the end of the road for gas-guzzling cars , glass apartments that need constant air conditioning , water-thirsty washing machines , and wasteful packaging .
By 2050 , Earth ’ s population will be more than nine billion , and more than two-thirds will live in urban areas .
We cannot survive the lifestyle that we desire .
There is an opportunity here for leadership .
Infosys is redesigning every aspect of how it provides lighting , cooling , water , and transportation to their more than 100,000 employees , and aiming to reduce costs ten-fold in the process .
The Indian army is using solar steam cooking in Ladakh to cook for the 500 jawans ( young army recruits ) stationed there , and so is the Shirdi Sai Baba temple in Maharashtra .
Elsewhere , prisons in Rwanda are using their 30,000 inmates ’ sewage to provide biogas for cooking and compost for growing vegetables .
Sunlabob , a private company in Laos , is renting solar lanterns to poor villagers , who find them more affordable than candles .
The UAE is spending a chunk of its oil money to develop Masdar , the world ’ s first zero-carbon , zero-waste city .
Singapore is using Newater , a treated form of wastewater that is potable .
And British schools now include sustainability as a key part of the curriculum .
But some are falling behind in this thinking , namely well-to-do Asian households – and some Asian governments .
Just five years from now , developing countries are projected to emit more greenhouse gases than all developed countries .
We can either shrug our shoulders , or we can use the opportunity to revive our old values , rethink how we live , and change that projection .
Whether it is through low-energy housing , planting trees , teaching children to respect the environment , boycotting incandescent lightbulbs , or wrapping gifts in old newspapers , we have the opportunity to lead by example .
Governments , too , should collaborate with their developing-country counterparts to provide much-needed leadership in the climate-change debate .
Asia must leapfrog the unsustainable stage of development .
We already have a deep-rooted tradition of conservation .
Reclaiming it would make Asians trendsetters , and make the Asian way of life an example for others to follow .
