Our Summer of Extremes
BERLIN – This summer has been one of weather-related extremes in Russia , Pakistan , China , Europe , the Arctic – you name it .
But does this have anything to do with global warming , and are human emissions to blame ?
While it cannot be scientifically proven ( or disproven , for that matter ) that global warming caused any particular extreme event , we can say that global warming very likely makes many kinds of extreme weather both more frequent and more severe .
For weeks , central Russia has been in the grips of its worst-ever heat wave , which has caused probably thousands of fatalities .
As a result of drought and heat , more than 500 wildfires have raged out of control , smothering Moscow in smoke and threatening several nuclear facilities .
Russia ’ s government has banned wheat exports , sending world grain prices soaring .
Meanwhile , Pakistan is struggling with unprecedented flooding that has killed more than a thousand people and affected millions more .
In China , flash floods have so far killed more than a thousand people and destroyed more than a million homes .
On a smaller scale , European countries like Germany , Poland , and the Czech Republic have also suffered serious flooding .
Meanwhile , global temperatures in recent months have been at their highest levels in records that go back 130 years .
Arctic sea-ice cover reached its lowest recorded average level for the month of June ever .
In Greenland two huge chunks of ice broke off in July and August .
Are these events connected ?
Looking only at individual extreme events will not reveal their cause , just like watching a few scenes from a movie does not reveal the plot .
But , viewed in a broader context , and using the logic of physics , important parts of the plot can be understood .
This decade has been marked by a number of stunning extremes .
In 2003 , the most severe heat wave in living memory broke previous temperature records by a large margin and caused 70,000 deaths in Europe .
In 2005 , the most severe hurricane season ever witnessed in the Atlantic devastated New Orleans and broke records in terms of the number and intensity of storms .
In 2007 , unprecedented wildfires raged across Greece , nearly destroying the ancient site of Olympia .
And the Northwest Passage in the Arctic became ice-free for the first time in living memory .
Last year , more than a hundred people were killed in bush fires in Australia , following drought and record-breaking heat .
This cluster of record-breaking events could be merely an astonishing streak of bad luck .
But that is extremely unlikely .
This is far more likely to be the result of a warming climate – a consequence of this decade being , worldwide , the hottest for a thousand years .
All weather is driven by energy , and the sun ultimately provides this energy .
But the biggest change in Earth ’ s energy budget by far over the past hundred years is due to the accumulation in our atmosphere of greenhouse gases , which limit the exit of heat into space .
Owing to fossil-fuel emissions , there is now one-third more carbon dioxide in the atmosphere than at any time in at least a million years , as the latest ice drilling in Antarctica has revealed .
The changes in the planet ’ s energy budget caused by solar variations are at least ten times smaller in comparison .
And they go in the wrong direction : in recent years , the sun has been at its dimmest since satellite measurements began in the 1970 ’ s .
So , when unprecedented extreme weather events occur , the prime suspect is naturally the biggest atmospheric change that has happened over the past hundred years – one that has been caused by human emissions .
The fact that heat waves like the one in Russia become more frequent and extreme in a warmer world is easy to understand .
Extreme rainfall events will also become more frequent and intense in a warmer climate , owing to another simple fact of physics : warm air can hold more moisture .
For each degree Celsius of warming , 7 % more water is available to rain down from saturated air masses .
Drought risk also increases with warming : even where rainfall does not decline , increased evaporation dries out the soils .
The carbon-dioxide effect can also change the preferred patterns of atmospheric circulation , which can exacerbate extremes of heat , drought , or rainfall in some regions , while reducing them in others .
The problem is that a reduction in those extremes to which we are already well-adapted provides only modest benefits , whereas the new extremes to which we are not adapted can be devastating , as recent events in Pakistan show .
The events of this summer show how vulnerable our societies are to weather-related extremes .
But what we see now is happening after only 0.8º Celsius of global warming .
With swift and decisive action , we can still limit global warming to a total of 2º Celsius or a bit less .
Even that much warming would require a massive effort to adapt to weather extremes and rising sea levels , which needs to start now .
With weak action , like that promised by governments in Copenhagen last December , we will be on course for 3-4º Celsius of global warming .
This is bound to outstrip the ability of many societies and ecosystems to adapt .
And , with no action at all , the planet could even heat up by 5-7º Celsius by the end of this century – and more thereafter .
Knowingly marching down that road would be insane .
We must face the facts : our emissions of greenhouse gases probably are at least partly to blame for this summer of extremes .
Clinging to the hope that it is all chance , and all natural , seems naive .
Let us hope that this summer of extremes is a last-minute wake-up call to policy makers , the corporate world , and citizens alike .
