An IMF We Can Love ?
CAMBRIDGE – What a difference the crisis has made for the International Monetary Fund .
It was just a few months ago that this important but unloved institution , a landmark of post-war global economic arrangements , seemed destined to irrelevance .
The IMF has long been a whipping boy for both left and right – the former because of the Fund ’ s emphasis on fiscal rectitude and economic orthodoxy , and the latter because of its role in bailing out indebted nations .
Developing nations grudgingly took its advice , while advanced nations , not needing the money , ignored it .
In a world where private capital flows dwarf the resources at its disposal , the IMF had come to seem an anachronism .
And , when some of the IMF ’ s largest debtors ( Brazil and Argentina ) began to prepay their debts a few years ago with no new borrowers in sight , it looked like the final nail in the coffin had been struck .
The IMF seemed condemned to run out of income , in addition to losing its raison d ’ être .
It shrank its budgets and began to downsize , and , while it was handed some new responsibilities in the meantime – surveillance over “ currency manipulation , ” in particular – its deliberations proved largely irrelevant .
But the crisis has invigorated the IMF .
Under its capable managing director , Dominique Strauss-Kahn , the Fund has been one of the few official agencies ahead of – instead of behind – the curve .
It moved quickly to establish a fast-disbursing emergency line of credit for countries with “ reasonable ” policies .
It ardently championed global fiscal stimulus on the order of 2 % of world GNP – a position that is all the more remarkable in view of its traditional conservatism on all fiscal matters .
And , in the run-up to the G-20 summit in London , it thoroughly overhauled its lending policies , de-emphasizing traditional conditionality and making it easier for countries to qualify for loans .
Even more significantly , the IMF has emerged from the London meeting with substantially greater resources , as well as new responsibilities .
The G-20 promised to triple the Fund ’ s lending capacity ( from $ 250 billion to $ 750 billion ) , issue $ 250 billion of new Special Drawing Rights ( a reserve asset made up of a basket of major currencies ) , and permit the Fund to borrow in capital markets ( which it has never done ) if necessary .
The IMF was also designated as one of two lead agencies – along with an expanded Financial Stability Forum ( now renamed the Financial Stability Board ) – charged with providing early warning of macroeconomic and financial risks and issuing the requisite policy recommendations .
Another piece of good news is that the Europeans have now given up their claim on naming the IMF ’ s managing director ( as have the Americans their corresponding claim on the World Bank presidency ) .
These senior officials are henceforth to be selected “ through an open , transparent , and merit-based selection process . ”
This will provide for better governance ( although Strauss-Kahn ’ s leadership has been exemplary ) , and will enhance both institutions ’ legitimacy in the eyes of developing nations .
So the IMF now finds itself at the center of the economic universe once again .
How will it choose to deploy its newfound power ?
The greatest risk is that it will once again over-reach and over-play its hand .
That is what happened in the second half of the 1990 ’ s , as the IMF began to preach capital-account liberalization , applied over-stringent fiscal remedies during the Asian financial crisis , and single-handedly tried to reshape Asian economies .
The institution has since acknowledged its errors in all these areas .
But it remains to be seen if the lessons have been fully internalized , and whether we will have a kinder , gentler IMF in lieu of a rigid , doctrinaire one .
One encouraging fact is that developing countries will almost certainly get a larger say in how the Fund is run .
This will ensure that poorer nations ’ views receive a more sympathetic hearing in the future .
But simply giving developing nations greater voting power will make little difference if the IMF ’ s organizational culture is not changed as well .
The Fund is staffed by a large number of smart economists , who lack much connection to ( and appreciation for ) the institutional realities of the countries on which they work .
Their professional expertise is validated by the quality of their advanced degrees , rather than by their achievements in practical policymaking .
This breeds arrogance and a sense of smug superiority over their counterparts – policymakers who must balance multiple , complicated agendas .
Countering this will require proactive efforts by the IMF ’ s top leadership in recruitment , staffing , and promotion .
One option would be to increase substantially the number of mid-career recruits with actual practical experience in developing countries .
This would make the IMF staff more cognizant of the value of local knowledge relative to theoretical expertise .
Another strategy would be to relocate some of the staff , including those in functional departments , to “ regional offices ” in the field .
This move would likely face considerable resistance from staff who have gotten used to the perks of Washington , DC .
But there is no better way to appreciate the role of context than to live in it .
The World Bank , which engaged in a similar decentralization a while back , has become better at serving its clients as a result ( without facing difficulties in recruiting top talent ) .
This is an important moment for the IMF .
The international community is putting great store in the Fund ’ s judgment and performance .
The Fund will require internal reforms to earn that trust fully .
