Reinventing the World Bank , Again
MADRID – With three nominees now in the running to become the World Bank ’ s next president – Nigerian Finance Minister Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala , former Colombian Finance Minister José Antonio Ocampo , and the United States ’ nominee , Dartmouth College President Jim Yong Kim – this is the moment to step back and assess the Bank ’ s trajectory .
Unless the Bank ’ s next president has a clear vision of the way ahead , and the gravitas to withstand the institution ’ s internal pressures , he or she will be swallowed up by its complex machinery and unwieldy processes .
Global attention has been focused on weighing the three candidates ’ strengths and qualifications , particularly their economic and financial credentials .
But the real challenge lies in providing direction for the World Bank that reflects the world as it is , and re-calibrating the Bank ’ s tools accordingly .
Inevitably , the new course hinges in part on recognizing that economics and finance , while integral elements of all areas of the Bank ’ s activities , are no longer the institution ’ s main drivers .
The World Bank ’ s traditional instruments have been ( and still are ) low-interest loans , interest-free credits , and grants .
But the Bank ’ s core philosophy has rested on lending , with interest , to middle-income countries and channeling the ensuing funds to the poorest countries eligible for assistance .
Today , owing to the conditionality of its loans , the Bank is losing competitiveness vis-à-vis the plethora of actors , both public and private , that crowd the development scene .
Meanwhile , the Bank is emerging as a vital – indeed , indispensable – source of expertise and technical assistance , as well as a provider of global public goods .
Building on these strengths , the Bank must be willing to understand its client countries ’ realities , rather than pontificate , and to balance its country-based work with its global roles .
While lending is progressively thinned out and retained only for the poorest countries , the Bank must adopt the lean hub-and-spoke structure of a strategic consultancy or a “ knowledge bank . ”
The organization must reformulate its mission , moving away from the idea of being the “ West ’ s Bank , ” the “ BRICS ’ Bank , ” or , for that matter , a bank at all .
What is unambiguous today is a growing intolerance for bad governance and corruption – a collective rejection evident in countries as diverse as Burma , Congo , Russia , and Bolivia , not to mention Arab countries from Syria to Morocco .
At the same time , the biggest threat to the international order comes from failing , failed , post-conflict , and conflict-ridden states .
For the past two decades , as part of the soul-searching triggered by the collapse of communism , the World Bank has been seeking to make governance and anti-corruption efforts integral to its work on economic growth and poverty reduction in the developing world .
But , beyond eloquent rhetoric , these changes have been incremental , and have been superimposed on the Bank ’ s operations , rather than becoming part of its organizational DNA .
The Bank has been too focused on itself and its reputation , and not enough on the countries that it advises and in which it operates , while institution-building has been considered to be embedded in the growth agenda .
As a consequence , law , which constitutes the foundation of institution-building , has been regarded as no more than a toolbox .
Property rights , contract enforcement , entrepreneurial conditions , and free and competitive product and labor markets were proclaimed to be part of the economic framework – a misconception recently restated by the former World Bank economist and current development pundit William Easterly .
Moreover , the traditional interpretation of the Bank ’ s Articles of Agreement imposed a proclaimed “ neutrality ” that translated into a readiness to overlook the nature of its client countries ’ regimes and their lack of popular accountability .
Ironically , the same World Bank whose former president , Robert McNamara , transformed it almost five decades ago , at the height of decolonization , into a key instrument in the fight against communism , today views the so-called “ Beijing Consensus , ” by which the Chinese Communist Party maintains an iron grip on the country , as a viable development model .
In this context , a “ knowledge bank ” needs to address three challenges .
It must enhance support for the private sector and prioritize infrastructure , in a broad sense , in accordance with its importance for individual initiative .
It also must strengthen its know-how in capacity-building , particularly administrative capacity-building , with an emphasis on its legal-institutional aspects .
Finally , it must place anti-corruption and good-governance programs at the core of its mission .
The international community cannot afford a World Bank that , anchored in the world of the past , loses its relevance .
No other institution can fulfill the Bank ’ s formidable potential as a center of knowledge and a coordinator of development policies .
The mandate of the Bank ’ s next president will be crucial in making or breaking an institution that the world desperately needs in the century ahead .
