Nuclear Disarmament ’ s Midnight Hour
CANBERRA – Last month , the Doomsday Clock ’ s hands were moved a minute closer to midnight by the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists , the respected global organization that for decades has tracked the risk of a nuclear-weapons catastrophe , whether caused by accident or design , state or terrorist , fission bomb or dirty radiological bomb .
Few around the world seemed to be listening .
The story – as others like it since the end of the Cold War ­ – came and went within a half-day ’ s news cycle .
But the Scientists ’ argument was sobering , and demands attention .
Progress since 2007 – when the Clock ’ s hands were last set at five minutes to midnight – has stalled , and political leadership has gone missing on all of the critical issues : disarmament , non-proliferation , and key building blocks needed for both .
On disarmament , the balloon has well and truly deflated .
The New START treaty , signed by the United States and Russia in 2010 , reduced the number of deployed strategic weapons , but left both sides ’ actual stockpiles intact , their high-alert status undisturbed , & nbsp ; weapons-modernization programs in place , disagreements about missile defense and conventional-arms imbalances unresolved – and talks on further draw-downs going nowhere .
With no further movement by the US and Russia , which together hold 95 % of the world ’ s total of more than 20,000 nuclear weapons , no other nuclear-armed state has felt pressure to reduce its own stocks significantly , and some – China , India , and Pakistan – have been increasing them .
The 2010 Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) Review Conference was a modest success , mainly because it did not collapse in disarray , as had the previous one in 2005 . But it could not agree on measures to strengthen the regime ; its push for talks on a nuclear-weapons-free zone in the Middle East has so far gathered no momentum ;
North Korea is no closer to being put back in its NPT box ; and Iran is closer than ever to jumping out of it , with consequences that would ricochet around the region – and the global economy – if it makes that decision .
Despite President Barack Obama ’ s good intentions , the US Senate is no closer to ratifying the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty , while China , India , and Pakistan , among others , take shelter behind that inaction , with a fragile voluntary moratorium the only obstacle to resumed testing .
And negotiations on another crucial building block for both disarmament and non-proliferation – a treaty to ban further production of weapons-grade fissile material – remain at an impasse .
The only half-way good news is that progress continues on a third building block : ensuring that weapons-usable materials , and weapons themselves , currently stored in multiple locations in 32 countries , do not fall into the hands of rogue states or terrorists .
At the end of March , South Korean President Lee Myung-bak will host a follow-up meeting to Obama ’ s successful Nuclear Security Summit in 2010 , which brought together 47 government leaders to agree on a comprehensive program aimed at securing all such materials within four years .
High on the agenda will be the security implications of nuclear safety : the Fukushima catastrophe showed that nuclear-power plants may be vulnerable not only to natural disaster , but also to terrorist sabotage .
But nuclear security is only one small part of what must be done to eliminate nuclear threats once and for all , and summit fatigue will make it difficult to sustain key world leaders ’ commitment to meeting for so narrow a purpose .
New thinking is urgently needed on how to recover the momentum of just two years ago .
To achieve that requires meeting three conditions .
First , political leaders and civil-society leaders must restate , ad nauseam if necessary , the case for “ global zero ” – a world without nuclear weapons – and map a credible step-by-step path for getting there .
Second , new mechanisms are needed to energize policymakers and publics .
One is to develop and promote a draft Nuclear Weapons Convention as a framework for action .
Another is a “ State of Play ” report card that pulls no punches in assessing which states are meeting their disarmament and non-proliferation commitments , and which are not ( the Nuclear Materials Security Index , just published by Senator Sam Nunn ’ s Nuclear Threat Initiative , is one example ) .
Advocacy-focused leadership networks , such as those now operating in Europe and the Asia-Pacific region , comprising well-known former leaders and other senior figures , could also help .
Third , sustaining high-level policy attention to the entire nuclear agenda requires an institutional setting .
The Nuclear Security Summit ’ s focus is too narrow for this role ; the International Atomic Energy Agency ’ s formal mandate is too restricted ; the NPT Review Conference meets too irregularly ; and the United Nations Security Council ’ s membership is too limited .
The best forum for norm-building may prove to be the G-20 , whose members embrace both North and South , account for most of the world ’ s population , GDP , and all but a handful of its nuclear weapons , and whose heads of government meet regularly .
With its foreign ministers meeting in Mexico this month to discuss broader global governance issues , the G-20 is beginning to move beyond a narrow economic focus .
That is to be welcomed .
Economic destruction causes immense and intolerable human misery .
But there are only two global threats that , if mishandled , can destroy life on this planet as we know it .
And nuclear weapons can kill us a lot faster than CO2 can .
