Obama Gets It Right
NEW YORK – US President Barack Obama has been much criticized for the way he has handled revolutionary changes in North Africa and the Middle East .
Actually , he has not handled them very much , at least not in public .
That is precisely the problem for armchair warriors watching events unfold on their computer and television screens in Washington and New York .
They want Obama to handle things more .
Instead of taking a cautious approach , and letting the demonstrators in Iran , Tunisia , Egypt , Libya , Bahrain , Yemen , and other places do the shouting , they want him to talk tough , or , better yet , to send in the US Air Force and blast Qaddafi ’ s jet fighters and helicopter gunships out of the sky .
They want Obama to tell those dictators to quit right now , or else …
Or else what , exactly ?
To be sure , the US government has coddled too many brutal dictators over the last half-century .
During the Cold War , dictators benefitted from American largesse as long as they were anti-Communist ( “ our bastards ” ) .
Middle Eastern dictators were showered with money and arms if they refrained from attacking Israel and kept the Islamists down .
In both cases , these cozy relationships were maintained for far too long .
In Arab countries , they only helped to inflame Islamic extremism .
And yet , in order to begin a transition to more democratic forms of government , it helps to be a client state of the US .
During the 1980 ’ s , South Korea , the Philippines , and Taiwan managed to ditch their dictators , partly because they were utterly dependent on US arms and money .
When the Cold War was drawing to a close , anti-Communism no longer guaranteed US protection .
So , when Koreans , Filipinos , and Taiwanese rose up against their rulers , the US , albeit belatedly , was in a position to tell their military clients to back off .
In a discreet way , something like this probably happened in Egypt as well .
Unfortunately , this type of pressure could not work in China when its people demanded what other Asians had won .
Both the Chinese Communist Party and the People ’ s Liberation Army could survive without US patronage .
The same is true of the semi-theocratic regime in Iran .
If Qaddafi finally goes , it will not be because his army is dependent on the US .
But there is another problem with the US taking a leading role in political revolts in the Middle East .
Some of the same people who accuse Obama today of being “ soft ” were keen promoters of the war in Iraq .
Back then , they expected that the “ shock and awe ” of US force would not only topple the dictator ( which turned out to be true ) , but also that the US-led invasion would be greeted with enthusiasm by the liberated Iraqis , who would then herald a new democratic era in the Middle East .
One casualty of that brutal enterprise , apart from the roughly 100,000 Iraqis who have died and the millions more who have become refugees , is trust in the US as a force for good .
Operation Iraqi Freedom , not to mention Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan , gave American efforts to promote democracy a terrible name .
People want freedom , but not when it comes from the barrel of a US gun .
So far , anti-American rhetoric has been remarkably muted in the uprisings sweeping the Middle East .
The cynical way in which despots try to discredit all opposition as the work of foreign agents no doubt plays a part in this silence .
But so does Obama ’ s public discretion .
His conciliatory speech in Cairo on June 4 , 2009 , much derided by hawks in the US , together with his general lack of bluster , created enough space for the opponents of Middle Eastern dictators to rebel without being tainted in any way by foreign intervention .
It is their show , and so it should be .
But that is not to say that the US must always be passive .
In fact , it has not been .
Where America ’ s influence counts , as in the case of the Egyptian military , it has been used .
And Obama has made his support of democratic aspirations clear , to the dismay of allies like Israel and Saudi Arabia .
However , as recent history has shown , toppling strongmen is only the beginning of the democratization process .
Building institutions that guarantee not only political liberties , but also the protection of minorities , as well as other liberal conditions , is difficult enough in countries where such institutions had once existed , as in post-communist Central Europe .
It will be harder in countries where they did not , or where the economy remains largely in the hands of the armed forces .
Armed Anglo-American intervention , especially if it is not sanctioned by the United Nations , would do much to undermine liberals and democrats , who need all the credibility they can get .
There are no doubt some among the demonstrators who would like Obama to be more strident in his support of their aims .
Some even call for more active US assistance .
There may be things that Western powers can do to alleviate the suffering , by offering aid to refugees , for example , or use the latest technology to keep lines of information open .
But American hawks want what most opposition leaders in Libya have expressly rejected .
They want the US to show leadership , which is the last thing aspiring democrats need right now .
People in the Middle East and North Africa have been led by the West , or by Western-backed dictators , for long enough .
They must find their own way to freedom .
Obama seems to understand this .
Which is why he has done all right .
