The Changing Face of Global Risk
NEW YORK – The world ’ s economic , financial , and geopolitical risks are shifting .
Some risks now have a lower probability – even if they are not fully extinguished .
Others are becoming more likely and important .
A year or two ago , six main risks stood at center stage :
· A eurozone breakup ( including a Greek exit and loss of access to capital markets for Italy and / or Spain ) .
· A fiscal crisis in the United States ( owing to further political fights over the debt ceiling and another government shutdown ) .
· A public-debt crisis in Japan ( as the combination of recession , deflation , and high deficits drove up the debt / GDP ratio ) .
· Deflation in many advanced economies .
· War between Israel and Iran over alleged Iranian nuclear proliferation .
· A wider breakdown of regional order in the Middle East .
These risks have now been reduced .
Thanks to European Central Bank President Mario Draghi ’ s “ whatever it takes ” speech , new financial facilities to stabilize distressed sovereign debtors , and the beginning of a banking union , the eurozone is no longer on the verge of collapse .
In the US , President Barack Obama and Congressional Republicans have for now agreed on a truce to avoid the threat of another government shutdown over the need to raise the debt ceiling .
In Japan , the first two “ arrows ” of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe ’ s economic strategy – monetary easing and fiscal expansion – have boosted growth and stopped deflation .
Now the third arrow of “ Abenomics ” – structural reforms – together with the start of long-term fiscal consolidation , could lead to debt stabilization ( though the economic impact of the coming consumption-tax hike is uncertain ) .
Similarly , the risk of deflation worldwide has been contained via exotic and unconventional monetary policies : near-zero interest rates , quantitative easing , credit easing , and forward guidance .
And the risk of a war between Israel and Iran has been reduced by the interim agreement on Iran ’ s nuclear program concluded last November .
The falling fear premium has led to a drop in oil prices , even if many doubt Iran ’ s sincerity and worry that it is merely trying to buy time while still enriching uranium .
Though many Middle East countries remain highly unstable , none of them is systemically important in financial terms , and no conflict so far has seriously shocked global oil and gas supplies .
But , of course , exacerbation of some of these crises and conflicts could lead to renewed concerns about energy security .
More important , as the risks of recent years have receded , six other risks have been growing .
For starters , there is the risk of a hard landing in China .
The rebalancing of growth away from fixed investment and toward private consumption is occurring too slowly , because every time annual GDP growth slows toward 7 % , the authorities panic and double down on another round of credit-fueled capital investment .
This then leads to more bad assets and non-performing loans , more excessive investment in real estate , infrastructure , and industrial capacity , and more public and private debt .
By next year , there may be no road left down which to kick the can .
There is also the risk of policy mistakes by the US Federal Reserve as it exits monetary easing .
Last year , the Fed ’ s mere announcement that it would gradually wind down its monthly purchases of long-term financial assets triggered a “ taper ” tantrum in global financial markets and emerging markets .
This year , tapering is priced in , but uncertainty about the timing and speed of the Fed ’ s efforts to normalize policy interest rates is creating volatility .
Some investors and governments now worry that the Fed may raise rates too soon and too fast , causing economic and financial shockwaves .
Third , the Fed may actually exit zero rates too late and too slowly ( its current plan would normalize rates to 4 % only by 2018 ) , thus causing another asset-price boom – and an eventual bust .
Indeed , unconventional monetary policies in the US and other advanced economies have already led to massive asset-price reflation , which in due course could cause bubbles in real estate , credit , and equity markets .
Fourth , the crises in some fragile emerging markets may worsen .
Emerging markets are facing headwinds ( owing to a fall in commodity prices and the risks associated with China ’ s structural transformation and the Fed ’ s monetary-policy shift ) at a time when their own macroeconomic policies are still too loose and the lack of structural reforms has undermined potential growth .
Moreover many of these emerging markets face political and electoral risks .
Fifth , there is a serious risk that the current conflict in Ukraine will lead to Cold War II – and possibly even a hot war if Russia invades the east of the country .
The economic consequences of such an outcome – owing to its impact on energy supplies and investment flows , in addition to the destruction of lives and physical capital – would be immense .
Finally , there is a similar risk that Asia ’ s terrestrial and maritime territorial disagreements ( starting with the disputes between China and Japan ) could escalate into outright military conflict .
Such geopolitical risks – were they to materialize – would have a systemic economic and financial impact .
So far , financial markets have been sanguine about these new rising risks .
Volatility has increased only modestly , while asset prices have held up .
Noise about these risks has occasionally ( but only briefly ) shaken investors ’ confidence , and modest market corrections have tended to reverse themselves .
Investors may be right that these risks will not materialize in their more severe form , or that loose monetary policies in advanced economies and continued recovery will contain such risks .
But investors may be deluding themselves that the probability of these risks is low – and thus may be unpleasantly surprised when one or more of them materializes .
Indeed , as was the case with the global financial crisis , investors seem unable to estimate , price , and hedge such tail risks properly .
Only time will tell whether their current nonchalance constitutes another failure to assess and prepare for extreme events .
