No Velvet Transition
CAMBRIDGE : It is easy to idealize revolutions that happen somewhere else .
Across the West , people have been celebrating the tenth anniversary of the end of communism as the war won without firing a shot .
Across the former Soviet empire , genuine euphoria is tempered by ten hard years of change .
Some things happened as expected : Hungary is doing better than most , Estonia outpaced the rest of the Soviet Union , and Southern Europe is in trouble .
But surprises also abound .
Everybody 's " basket case " of 1989 , Poland , became the region 's dynamo .
The Czech Republic – everyone 's favorite – went from Velvet revolution to muddied reformer .
Russia has been the biggest puzzle .
It avoided the abyss that was widely predicted by the now unemployed Kremlinologists .
But Russia also refused to become " normal . "
I myself thought that communism 's collapse would deliver quicker social rejuvenation in Russia , although I argued from the start that Russia 's road would be a hard slog , and that the country required substantial financial help from the West .
Despite the variety of transitions underway , there are some durable lessons that can probably be drawn by now from the experience of the postcommunist transitions :
• Markets work , but require a solid legal framework to function
Where the legal framework could be changed quickly , as in eliminating price controls and a myriad of subsidies , or assuring currency convertibility , market forces began to work quickly and efficiently .
Reforms unleashed the beneficial forces of supply and demand , as Poland 's experience made dramatically evident , and brought an end to the endemic shortages of the old regime .
But when the new legal framework demanded the creation of working state institutions that took time to create , quick reforms often had less than the desired effect .
Speedy privatization , for example , especially the mass voucher schemes in Czechoslovakia , Russia , and many other former Soviet countries , did not work .
Transferring title from state to private hands did not create enough real ownership .
What is worse , when privatization was rushed through , the result was massive corruption , managerial plunder , and paralysis at the firm level .
Although some abuses could have been lessened , the main reason for failure was that reform of the state did not keep pace with economic reforms .
• Initial conditions matter in economic restructuring
Some surprises of the postcommunist transition needn 't have been such , if the different starting points had been properly considered .
Poland 's chaos in the 1980s , for example , may have created the basis for rapid growth in the 1990s , because the dead hand of central planning had already been cut off when the reforms began .
Where central planning was alive , as in Czechoslovakia , it may have made it more difficult to break the mold of loss-making state enterprises .
In largely agricultural China , huge state industrial enterprises had been less important , so their reform could have been postponed , and reliance could be placed on " starting afresh . "
But in the more " advanced " socialist countries , such as Russia , where 90 % of the population was employed in state-owned industries , restructuring the state sector – a much harder job in many ways – was a necessity , and an obstacle to quick recovery .
• Civil society is critical to successful transformation
Even when governments have good intentions , they tend to be corrupted , if power is unchecked .
Constitutions provide modest checks , but private associations of professionals , religions , and regions – the heart of civil society – provide the deeper balance .
Stalinist purges in Russia left no independent institutions to stop the depredations of corrupt officials , managers , and the state .
In Poland , by contrast , Communism never managed to destroy the Catholic Church or prevent the rise of the Solidarity movement .
( Stalin once complained that establishing party rule there was like putting a saddle on a cow . )
Solidarity unionists , even if they often opposed many specific policy proposals , stopped firm managers from stealing assets ; and the Church provided a force with which all governments to reckon .
• Geography is an important factor
It is fashionable today to stress the global nature of the world 's problems .
But geography has not ceased to matter .
The closer a postcommunist country was to the European Union , the more successful and dynamic has been the transformation .
Countries such as Poland , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Slovenia , Croatia , and the Baltic States , have done much better at attracting foreign investment , expanding exports , and stimulating economic growth than those whose markets were at a greater remove from the European Union .
Just as U.S. firms go next door to Mexico , German firms head for the immediate neighborhood to the East .
• History casts a long shadow
1989 was supposed to be a fresh start , the awakening from a nightmare .
But 1989 also awakened ancient antipathies and mythologies that had been repressed in the Communist era .
Who would have thought that in the late 20th century Serbian mythologies over the Battle of Kosovo of 1389 could galvanize a population behind the murderous nationalism of Slobodan Milosevic ?
• Assistance from developed countries can make a big difference
Blame for failures does rest , in part , on the West , which was nonchalant in its efforts and stingy with its purse .
Poland is the exception that suggests what might have been .
Here the West helped with initial balance of payments funds and later with debt cancellation .
Compare this with what happened in Russia , which was denied vitally needed funds and lasting debt relief .
Many American politicians and citizens felt that the U.S. had no business helping a former rival nation that still had more than 10,000 nuclear warheads .
What aid was given was a mere drop in the bucket when set against Russia 's gargantuan financial and social needs .
The final irony ? The IMF actually provided most of its funds , but after reformers had been thrown out of office and Russia 's kleptocracy had revealed itself !
