Kerry vs. Bush : Will Reason Prevail ?
With over 1,000 US deaths in Iraq , and the huge pressures that the occupation of that benighted country has put on American troops around the world , it is clear that - for the first time in decades - foreign policy issues may determine the outcome of a US presidential election .
Ordinary Americans are asking themselves the same questions that people around the world are asking : how should America 's global supremacy be used ?
What price must be paid for that supremacy to be maintained ?
What limits on the use of US military power are acceptable or necessary ?
These have long been dominant questions in America 's strategic debate .
But , after the terrorist attacks of September 11 , 2001 , they became confused with another debate , one far more important for a US electorate that feels threatened : how can alliances and multilateral institutions protect Americans ?
John Kerry 's great virtue has been to resist confusing the demand for security and peace with the hegemonic impulses of America the hyper-power .
Nationalist and neo-conservative currents within the Bush administration believe that unilateral action best serves US interests because it handcuffs American power the least .
On this view , the security of the US can be guaranteed through energetic military action , with or without allies .
Hence the Bush administration 's tendency to weaken the ties of America 's permanent alliances , including those that NATO represents .
Unilateral announcement of troop reductions in Europe and Asia , where US forces primarily serve ( as in South Korea ) to dissuade aggression , can only be seen as a corollary of this tendency .
The Bush doctrine 's bedrock notion is that of " pre-emptive war , " a doctrine that lacks international legitimacy and that therefore can usually count on only a limited number of allies .
The idea behind pre-emptive wars is that American force should be projected through high-tech , blitzkrieg type wars waged from US soil , or from the soil of uncritical allies .
On this view , NATO is merely to serve as a means to mobilize Europeans to tackle the inevitable postwar stabilization and reconstruction missions - obviating the need for the US to place its forces under NATO command .
This is what happened in Afghanistan .
But as NATO 's Secretary General has said , if it is the mission that defines the coalition , then NATO - a permanent alliance - is no longer needed .
John Kerry is focused upon the same type of security problems as Bush .
This leaves many observers skeptical about the possibility for real change .
Where he differs fundamentally from Bush is in his belief that resolving international problems that affect the US almost always calls for the support of others .
He therefore considers the revival of America 's alliances to be a key foreign policy priority , and he has proposed that US forces in Iraq should be integrated into a NATO operation , as long as this remains under US command .
Acting jointly means that the US will have to take into account other interests and views - views that may not always be in harmony with its own .
America will have to accept a world that is regulated not by the US unilaterally , but by global institutions and permanent alliances .
And the norms and rules that govern international institutions constitute a boundary on American power - and thus as a check on its hegemony .
Kerry and a growing number of Americans recognize that accepting limits on US power and the use of military force are a precondition for America 's ultimate security , that what binds can also strengthen , and that such limits will reinforce America 's ability to tackle the crisis in Iraq .
Kerry knows that in most cases military power alone cannot be decisive , as there are other dimensions of power - so-called " soft power " - that are essential to resolving crises and establishing peace .
These dimensions include international legitimacy , values ( including tolerance ) , and public opinion .
The coming US election recalls a famous debate described by Thucydides in his History of the Peloponnesian War , concerning how Athens should respond to the revolt of Mytilene .
The vote supported those who felt that " those who make wise decisions are more formidable to their enemies than those who rush madly into strong action . "
Let us hope that reason also prevails this time round .
