Obasanjo ’ s Troubling End-Game
In Nigeria today , the key question nowadays is not whether President Olusegun Obasanjo will quit after his second ( and final ) term expires next year , but who will succeed him .
Given Nigeria ’ s history of sit-tight military dictatorships , that is real progress .
Unfortunately , it is not necessarily the president ’ s doing .
Attempts by Obasanjo ’ s supporters to persuade the National Assembly to amend the Constitution to enable Obasanjo to continue in office beyond two terms met a solid wall of opposition .
Government and commercial activities virtually ground to halt this spring as democracy activists , in alliance with politicians and lawmakers opposed to a third term , battled Obasanjo ’ s allies to thwart the proposed bill .
The failure of Obasanjo ’ s supporters triggered three big political developments .
The president ’ s authority is draining away precipitately , and his vice-like grip on his People ’ s Democratic Party ( PDP ) has loosened .
Opposition parties , human rights groups , and other government critics , hitherto cowed by a seemingly omnipotent Obasanjo and PDP machine , have found a new lease on life .
Obasanjo , besieged and angry that friends at home and abroad ( particularly in the United States and Europe ) betrayed him by aiding his political opponents in killing the amendment , is determined to settle scores .
The storm had hardly settled when Obasanjo sacked General Aliyu Gusau , his powerful National Security Adviser .
Several senior military officers whose loyalty was questionable were also replaced .
Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala , the Finance Minister and the brain behind the government ’ s economic reforms , was redeployed to head the Foreign Ministry , in a move widely seen as punishment , as Obasanjo has dominated foreign policy-making throughout his tenure .
The official spin is that Okonjo-Iweala , a former World Bank economist , was reassigned to prepare her for higher office in 2007 , and that the move signals the end of the President ’ s love affair with IMF-guided neo-liberal reforms .
But it is no coincidence that Obasanjo removed Okonjo-Iweala from a job for which she has proven competence and , more importantly , in which she ruled the roost : she had led the opposition from within the government to the constitutional amendment .
Obasanjo is also shaking up the oil industry in a double maneuver interpreted as a rap on the knuckles for his Western allies and a last ditch effort to secure a legacy as the one Nigerian leader who tamed corruption in that sector .
American , British , and French oil companies enjoyed a virtual monopoly of Nigeria ’ s oil industry .
Royal Dutch Shell ’ s joint venture with the government produces half of the country ’ s daily output of 2.5 million barrels .
Two US companies , Chevron Texaco and Mobil , are also key players .
Obasanjo ’ s new oil policy threatens this dominance .
China made a dramatic entry into the picture last April , when Nigerian officials announced that China National Offshore Oil Corporation ( CNOOC ) had bought a 45 % stake in a Nigerian oil field for more than $ 2 billion .
That field will pump 225,000 barrels per day when it begins production in 2008 .
Obasanjo also negotiated a loan of $ 1 billion from the Chinese government to finance repair of Nigeria ’ s railways and buy new rolling stock .
These deals were brokered at the height of the constitutional drama , when America said it would not support an attempt by the government to extend its stay in office unconstitutionally .
In addition to rolling out the welcome mat for energy-hungry China , oil ministry officials say they will tighten financial regulations and impose sanctions on companies seen as defaulting on tax and royalty payments – moves apparently aimed at local subsidiaries of Western oil companies in the Niger Delta .
The announcement was welcomed by ordinary Nigerians , but incited jitters in the industry , prompting anxious questions about how deep Obasanjo ’ s angry sword will cut , and how smooth the political succession is likely to be .
Obasanjo has made it clear that Atiku Abubakar , the Vice President and the arrowhead of the anti-third term coalition , will not succeed him .
But this has not stopped Abubakar , a formidable political operator , from launching his presidential bid , despite uncertainty over whether he will fight it out with his boss for control of the PDP machinery or decamp to another political party .
In fact , the PDP has splintered into three warring factions , drastically reducing Obasanjo ’ s chances to control the succession .
Muhammadu Buhari , a retired general who challenged Obasanjo for the presidency in 2003 and lost , has said that he will try again in 2007 on the platform of the All Nigeria People ’ s Party ( ANPP ) , the second largest party .
But the ANPP is also in disarray .
Obasanjo ’ s spokesmen regularly brief journalists anonymously that he favors a successor from the Niger delta area .
The President has appointed the late Ken Saro-Wiwa ’ s son as one of his special assistants , in an attempt to mend fences with political elites in the restive delta .
Obasanjo is anxious to thwart the region ’ s growing armed insurgency , which is driven by widespread poverty and oil industry-related ecological damage .
Dangling the PDP ’ s presidential ticket before the delta region ’ s leading politicians is seen as Obasanjo ’ s strategy to maintain stability and , more importantly , prevent Atiku Abubakar or General Buhari from coming to power .
As it has since the discovery of oil and the Biafran War in the 1960 ’ s , the Niger Delta will be at the center of Nigerian politics .
This time , however , the politics will be democratic .
