From Gaza to Where ?
CANBERRA – The wisest words on the Second Gaza War may have come from an Israeli living in a kibbutz near the Gaza border .
“ If you want to defend me … Don ’ t send the Israel Defense Forces for us in order to ‘ win , ’ ” Michal Vasser wrote in Haaretz on November 15 . “ Start thinking about the long term and not just about the next election .
Try to negotiate until white smoke comes up through the chimney .
Hold out a hand to Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas .
Stop with the ‘ pinpoint assassinations ’ and look into the civilians ’ eyes on the other side as well . ”
Israel is , of course , entitled to defend itself from rocket attacks .
But the lesson of the last two decades is that attacks stop , and intifadas do not start , when there is a prospect of peace – and that , when there is no such prospect , Palestinian militancy is uncontainable .
The chances of a comprehensive and sustainable two-state settlement now being negotiated with Mahmoud Abbas ’ s West Bank-based Palestinian Authority ( PA ) – and of its acceptance , albeit grudgingly , by Gaza ’ s Hamas after a popular vote – may be slim and receding .
But the only alternative is an endlessly recurring cycle of deadly violence between Israelis and Palestinians .
The immediate priority is to calm and stabilize the situation in Gaza .
But if there are not to be more and even worse eruptions , Israeli policymakers need to ask themselves some fundamental questions .
So , too , must their rusted-on supporters in the United States and countries like mine .
How is peace fostered if the elimination or dramatic diminution of Hamas ’ s capability leaves Gaza in the hands of even more militant groups , and gives Islamists throughout the region another recruitment tool ?
How is Israel ’ s national security served when , by its action in Gaza and inaction with Abbas , it jeopardizes its longstanding and hard-won peace treaties with Egypt and Jordan ( both now looking very fragile indeed in the aftermath of the Arab Spring ) ?
How can Israel ’ s preferred Palestinian leaders , Abbas and PA Prime Minister Salam Fayyad , be left with any credible capacity to negotiate if talks cannot begin until , as Israel insists , they retreat on their minimum condition of a settlement freeze in the Occupied Territories ?
For all that Israel downplays its significance , the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002 still offers a critically important deal : full normalization of relations by the entire Arab world in exchange for a comprehensive peace settlement .
How long can this Arab League position be sustained with peace talks going nowhere ?
Another big question for Israel is whether it can accept the consequences if a two-state solution disappears completely from the agenda .
Israel , as founding father David Ben-Gurion warned , can be a Jewish state , it can be a democratic state , and it can be a state occupying the whole of historical Israel ; but it cannot be all three .
According to the CIA World Factbook , Jews currently outnumber non-Jews , by 6.4 million to 5.6 million , in the total area of historical Palestine .
But , with a much lower birthrate and declining immigration , it is only a matter of time before Jews are in a minority .
With Gaza still smoldering , yet another burning question is waiting in the wings .
What are Israel and its supporters supposed to gain by bitterly resisting the United Nations General Assembly resolution recognizing Palestine as a non-member “ observer state ” ( with a status like the Vatican ) , which now seems bound to be introduced , and passed by a huge international majority , on or around November 29 ?
The text of the draft resolution now in circulation contains no offensive language .
It makes clear both that full UN membership remains to be determined and that final-status issues like borders , refugees , Jerusalem , and security all remain to be negotiated .
True , passage of this resolution might give Palestine some standing that it now lacks to seek prosecutions in the International Criminal Court for alleged violations of international law .
But the ICC is not a kangaroo court , and allegations without substance can be expected to be treated accordingly .
Palestinian statehood has always been an indispensable requirement of Israel ’ s own long-term peace and security , and it is overwhelmingly in Israel ’ s interest to defuse rather than further inflame the issue .
This need has become more urgent than ever in view of the new realities of power in the region .
In short , Israel should treat the UN vote not as an excuse for renewed confrontation , but as an opportunity for a fresh start to serious negotiations .
The US reaction is key : Rather than punishing the PA , and maybe the UN as well , it should use the resolution to propose the kind of diplomatic circuit-breaker for which the world has long been hoping .
Of course , to put on the table a comprehensive settlement plan that addresses all of the final-status issues , with compromises that all sides could be persuaded and pressured to accept , would require statesmanship .
Unhappily , that quality has been agonizingly absent from Middle East diplomacy for almost as long as anyone can remember .
