In Defense of Angela Merkel
PARIS – The recent cover of Der Spiegel showing German Chancellor Angela Merkel in front of the Acropolis surrounded by Nazi officers serves an important purpose : it finally poses , in a way that cannot be evaded , the question of Germanophobia in Europe .
The abuse of Germany has dragged on for quite some time .
Demonstrations in Cyprus in March 2013 included banners bearing caricatures of Merkel done up as Adolf Hitler .
In Valencia at around the same time , on the occasion of the annual Fallas celebration , there was Merkel as an evil headmistress delivering to the head of the Spanish government and his ministers “ The Ten Commandments of Angela the Exterminator . ”
She ended up being burned in effigy in the flames of the bonfires of St. Joseph .
Two months later , in Portugal , similar parades featured the same Hitlerized Merkel caricatures , borne by howling demonstrators dressed in mourning clothes and decrying the German leader ’ s “ policy of massacring the poor . ”
And , naturally , there was Greece , where the phenomenon reached its apogee during the near-riots of October 2012 , in which the world was treated to the spectacle of Nazi and German flags flown together – and then burned – together before the Acropolis in scenes that presaged the Der Spiegel cover .
In Italy , the right-wing daily newspaper Il Giornale had no scruples about devoting its headline for August 3 , 2012 , to the emergence of the “ Fourth Reich . ”
Likewise , conspiracy websites in the countries of northern Europe claim that Germany ’ s eagerness to support Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko against Russian President Vladimir Putin is a reenactment of Hitler ’ s subjugation of Ukraine .
Then there is France , where the game seems to be to see who can come out on top in populist denunciations of the new and detestable “ German empire . ”
From the extreme right , National Front leader Marine Le Pen chides Merkel for the “ suffering ” that she is imposing on the peoples of Europe .
From the opposite extreme , we have the Left Party ’ s Jean-Luc Mélenchon thundering against Merkel ’ s “ austerity ” policy and inviting her to “ shut up . ”
The problem with this Germanophobia is not simply that it is stupid , or that it is yet another symptom of the decomposition , before our eyes , of the noble European project of integration and ever-closer union .
No , the problem with today ’ s Germanophobia is that , contrary to what the sorcerer ’ s apprentices who stoke it would have us believe , their behavior is not a sign of their opposition to the true fascism that lies on the horizon , but rather of their allegiance – and even contribution – to it .
Why ?
There are several reasons .
For starters , to oppose Germany ’ s social , economic , and foreign policies by equating Merkel with Hitler is to banalize Hitler .
However legitimate disagreement with those policies may be , Germany is one of the continent ’ s most scrupulous and exemplary democracies .
To say that it resembles in any way the Nazi regime – which in Europe still stands for the destruction of democracy ( indeed , civilization itself ) – is to exonerate that regime , and to reassure and encourage today ’ s neo-fascists , allowing them , whether intentionally or not , to reenter the public debate .
What is more ( and this is key ) , those keenest to discredit Merkel just happen to be the same people who do not hesitate to waltz with Viennese neo-Nazis or to form an alliance , as in Athens , with the leaders of a genuinely extremist party .
All of the clamor raised around a Germany that has supposedly “ reunited with its demons ” masks the voice of fascistic parties – from Greece ’ s Golden Dawn to Hungary ’ s Jobbik , Slovakia ’ s SNS , Belgium ’ s Vlaams Belang , and Bulgaria ’ s Ataka – that are in the process of establishing themselves in Europe .
It should also be noted that Merkel is a woman , and that hatred for women – the disdain in which they , right alongside the Jews , were regarded by the racist theoreticians of the 1920s and 1930s – has been an essential dimension of every expression of fascism .
Likewise , the slogans slung about in Valencia in October 2012 – with demonstrators urged to chant at the chancellor ’ s effigy , “ You will love money above all else ” and “ You will honor the banks and the Bank ” – had the unmistakably foul odor of the old mantras about “ the golden calf ” and the “ cosmopolitan plutocracy . ”
People have finally come to understand that anti-Americanism , born on the extreme right and fed , in Germany , for example , by the philosophy of Martin Heidegger and his acolytes , is a fixture of fascism .
It is now time for us to understand that the same is true of Germanophobia .
In France , it appeared with the French anti-Semitic novelist and activist Maurice Barrès , who saw in the philosophy of Immanuel Kant a vehicle for the “ Jewification ” of European minds .
It triumphed with Charles Maurras ’ Action Française and its protracted war with “ Jewish and Germanic abstractions . ”
And it culminated with the red-brown cells that , even today , on sites that I prefer not to mention , offer “ grub ” and a “ hideout ” for persons willing to “ bump off ” the “ bosses ” on the chancellor ’ s “ payroll . ”
The history of ideas has its logic , reason , and folly , its unconscious and its trajectory .
It is both futile and dangerous to deny any of them .
That is why , today , it is critically important , in the face of a dark force that is rising , swelling , and unfurling in Europe , to defend Angela Merkel .
