Anatomy of Chavez
Hugo Chavez 's almost 8 years in power in Venezuela – which he will seek to extend in presidential elections next month & # 45 ; & # 45 ; seems to defy economic analysis .
Indeed , any and all economic examination of Chavez ’ s Venezuela confirms Edgar R. Fiedler ’ s quip that if you & quot ; ask five economists something , you will get five answers ... or six if one of them is a Harvard graduate . & quot ;
Some people see in Chavez an innovative statesman who has seized an almost magical moment – the windfall Venezuela has received from today ’ s sky high oil prices & # 45 ; & # 45 ; to change the rules of the game in his country .
A few key indicators appear to support this .
Foreign investment has grown recently from $ 1.5 billion ( 2004 ) to $ 2.5 billion ( 2005 ) .
In that two year period , Chavez stepped on the gas for his social reforms – education , health care , etc . – and also in regard to breaking down the country ’ s excessive concentrations of wealth .
Although over 70 % of national income remains in the hands of just 20 % of the population , Chavez has forced big foreign oil companies to pay much higher royalties and has started expropriating unproductive land and industrial facilities .
With oil prices now six times higher than they were when he came to power , Chavez presided over economic growth of 9 % in 2005 and as much again in the first quarter of 2006 .
Above all , however , he has achieved a 6.3 % effective reduction of poverty , after taking over a country whose vast majority - 80 % - was perched between poverty and squalor .
Seen in this angle , Chavez appears to have real achievements .
But there is another , darker , angle from which to view his presidency .
It is possible to see in Chavez but another Latin American populist sorcerer 's apprentice , one whose political shelf life will expire whenever oil prices begin their inevitable shift backward .
To those who think that this is the case , Chavez is not an innovator but someone who is merely squandering Venezuela ’ s oil wealth in the same way that governments did following the oil shocks of the 1970 's .
The notion of specific & quot ; Chavist & quot ; growth can also be challenged .
The highest growth achieved in the Chavez years is lower than Venezuela ’ s average during the second half of the 1990 's , when oil was the exclusive domain of the private sector .
Moreover , growth under Chavez seems to reflect an increase in domestic consumption resulting from the flow of petrodollars and nothing more fundamental , as oil remains the economy ’ s only real engine .
So nothing Chavez has done translates into a fundamental improvement in , or diversification of , Venezuela ’ s economy .
Private investors appear to understand this , as such investment in Venezuela grew by a mere 3 % between 2000 and 2004 . Suspiciously , the country ’ s central bank refuses to publish that figure for 2005 .
Only one out of every ten Venezuelan companies polled states any intention of making middle or long term investments such as renovating existing industrial plants or building new ones .
True , businessmen have tempered their criticisms of Chavez and seem eager to participate in the profit feast brought about by increased consumption .
But they may also be waiting for the first external shock to puncture the Chavez balloon before they pounce .
These two versions of the Chavez years are both distorted & # 45 ; & # 45 ; to a certain degree & # 45 ; & # 45 ; by nostalgia .
Those who see him as successful have the 1960 's and 1970 's as their dream fantasy .
Their main arguments are reminiscent the arguments put forward by those who backed the Cuban Revolution .
Those who revile Chavez often do so in the name of the ‘ Washington Consensus , ’ that mix of capitalism and democracy that was almost hegemonic across the continent in the 1980 's and 1990 's .
Thus , Chavez is portrayed as a return to the Latin American populist heresy , a heresy that must be resisted because it affects not only the country with the largest oil reserves outside the Middle East , but also because it may tempt the rest of Latin America down that road .
But history never truly repeats itself .
The years of the biggest transformation demands in Latin America or those of its docility to economic orthodoxy will not come back because we can remember them .
Especially , the view of the Washington Consensus seems irretrievable ; its & quot ; grand tale & quot ; is now beyond the pale in the region 's societies after it did not deliver the promised prosperity .
Yet one thing is clear : Chavez was the first ruler of his generation to recognize the region ’ s fatigue and disillusion with neo-liberalism , and to propose new rules of the game .
In the end these may not be the rules he envisions today , but neither are they a spent force .
To believe that one can accurately foresee what will become of Chavez and Venezuela brings to mind another warning by Fiedler : & quot ; He who lives by the crystal ball must sooner or later learn to chew glass . & quot ;
