Patenting Prosperity
CAMBRIDGE : Most people are aware of the huge inequalities of income that now separate the developed and developing world .
Fewer people recognize that the gaps between rich and poor in terms of science and technology are even larger than the gaps in income .
While rich countries account for around 16 % of the world 's population , and around 60 % of the world 's purchasing power , they account for around 99 % of the patents for new inventions granted by the United States and Europe in recent years .
If we are serious about narrowing the income gaps between the rich and poor , we had better think seriously about how to raise the outputs of science and technology directed at the problems of poor countries .
In today 's world , economic prosperity comes not from natural resources or production of industrial goods such as coal and steel , but from the production of new ideas and new products .
The dynamic U.S. economy owes its great advantage to a tremendous capacity to innovate – whether in information technologies such as computer hardware and software , or biotechnology such as new medicines and crop varieties , or new telecommunications technologies such as advanced fiber optics and earth satellites .
The world 's poorest countries , by contrast , hardly innovate at all .
As a result , many of them rely on exports of primary commodities with little change in the composition of exports or their methods of production year after year , or even decade after decade .
Thus , many tropical countries continue to live off of the same mix of coffee , tea , cacao , bananas , or mining products that they did a generation ago .
In the case of many of these commodities , world prices have declined sharply during the period ( at least relative to the cost of imports ) , but the poorest countries lack the flexibility and innovative capacity to shift to new types of production , much less to produce entirely new products not previously seen in world markets .
Recent data for the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office tells an amazing story .
Of the 163,000 patents issued by the United States in 1998 , 90,000 were issued to U.S. inventors and 72,000 to foreign inventors .
Of the foreign inventors , Japanese inventors received 32,000 patents , German inventors 9,500 patents , and another 28,000 among the next 15 countries , all of which are developed economies .
Three of these – Korea , Taiwan , and Israel – were considered developing countries a decade ago , but each has achieved rapid and sustained growth for many years , in no small part due to their scientific prowess .
The combined patents coming from developing countries and transition ( post-communist ) economies in 1998 amount to less than 1 percent of the U.S. total patents last year .
Tropical countries , almost all of which are poor , had virtually zero share of the total patents ( Singapore being the only notable exception ) .
It might be considered normal that developed countries would be the inventors , and developing countries the users , or new technologies .
But the status quo is very risky for poorer countries .
With the developing world relying almost totally on innovation from the rich countries , many of the most pressing problems that are unique to poorer countries remain neglected by the world 's scientists and leading high-technology industries .
For example , many of the poorest countries are in the tropics , and problems of tropical health ( such as malaria ) and tropical agriculture , are generally ignored by rich-country scientists .
A very few countries , particularly Israel , Korea , and Taiwan , have made the transformation to being producers of high technology products .
They have gotten rich in the process .
It 's time for the developing world to put science and technology much higher among their policy priorities .
The list of needed policy changes includes the following measures :
· strengthening the university system ( including the encouragement of private universities to compete with state universities ) ;
· increasing public-sector spending on scientific institutes ;
· attracting high-technology firms from the developed countries to invest in the developing countries ;
· fostering increased scientific and technological partnerships between rich-country universities and companies with those in the developing countries ;
· strengthening the protection of intellectual property rights to foster innovative activities ;
· shifting international aid money away from IMF-World Bank structural adjustment lending and towards research and development in priority areas ( such as health and agriculture ) .
Such steps would help to increase the vitality of science and technology in the developing countries , and thereby to give new energy to their overall economic development .
