Milosevic \ u0027s Divide and Mis-rule
BELGRADE : Slobodan Milosevic may be the most despised man in Serbia , but leaders of the country 's opposition can barely hide their hatred for each other .
Indeed , as Vuk Draskovic , the leader of the largest opposition group , tried to hijack last week 's massive protest of 100,000 in Belgrade ( a rally he had previously shunned ) , security men from Draskovic 's Serbian Renewal Movement and Zoran Djindjic 's Democratic Party openly scuffled .
Forging a united front against the regime seems as remote as ever .
The feuds and incompetence of the Serbian opposition are the main reasons why Milosevic still rules .
Since the expulsion of a quarter-of-a-million Serbs from Krajina by the Croatian Army in the summer of 1995 , less than one-third of the electorate has backed him .
But the vanity , greed , and perpetual scheming of the opposition 's leaders has left them easy prey for Milosevic 's schemes of divide-and-misrule .
Because of this political failure , many fear that Serbia faces civil war .
Yet the abyss can be avoided .
While the Serbian police force is huge and well-armed , it is ill-trained and psychologically ill-prepared to suppress mass demonstrations .
In the Army , only the top generals are unconditionally loyal to Milosevic ; most of the officer corps is embittered at the lost Kosovo war and at Milosevic 's dismissive treatment of them , particularly their low pay .
Last but not least , it is not obvious that Milosevic is prepared to resort to large scale violence within Serbia .
As opposed to his dealings with non-Serbs , this wily authoritarian 's preferred methods of domestic political struggle are unscrupulous manipulation of friend and foe , bribery , propaganda , and electoral fraud .
Almost sixty years-old and in power for more than a decade , he is unlikely to change .
After all , although many believed that his indictment by the Hague War Crimes Tribunal , announced during the bombing of Serbia , would make him fight to the bitter end , he yet accepted unconditional surrender .
Here is Milosevic 's Achilles heel .
The irony of last Thursday 's opposition rally is that it took place in front of Belgrade 's federal parliament , for it is in parliament and not the streets that Milosevic can be challenged .
In this regard , it is a pity that Montenegro 's pro-Western president Milo Djukanovic has chosen a separatist path , rather than help Serbia 's opposition .
For Djukanovic holds a possible key to eviscerating Milosevic 's stranglehold on government .
Because there are no direct elections for the top two federal offices in what remains of Yugoslavia , Serbia and Montenegro agreed in 1992 to share them .
If the Yugoslav president is Serbian , the premier must be from Montenegro .
The trouble with current premier Momcilo Bulatovic is that his party gained fewer votes in Montenegro 's elections than Djukanovic 's party . He got his job because Milosevic fiddled .
Almost all Serb opposition leaders agree with Djukanovic 's complaint that the federal government is illegitimate because of this state of affairs .
Djukanovic prefers an illegitimate federal government because it strengthens his argument for secession .
But if he were to work with Serbia 's opposition ( by pledging , say , to postpone Montenegro 's bid for independence if a legitimate prime minister is named ) , and focus public protests on installing a new premier , Yugoslavia could rid itself of Milosevic in a rather elegant way .
Since the Constitution of Yugoslavia gives little power to the president , a new premier from Montenegro could adopt the opposition 's agenda .
Milosevic would be squeezed into a ceremonial presidential role .
Once Milosevic was stripped of real power , his Socialist Party would seek a new leader ; the road would be open for Milosevic 's removal .
Djukanovic is a perfect figure to lead the opposition because , as a Montenegin , he poses no threat to the career ambitions within Serbia of Draskovic , Djindjic , and retired General Momcilo Perisic .
But Djukanovic keeps the Serbian opposition at a distance .
So many opposition politicians hope to get rid of Milosevic through street protests .
The most vocal advocate of this is Mladjan Dinkic , the energetic leader of an economic think tank called G 17 .
He argues that street protests should combine with a general strike .
Parliament would then vote Milosevic and the government out and appoint a government of experts .
These would struggle with Serbia 's problem for one year , then withdraw from public life .
Elections would be held and democratic politics would begin .
The naive part of this plan is the assumption that MPs from Milosevic 's Socialist Party , the Yugoslav United Left ( the small but influential party of Mrs. Milosevic ) and Vojislav Seselj 's ultra-nationalist Radical Party , would vote against their government and for a new one from which they could not benefit .
Even if this miracle were to happen , who can prevent these MPs from voting against the new government in a few months or only a few weeks time ?
Finally , Serbs like leaders who can inspire and communicate with them .
They would never follow unknown technocrats .
The governing coalition of President Milosevic seems ready to accept early elections .
Perhaps it fears that its popularity will further decline , and would prefer to go into elections while it still has the advantages of counting the votes , controlling state television , and establishing electoral districts .
That part of the opposition led by Draskovic also wants elections , but doesn 't reject the idea of an interim government .
This , Draskovic says , should result from a compromise between Milosevic and the opposition .
Draskovic is right .
Unless Montenegro 's Djukanovic can be prevailed upon to work with the opposition in order to strip Milosevic of power by stripping him of his puppet prime minister , elections and compromises are the way to a democratic Serbia .
Street protests should concentrate on getting from Milosevic fair conditions for elections and acceptance of international monitoring ( but , needless to say , not from NATO countries ) .
In this way , even without joining into a coalition , opposition parties could get a majority of seats in parliament .
What the new government would then look like is difficult to know , but it certain that Milosevic would not be its leader .
