Referendum Farce in Burma
PRAGUE – The enormous suffering of the Burmese people caused by the recent cyclone , which has caused tens of thousands of deaths , deserves the sympathy of the entire world .
But more than sympathy is needed , because the Burmese military junta ’ s incompetence and brutal oppression are further aggravating the tragic consequences of this natural disaster .
In the midst of the cyclone ’ s devastation , Burma ’ s ruling generals went ahead and held a referendum on a new constitution .
But , according to Burma ’ s Constitutional Referendum Act , members of religious organizations , those subject to criminal prosecution , and members of ethnic groups that have not agreed to a ceasefire with the government were barred from voting .
Thus , all current and former political prisoners , about 500,000 Buddhist monks , and more than twice as many members of ethnic minority groups living close to the borders were banned from the vote .
Moreover , according to the new constitution that was supposedly “ approved ” by the “ referendum , ” Daw Aung San Suu Kyi , who has never been prosecuted and still remains under house arrest , is barred from standing in the 2010 general elections under the pretext that her deceased husband was British .
Is the world really willing to accept such an absurdity ?
We strongly support the Burmese opposition ’ s campaign calling on the country ’ s citizens to reject the constitution , which does not promote human rights , but only confirms the military ’ s political role .
Many democracy activists have been arrested throughout the country .
The regime ’ s draconian “ law ” ( 5 / 96 ) prohibits participants from criticizing the draft constitution ; those who dare to challenge the regime face a 20-year prison sentence .
Given the violent suppression of last September ’ s mass demonstrations ( the “ Saffron Revolution ” ) led by Burma ’ s Buddhist monks , and the constant repression in the country , it is not surprising that the military junta tries to shroud its despotic tendencies in pseudo-democratic measures such as the sham electoral process of the referendum .
Sadly , the international community did not respond to last autumn ’ s mass arrests of human rights defenders .
The 88 Generation leaders , including Min Ko Naing , Ko Ko Gyi , women activists like Su Su Nway , and others bravely expressed their grievances time and again in letters , statements , and public demonstrations prior to the Saffron Revolution .
Their courageous calls fell on deaf ears ; they now remain imprisoned .
It is time to strongly condemn the exclusion of a considerable number of people from voting and to insist on the release of Burma ’ s political prisoners .
The United Nations and the European Union should be ready to reject conclusively the result of the referendum and strengthen sanctions against the regime .
Burma ’ s neighbors in ASEAN should stop looking the other way as Burma ’ s rulers trample on Burma ’ s citizens .
The UN Security Council should consider introducing a universal arms embargo , and the EU should adopt banking sanctions that target the regime and its cronies .
Moreover , the UN should not only condemn , but without further delay put a stop to today ’ s greatest atrocity : the regime ’ s obstruction of foreign assistance to victims of the cyclone .
Their deaths are the sole responsibility of the military junta , which deliberately and with knowledge of the likely consequences has closed the door to humanitarian aid and workers from all over the world .
Their actions represent an appalling crime against humanity .
The military-run referendum will not bring democracy to Burma , nor will it help the Burmese people , who now are suffering not only from the authoritarian regime and poverty , but also from a grave natural disaster and its totally inept handling by the cynical generals .
Burma ’ s rulers have failed in their duty to protect the Burmese people , but active and decisive political action by the international community towards the regime may yet do so .
