Another Year of Panic ?
PARIS : Brazil 's currency devaluation earlier this year , and its difficulties since in stabilizing the real as well as its stock market , have demonstrated the importance , if any new proof was needed , of financial markets and their volatile mood swings .
There can no longer be any doubt that investor panic can provoke economic meltdown , as it did in Asia and Russia last year , still threatens to do in Brazil and across Latin America , and may yet stage an encore in Asia over worries about a devaluation in China and the spiral of competitive devaluations that could follow .
Now in its eighth year , the almost obscene economic growth in the United States could be used to illustrate the inverse proposition .
On at least two occasions in 1998 , bad news could have set off a crash in American stock prices and an economic recession .
After all , the majority of observers ( analysts , too ) had concluded that Wall Street was overvalued , even before the onset of the Asian crisis .
Stock prices did , of course , decrease as a result of the Asian panic and its financial ramifications , but America 's stock markets have since then recouped all of their initial losses and even moved on to new record highs .
The impeachment trial in the US Senate of President Clinton and the political crisis that could have amplified both political and economic uncertainty , leading to another sharp fall in prices on Wall Street , also had absolutely no effect on Americans and how they spend and save their money .
Investors and consumers did not lose their optimism .
Nothing seems able to shake them .
Could the American public 's faith in Alan Greenspan , chairman of the Federal Reserve Board , America 's central bank , be a satisfactory explanation ?
He 's done a solid job , but I doubt that this can be the only cause of American buoyancy .
So what factors get economies going and keep them humming ?
In Europe , the advent of the Euro has certainly not invigorated economic growth , and does not look likely to do so anytime soon .
The best news of the year is that , at long last , the Continent 's consumers seem to be emerging from their long depression .
In contrast to the United States , however , the boost in consumer demand has not become an engine of growth .
Why not ?
Probably because the macroeconomic policies of Europe 's governments were , and remain , overly cautious and have not dared provide the necessary kick-start .
Having satisfied the Maastricht criteria , fiscal policies have been geared to putting on brakes .
Across " euroland " monetary policy was focused on the harmonization of interest rates , not on their level .
So there is little reason to be terribly optimistic for the near future , neither for growth nor job creation .
Still , there is an upside here . Europe 's relatively newfound fiscal discipline probably was a blessing in maintaining market confidence , and thus in immunizing the Continent , during the Asian , Russian , and Brazilian financial panics .
In Japan , sad to say , that sort of fiscal austerity remains something of a curse .
Sad to say , Japan continues to teach us that some of history 's most painful episodes do repeat themselves .
A series of vicious cycles that one had hoped had vanished with the end of the Great Depression have shown themselves to be relevant today .
Deflation increased real interest rates and curbed economic activity , thereby setting off another round of deflation , and so on .
With interest rates reaching almost zero , this liquidity trap has paralyzed Japan 's monetary policy .
Keynesian remedies ( now being tardily applied ) and an expansionary fiscal policy have not been able to jump-start the Japanese economy and bring about a return of optimism .
Is it because the Japanese government delayed action for too long before accepting budget deficits ?
No one really knows .
Is it possible to discern a common thread to all of these developments ?
I see two of them .
The first one is the importance of what Keynes called " animal spirits . "
In all cases , they have been at the center of today 's economic successes and failures .
The second one is that it is quite difficult to tame those animal spirits .
Why did international investors panic in South East Asia ?
Why has , say , Poland been relatively immune to the panic caused by Russia while the rest of Eastern Europe caught cold ?
Why do American consumers seem to be immunized against pessimism ?
Is there a macroeconomic policy that could boost the still shaky optimism of consumers ?
How can Japan restore optimism and jump-start its economic engine with no macroeconomic tools left to use ?
These are the questions on which governments must now focus .
On the answers will depend the health of the global economy .
