Putin ’ s Last Stand
WASHINGTON – On April 2-4 , NATO will hold its biggest summit ever in Bucharest , the capital of its new member , Romania .
Incredibly , NATO has invited its fiercest critic , Russian President Vladimir Putin , to attend .
For the first time since 2002 , he will .
His presence is an embarrassment to NATO , but an even greater disgrace for Russia .
The two biggest issues in Bucharest will be whether to invite Albania , Croatia , and Macedonia to join NATO , and whether to offer applications to Ukraine and Georgia to start so-called “ membership action plans . ”
These questions should be decided by NATO ’ s members , not outsiders .
In February 2007 , Putin , in an anti-Western tirade delivered in Munich , declared : “ I think it is obvious that NATO expansion does not have any relation with the modernization of the Alliance itself or with ensuring security in Europe .
On the contrary , it represents a serious provocation that reduces the level of mutual trust . ”
So Putin ’ s views about NATO are clear .
He will scandalize the summit by seeking to intimidate the former Soviet clients in the room .
Such an aggressive attitude benefits a country ’ s foreign policy only up to a point – one that Putin passed long ago .
Initially , he acted as an able diplomat and accommodator , but since his Munich speech , Putin has begun uniting the West against Russia .
In his speech on May 9 , 2007 , commemorating Russia ’ s victory in World War II , Putin compared the United States with Nazi Germany : “ We have a duty to remember that the causes of any war lie above all in the mistakes and miscalculations of peacetime , and that these causes have their roots in an ideology of confrontation and extremism .
It is all the more important that we remember this today , because these threats are not becoming fewer , but are only transforming and changing their appearance .
These new threats , just as under the Third Reich , show the same contempt for human life and the same aspiration to establish an exclusive dictate over the world . ”
Serious politicians do not speak like that .
These are the rants of Putin ’ s few remaining friends – Venezuela ’ s Hugo Chavez , Iran ’ s Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , and Belarus ’ s Alyaksandr Lukashenka .
At home , awareness is rising that Putin is damaging Russia ’ s interests by insulting and intimidating everybody .
He is isolating his country among the world ’ s pariahs ; worse yet , he has achieved little .
When Putin became president in 2000 , he named accession to the World Trade Organization as his foreign policy priority .
He failed , because he gave in to petty protectionist interests , imposing a timber embargo against Finland and Sweden , a fish embargo against Norway , and various agricultural embargos against Lithuania , Ukraine , Moldova , Georgia , and others .
Russia ’ s foreign policy is focused on the interests of its state-dominated corporations , notably Gazprom , which has concluded agreements with many foreign countries and companies for monopolistic deliveries .
But a Gazprom pipeline typically costs three times as much per kilometer as a similar Western pipeline , because of “ leakage ” ( kickbacks and waste ) .
The primary purpose of Russia ’ s foreign policy seems to be to tap Russia ’ s state companies for the benefit of Kremlin officials .
But customers do not trust suppliers who cut deliveries , raise prices unpredictably , expropriate competitors , and let production decrease in the way Gazprom and Russia ’ s other state companies have done .
As a result , Russia ’ s gas exports to Europe have started declining .
Putin ’ s foreign policy also is evidently intended to whip up populist chauvinism .
Beating up on foreigners may boost his authoritarian rule , but this , too , has a price .
Not only the US and Europe , but all former Soviet republics feel alienated by Putin ’ s aggressive tactics .
Many are seeking to shield themselves from Russia ’ s capricious embargos – for example , by seeking alternative energy supplies .
Arguably , Russia has improved its relations with China under Putin , but at the cost of acceding to China ’ s demands for two big disputed islands over which the two countries fought in 1969 .
Putin ’ s apparent aim was to secure financing for Rosneft ’ s purchase of the Yugansk oil field , which was part of the Yukos confiscation .
Yet China , too , is wary of Putin , and has been sending warm signals to leaders of former Soviet republics , such as Ukraine ’ s Yuliya Tymoshenko .
Russia ’ s nationalists are also outraged by Putin ’ s foreign policy , because it has alienated former Soviet republics and weakened Russia ’ s military .
The nationalist Council for National Strategy published a devastating report on the decay of Russia ’ s military under Putin .
Russian military procurement , it claims , has plummeted .
For example , only three new military aircraft have been purchased since 2000 .
True , armaments costs have risen sharply , but only because Putin ’ s KGB friends , who monopolize weapons production , have stolen inordinate amounts .
Yet , despite this spending shortfall , Putin seems obsessed with making pointless and provocative gestures , such as resuming long-range nuclear bomber flights off the American coast .
In the early 1990 ’ s , many westerners and Russians wanted Russia to become a full-fledged member of both the European Union and NATO , on the condition that Russia became a full-fledged democracy .
Unfortunately , the West never made that offer , and Russian democracy went astray .
Russia should be given a new chance , but only after Putin has departed .
Russia is no enemy of the West ;
Vladimir Putin is .
