Obama ’ s Middle East
JERUSALEM – President-elect Barack Obama ’ s plans for the Middle East , the region where his predecessor ’ s policies shattered America ’ s standing around the world as a benign superpower , represent a welcome departure from President Bush ’ s grand design to redress the region ’ s ills through “ constructive chaos . ”
Unfortunately , Obama ’ s all-encompassing promises might prove to be just as unrealistic .
Obama ’ s agenda is breathtaking .
It includes extrication from the Iraqi morass and lifting its burden from America ’ s foreign policy , resolving the festering Israeli-Palestinian conflict while confronting the “ hawkish ” Israel lobby , using dialogue to curb Iran ’ s nuclear ambitions and wean Syria from its radical agenda – thereby dissolving the region ’ s “ axis of evil ” ( Iran-Syria-Hezbollah-Hamas ) – freeing Lebanon from Syria ’ s grip , and pushing for an Israel-Syria peace .
And you can add to this a reorientation of America ’ s military effort to the war in Afghanistan .
The magnitude of this agenda must be seen against the region ’ s depressing legacy .
The entire region is going through a dangerous process of “ Somaliazation , ” with an expanding chain of non-state agents , mostly radical Islamist groups , challenging the idea of the state almost everywhere .
This is the case in Lebanon with Hezbollah , in Palestine with Hamas , in Iraq with Moqtada al-Sadr ’ s Mahdi Army and scores of other groups , with the Taliban and tribal warlords in Afghanistan , and with breakaway movements in Pakistan that have been emboldened by Pervez Musharaf ’ s resignation .
The looming end of President Hosni Mubarak ’ s long rule in Egypt might lead to the emergence of a formidable bid by the Muslim Brotherhood for power in Cairo , possibly forcing Mubarak ’ s successor either to reach a modus vivendi or to wage a fight to the death .
Obama may soon learn that his timetable for withdrawal from Iraq is unrealistic .
A rapid American disengagement might ultimately cause the country ’ s disintegration into fragmented political entities , one of which would likely be an Iran-controlled Islamic republic .
The resurgence of the Taliban in Afghanistan requires a more robust military response , but with the American army bogged down in Iraq and the Western allies reluctant to send additional troops , the country ’ s dismemberment by local warlords is not a far-fetched scenario .
And , with the allies ’ military operations eroding President Hamid Karzai ’ s domestic legitimacy , Obama might consider the advice of French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner , who warns that the answer in Afghanistan will have to be more political than military .
As for Iran , Obama might have to fall back on a strategy of military pressure sooner than he would like .
As the protracted dialogue conducted by the European Union ’ s special representative , Javier Solana , on behalf of the Security Council ’ s permanent members and Germany has proved , Iran has no intention of deviating from its drive to nuclear status .
Unless Obama reaches an uneasy understanding with Russia – which would require revising post-Cold War strategic agreements – the chances of imposing a tight sanctions regime on Iran are slim .
The specter of a Middle East nuclear arms race , with Iran ’ s Sunni rivals in the region – Saudi Arabia , Egypt and others – redoubling their efforts to attain nuclear status , cannot be ruled out .
In the Middle East , Obama faces an almost impossible task of redressing historical and political ills .
Meanwhile , he inherits an America that is no longer an undisputed hegemony , and that , together with its allies , is immersed in the most severe economic crisis since 1929 .
Struggling with a crisis that is shaking the foundations of capitalism and the American way of life , and laden with a $ 10 trillion national debt and a $ 1 trillion budget deficit , the United States is bound to opt for a realistic foreign policy , one that departs from the haughty disregard for history , tradition , and religion that characterized the Bush administration .
Obama ’ s ascension to the US presidency represents a revolutionary landmark in America ’ s history that should not be allowed to fall victim to inflated expectations .
His idealism needs to be tempered by the limits of American power .
The challenge of his foreign policy is not to change the Middle East – this is the long-term task of the region ’ s peoples – but to redress America ’ s damaged reputation in the Muslim world .
To achieve this objective requires resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict , particularly the Palestinian question .
This is the real wound that infects America ’ s entire foreign policy , particularly its standing in the Arab and Muslim world .
During his visit to the region last July , Obama vowed to address the Israeli-Palestinian conflict “ starting from the minute I ’ m sworn into office . ”
He cannot lose any time in fulfilling that pledge .
Unlike the insoluble mess that he inherits in the broader Middle East , the road to a comprehensive solution of the Arab-Israeli dispute has already been paved , and no wheels would have to be reinvented .
Leadership and commitment are what is required , and Obama ’ s “ Yes , we can ” campaign has already shown that he has both .
