Angela Merkel ’ s Fear of Europe
BERLIN – Ever since the global financial crisis erupted in September 2008 , the European Union has been in turmoil .
On the one hand , the euro protected the eurozone , particularly Germany ’ s export economy , from speculative attacks and the chaos of currency volatility .
On the other hand , the second phase of the crisis mercilessly exposed the euro ’ s Achilles heel : the absence of economic or financial unification within the eurozone .
Rising tensions within the EU have been the inevitable result .
Germany ’ s actions throughout the crisis have been plainly contradictory .
Rather than moving forward in the direction of an economic union , it reverted to a policy favoring national solutions .
But that position is difficult to reconcile with Germany ’ s inability to call into question the euro or European structures and treaties .
The contradictory stance of Chancellor Angela Merkel ’ s government was exacerbated by the transition from the grand coalition during her first term to the current conservative / liberal coalition .
At that point , self-inflicted domestic political weakness collided with the fiscal constraints of the euro rescue .
At first , Merkel had a hard time getting the Bundestag – and even the parties in her government – to approve the initial “ small ” rescue package for the euro , promising that Germany would not have to pay any more than that .
By nightfall on the same day , however , she had to assent to the much larger € 750 billion rescue package in order to prevent an EU-wide disaster .
That created a multi-layered credibility problem for Merkel that continues to haunt her .
Merkel still hasn ’ t figured out how to explain the consequences of the financial and euro crises to the German people .
That is not only because she is a poor public speaker , but also because she herself does not seem to know how to resolve the contradictions between national solutions and European constraints .
Her style of leadership , which has mostly consisted of taking a wait-and-see approach to issues , fits this uncertainty well .
Only at the last moment , when it is clear where the majority lies , does she embrace a solution .
Even when times were better , Merkel ’ s passive political style allowed vacuums to form , which were filled by other political forces within her party .
As a result , while Merkel may appear to be in charge of things in the EU these days , in reality she is no longer driving events , but rather being driven by them .
Without regard for the political consequences , Merkel is trying to escape the specifically German contradiction between national solutions and European constraints by advocating a rigorous fiscal-consolidation program , severe punishment for non-compliance ( including loss of EU voting rights ) , and a trigger mechanism for member states that lag in meeting their obligations .
In Berlin , the term for this is “ a Europe of stability and solidity . ”
It is a credo for which Germany will have to pay dearly in the future .
Merkel ’ s proposals do not reflect a German strategy aimed at leading the EU through this crisis .
Instead , they are largely a response to domestic political imperatives .
Berlin is consumed not with the question of what Europe might need in this historical situation , and what Germany ’ s role should be , but with fear – of the conservative and tabloid press , of further losses in state elections , and of the possibility that the German constitutional court will intervene and overturn the existing programs to contain the euro crisis .
Merkel now feels the fatal consequences of her “ leadership without leading ” approach .
One cannot shake the impression that the European soul of this government is devoured by angst .
As for Germany ’ s ability to assert itself , there is not much evidence of it , despite the vigorous rhetoric .
At the latest meeting of the European Council of Ministers , Germany ’ s “ Iron Chancellor ” hobbled home .
It was French President Nicolas Sarkozy who , in the run-up to the last EU summit , called a halt to Merkel ’ s attempt to introduce an automatic response to member states that violate the stability criteria .
Her second sweeping proposal , the withdrawal of voting rights in the Council , was abandoned at the Council ’ s recent meeting in Brussels .
In fact , Merkel ’ s “ triumph ” consisted of nothing more than a Council promise to “ review ” a change to the Lisbon Treaty – albeit a change below the level that might make referendums necessary .
In simple language : forget about any punishment or automatic trigger mechanisms that might affect a country ’ s sovereignty .
What remains of the effort to prevent a repeat of the crisis are tightened EU controls on national budgets and , regarding the treaty change to be considered , the continuation of the rescue package ( which previously was due to expire in 2013 ) , probably under a different name .
That is not much of a victory for Merkel .
So , as Germans once again see their “ Iron Chancellor ” deliver butter-soft results , they are increasingly likely to trust those who warn that the government is being tricked into a “ transfer union ” that uses German money to finance handouts for fiscally lax EU members .
Disagreement with this criticism is difficult , because the German federal system itself relies on transfers .
The more the EU is forced by Germany to become a union rooted in “ stability , ” the more pressing it will become for eurozone countries that cannot conform to the new , stricter rules to receive some sort of financial compensation .
It is , after all , unrealistic to assume that all members can profit to the same extent from this hard-line approach ; that is not achievable even among the 16 federal German states .
With Merkel ’ s active help , the eurozone is ( in effect ) moving towards becoming a transfer union : the stricter the new rules and the larger the interest-rate spreads among eurozone countries , the faster that will happen .
At home , though , Merkel fears this debate like no other – a debate that the financial markets and the crisis in many European countries will ensure cannot be avoided .
Faintheartedness comes at a price .
