Kipling ’ s Wisdom
LONDON – The beginning of October marked the seventh anniversary of the beginning of the American-led bombardment of Afghanistan .
Seven years later , the Taliban are still fighting .
Some 50 insurgents died recently in an assault on Lashkar gar , the capital of Helmand province .
Osama bin Laden is nowhere to be found .
Has the time come for NATO to declare victory and leave ?
Recently , a French diplomatic cable relating a conversation on September 2 between the French ambassador to Afghanistan , Francois Fitou , and his British colleague , Sherard Cowper-Coles , was leaked in Le Canard Enchainé , a French satirical magazine .
Cowper-Coles was reported to have said that the security situation in Afghanistan was deteriorating , that NATO ’ s presence was making it worse , and that the two American presidential hopefuls should be dissuaded from getting bogged down further .
The only realistic policy would be to cultivate an “ acceptable dictator . ”
Of course , the British Foreign Office denied that these thoughts reflected the British government ’ s views .
The departing commander of British forces in Afghanistan , Brigadier Mark Carleton-Smith , has claimed that defeating the Taliban was “ neither feasible nor supportable . ”
Two days after making that gloomy assessment , the French chief of the defense staff , General Jean-Louis Georgelin , followed suit .
And Kai Eide , the United Nations Secretary-General ’ s special representative in Afghanistan , has agreed that the situation cannot be stabilized by military means alone .
All call for a concerted political effort implying some form of negotiation with the Taliban .
A draft report by American intelligence agencies has also concluded that Afghanistan is in a “ downward spiral ” and casts serious doubt on the Afghan government ’ s ability to stem the Taliban ’ s resurgence .
Moreover , King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia hosted a Ramadan breakfast for the Afghan government and Taliban representatives .
Predictably , both parties deny that any serious negotiations took place , while the United States and Britain claimed to know nothing about this “ Saudi initiative . ”
But Afghan Defense Minister Abdul Rahim Wardak subsequently said that resolution of the conflict required a “ political settlement ” with the Taliban .
Yet at the recent NATO summit in Budapest , US Defense Secretary Robert Gates called on NATO members to provide more troops for missions in Afghanistan .
He accused the British of being “ defeatist ” and argued that Afghanistan ’ s deteriorating security situation could be addressed with an Iraq-style “ surge , ” which has undoubtedly brought down violence levels in that country .
The Americans have already committed 8,000 extra troops for next year .
So there seems to be a split .
The British and French are busy briefing , and preparing to scale down their commitments in Afghanistan .
They believe that boosting allied forces will only increase the sense of occupation and give the Taliban more targets .
The emergence of a “ realistic dictator ” might allow NATO to withdraw most of its troops within a few years .
But the Americans want a “ surge , ” and the US general commanding NATO forces in the country said last month that he needed three more brigades , some 15,000 troops in all , and Gates has asked the Europeans either to send or pay for them .
The Americans do recognize the importance of courting those Taliban leaders they believe to be motivated by tribal loyalties rather than religious ideology , but they oppose the latest Afghan policy of negotiating directly and officially with the Taliban .
Both Barack Obama and John McCain advocate increasing troop levels in Afghanistan above the levels that the Bush administration has already pledged .
Obama has that said he would send troops from Iraq as an urgent priority .
McCain has given no details of his plans .
Obama has made it a campaign issue to criticize the Bush administration for neglecting Afghanistan and diverting resources needed there to the misguided war in Iraq .
McCain , though , has always maintained that Iraq is the more important battlefield .
What candidates promise on the stump is not always what they do in office .
In the second presidential debate , Obama said , “ We will kill bin Laden .
We will crush al-Qaeda . ”
Are his patriotic credentials strong enough for him to renege on this pledge and pursue negotiations to withdraw without capturing the talismanic Osama ?
What would a US withdrawal mean for Afghanistan , for Pakistan , and for the future of NATO ?
To retreat from its first major “ out of area ” mission would be a damaging blow for the alliance .
Curiously , McCain may have more room for maneuver .
Republican presidents have a better record in negotiating with enemies than do Democratic ones .
Eisenhower ended the Korean War , Nixon the war in Vietnam – both wars started by their Democrat predecessors .
Nixon , a vitriolic anti-Communist , opened relations with Mao ’ s China and started détente with the Soviet Union .
Reagan brought the US hostages back from Iran .
Having condemned the “ evil empire ” of communism , he helped bring the Cold War to an end . Only recently , George W Bush evicted North Korea from his “ axis of evil ” by removing that country from America ’ s list of countries that sponsor terrorism .
And what about the British ?
Have they suddenly remembered the unsustainable cost of fighting asymmetric conflicts ?
Afghanistan has never been a place any foreign army could stay for long .
The British were burned there twice ( 1840-1 , 1878-80 ) . So were the Russians .
Rudyard Kipling got his arithmetic right in 1886 :
No proposition Euclid wrote ,
No formulae the text-books know ,
Will turn the bullet from your coat ,
Or ward the tulwar ’ s downward blow
Strike hard who cares – shoot straight who can –
The odds are on the cheaper man .
