The Great Leader Revival
LONDON – Two hundred years have passed since the battle of Waterloo , where Napoleon ’ s calamitous defeat made such a huge dent in his country ’ s self-image that General Charles de Gaulle , in his history of the French army , simply omitted it .
Nonetheless , Napoleon , like de Gaulle , would both easily make it onto any list of history ’ s great leaders – assuming , of course , that one considers “ greatness ” to be an individual trait .
Marx and Tolstoy would say that there is no such thing as a “ great leader . ”
For Marx , the class struggle in France created the circumstances in which a “ grotesque mediocrity ” – that is , Napoleon – was morphed into a hero .
As far as Tolstoy was concerned , Napoleon was not a particularly good general , and was carried to victory by the courage and commitment of all of the individual French soldiers who won the Battle of Borodino .
Whether or not Napoleon was great , the question remains whether any leader could merit that description .
And if so , who ?
There seem to be two particularly important criteria for great leadership , both noted by the political philosopher Isaiah Berlin .
First , does the leader recognize which way the winds of history are blowing ?
Otto von Bismarck did , as did his fellow German Konrad Adenauer ; both , in Bismarck ’ s memorable phrase , could hear “ the rustle of God ’ s cloak . ”
Second , does a leader have important choices to make ? Of course , if decisions are forced upon a leader , he or she cannot really be credited with ( or blamed for ) them .
So the key is that the leader has the opportunity to consider alternatives , and choose the right one for his or her country .
This is why de Gaulle is almost certain to be on any list of great leaders .
Almost single-handedly , he rescued France from the relegation zone after World War II .
After returning to power in 1958 , he rescued his country a second time , putting down two attempted coups , ending the war in Algeria , and inspiring the Fifth Republic ’ s constitution .
Much like British Prime Minister Winston Churchill , de Gaulle gave the French a new worldview that established their place in the post-war global order .
In fact , the worldviews that de Gaulle and Churchill established for their countries turned out to be a little too influential .
Their successors continued to perceive the world – and their countries ’ role in it – in ways that constrained rational discussion and distorted decision-making for years .
As a result , no subsequent leader of either country has matched them .
But there is one other British prime minister who may come close : Margaret Thatcher , a highly contentious figure , who was loved by some and loathed by others .
Even her resignation , 25 years ago this year , was spurred by a mutiny in her own cabinet and party .
But one does not need to be universally liked – or even likable – to be a great leader .
And the fact is that not even Thatcher ’ s detractors can deny her impact .
Beyond being the first woman prime minister in Britain , and among the first anywhere , Thatcher helped to reverse Britain ’ s economic decline .
Her assault on excessively powerful trade unions , moreover , made Britain governable , at a time when the country seemed to be slipping into drift and disorder .
Given this , she is certainly a candidate for “ great leader ” status .
Similarly , China ’ s Deng Xiaoping may qualify as a great leader , despite having a record that is far from squeaky clean .
Beyond undertaking dark deeds as one of Mao ’ s lieutenants , Deng played a decisive role in ordering the massacre in Tiananmen Square in 1989 .
But Deng also unleashed the market , setting the country on the path toward unprecedented growth and prosperity that ultimately lifted hundreds of millions of Chinese out of poverty .
Many would regard Lee Kuan Yew , Singapore ’ s founder and longtime prime minister , as great , though he probably would have welcomed the opportunity to test his mettle in a larger arena .
And , in fact , it seems that size does affect one ’ s ability to secure great-leader status .
I mean no insult to the House of Luxembourg when I say that it is unlikely that a great leader will emerge from that tiny country , especially given its generally uncontentious politics .
The United States is certainly big enough to produce great leaders .
And some presidents have indeed done great things .
Harry Truman and Dwight Eisenhower – no intellectual giants , to be sure – showed excellent judgment as they established the post-war international order that has supported peace in much of the world for decades .
Others , including Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton , have had great gifts – say , the ability to inspire or a talent for persuasion .
John F. Kennedy was a little of both .
He did one great thing : resolving the Cuban Missile Crisis .
And his gift for motivating people was unmatched ; indeed , it outlasted him , with his assassination cementing a powerful legacy .
In Africa , there has been no great figure since the death of South African President Nelson Mandela , who combined courage , authority , and magnanimity in graceful abundance .
In fact , he is among the most charismatic and charming leaders I have met ; the other two – former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan and former US Secretary of State Colin Powell – also are either African or African-American .
And what of today ?
The only contemporary European who can lay claim to the mantle of greatness is German Chancellor Angela Merkel , the European Union ’ s de facto leader .
Like former Chancellor Helmut Kohl , she tends to be underestimated at first , but gets the big decisions right .
Kohl delivered generous terms for German reunification ;
Merkel has stood up to Russian President Vladimir Putin on his interventionism in Ukraine , and she has taken a generous approach to the migration crisis .
Marx and Tolstoy were , I believe , wrong .
Political leadership – and the men and women who exercise it – can make a real difference , for better or worse .
Merkel is today ’ s leading example of that , as she provides the direction Europe needs to tackle the challenging existential crisis that it faces .
