Kremlin Rules
Long before Russia 's Duma election on December 7th , one could predict the outcome : victory for the Edinstvo ( Unity ) party , President Vladimir Putin 's main parliamentary ally .
What was not predicted was the size of the victory for this so-called " party of power , " or the exceedingly poor showing by the Communist Party ( KPRF ) .
In 1999 , Unity 's main rival was the Fatherland / All Russia bloc ( OVR ) , led by ex-premier Yevgeny Primakov and Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov , who at the time were very popular figures .
But the government-controlled media subsequently launched fierce attacks against them , targeting Primakov especially , since he was considered a serious rival to Putin and a legitimate presidential contender .
Since then , the situation changed markedly .
The OVR first became an ally of the Unity party , and then merged with it into what became known as United Russia , helping it become this year 's clear front-runner .
So the government-controlled media took aim at another antagonist , the Communist Party , which apparently never expect an attack on this scale .
Disoriented and bewildered , the party withered under the pressure of the media assault , which was mostly carried out on state-run TV channels .
The election result showed that the government 's strategy paid off handsomely .
Indeed , the Communist vote collapsed to a mere 12.7 % , down from 24 % in 1999 .
But the Communists also have themselves to blame for their electoral debacle .
Having won the most votes in two consecutive Duma elections , the Party now made a serious strategic blunder , exposing itself to attack by putting a number of major businessmen--or oligarchs--on its candidate list .
They formed perfect targets .
United Russia , on the other hand , based its campaign on the progress made during President Putin 's tenure : notable economic growth and slight improvement in people 's living standards .
The party actively supports Putin , but refrained from appearing in televised debates , possibly because it has no charismatic leaders of its own who can excite the public with sharp polemics .
A dull presentation could have adversely affected the party 's rating .
The refusal to accept any televised challenge , of course , aroused a lot of criticism in the media .
But the election law does not require that every party take part in such events , so United Russia merely shrugged off the criticism .
Most forecasts estimated that United Russia , led by such prominent politicians as Interior Minister Boris Gryzlov , Emergencies Minister Sergei Shoigu , and Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov , could take up to 30 % of the popular vote .
Added to the winners in single-seat constituencies--half the total--this would ensure it a sturdy majority of 250 to 270 of the Duma 's 450 seats .
In the end , United Russia secured 37 % of the vote , with the additional seats it gained in the single-seat constituencies assuring it an overwhelming parliamentary majority .
This means that the pro-Kremlin bloc probably attained the two-thirds majority needed to change the constitution , which would allow it to grant Putin a third four-year term , although Putin himself ruled this out last June .
Although the Communist leader , Gennady Zyuganov , accuses the Kremlin of rigging the vote , his party is--at long last--beginning to look like a spent force .
But the strong showing by Vladimir Zhirinovsky 's Liberal Democratic Party , or the LDPR , seems equally surprising .
Of course , Zhirinovsky 's national / socialist rhetoric has hidden his almost slavish subservience to the Kremlin .
Yet his party now seems to have fixed itself on the political landscape .
It has a committed electorate of its own , whose sentiments are responsive to Zhirinovsky 's populist slogans , and a party apparatus staffed by committed workers .
Russians are not surprised at the poor showing of the so-called reformist forces , the Union of Right-Wing Forces ( SPS ) and the liberal Yabloko party .
The leaders of the two parties--Boris Nemtsov and Grigory Yavlinsky , respectively , failed at the campaign 's start to find common ground .
By splitting the " reform " vote , both parties failed to win any seats in the Duma because neither surpassed the 5 % electoral threshold .
The " reformist " bloc will be replaced by
Because United Russia will hold a parliamentary majority , opposition to executive authority should be much weaker than when the Communists formed the largest faction .
For the first time since the Soviet collapse , the Kremlin will have firm parliamentary support .
For better or for worse , the government now has ample opportunity to enact its desired reforms , possibly including constitutional changes .
President Putin and his allies have every reason to rejoice .
But as the ancient Greeks used to say , those whom the gods will destroy , they grant their wishes .
