Northern Ireland : Between Optimism and Hope
BELFAST : The French say that optimists are those who don ’ t understand a question .
This week ’ s events in Northern Ireland contradict such cynicism .
One of Europe 's most intractable conflicts could be nearing resolution as key elements of the Belfast Agreement signed in April 1998 and endorsed by referendums in both parts of Ireland were implemented .
Substantial constitutional changes have transformed British-Irish relations with many lessons for other conflicts in Europe and elsewhere .
The Irish Nobel laureate poet Seamus Heaney distinguishes between optimism – the wish for a better future – and hope , the more rationally grounded expectation that it can indeed come to pass .
In that case hope and history would rhyme , as he put it in a celebrated phrase .
Following these momentous events Northern Ireland is suspended somewhere between optimism and hope .
A 10-person cross-party , cross-community , power-sharing executive was formed in Belfast on Thursday December 2 to govern functions devolved from the British government in London .
Ireland ’ s government dropped its territorial claim to Northern Ireland .
The principle of consent is accepted , meaning Northern Ireland ' s constitutional status as a part of the United Kingdom stands unless a majority of its citizens vote to unite with Ireland .
Cross-border governmental bodies have been established to deal with policies affecting Northern Ireland and Ireland itself .
A new British-Irish treaty and British-Irish Council provide a forum for the sovereign governments and devolved executives .
The Irish Republican Army , Sinn Fein 's paramilitary wing , has appointed a representative to liaise with an independent body charged with overseeing the decommissioning of arms by Northern Ireland ’ s paramilitary groups .
This week 's events followed a vote by the Ulster Unionist Party to accept a package worked out with former US Senator George Mitchell during a 10 week review of the Belfast Agreement .
But the vote was carried by 57 % to 43 % only after UUP leader David Trimble inserted a condition that the IRA actually begin arms decommissioning by February next .
In the delicate symbolic choreography of this peace process that new condition is seen by Sinn Fein as breaching the voluntary nature of the IRA 's commitment to disarm , which it views as necessary to avoid the psychological / political stigma of being seen as having surrendered .
In fact the peace process was predicated on a military stalemate between the IRA and the British forces which led to the 1994 cease-fire and an agreement to include Sinn Fein and Protestant / unionist paramilitaries in negotiations .
The IRA commitment to decommission weapons by May 2000 is contingent on the overall implementation of the Belfast Agreement , including demilitarisation by the British army ; radical reform of the Royal Ulster Constabulary ( the province ’ s armed police force ) ; effectively functioning devolved administration and cross-border bodies ; prisoner releases , equality and cultural reforms .
So there is only a limited time to demonstrate that the process will work .
Many dissident unionists still see the surrender of IRA arms as necessary – a condition that would subvert the process .
They are appalled that a party sustained by a private army should be in government controlling Northern Ireland ’ s education and health ministries .
Sinn Fein leaders are fearful that imposing arms decommissioning as a precondition will split the IRA , creating a paramilitary force determined to destroy the agreement .
The next few months will show whether political will exists to overcome these obstacles .
Public opinion in both parts of Ireland and the overwhelming balance of international influences on the peace process support it and will apply pressure to see it survive .
The actual functioning of the new institutions may create momentum for peace to succeed .
America ’ s role in the process has been crucial .
President Clinton saw that the end of the Cold War changed the special relationship with Britain which had inhibited the US government from involving itself decisively in Northern Ireland – despite the political influence of Irish-Americans .
His decision in 1994 to allow the Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams to visit Washington was made despite outright opposition by the British and the State Department .
It gave him an important purchase on the negotiations ever since , which Mr Mitchell 's skilful diplomacy built upon .
A speech by Britain ’ s then Secretary of State for Northern Ireland , Mr Peter Brooke , on November 9th , 1990 recognised the significance of the end of the Cold War for Ireland by saying " the British government has no selfish or strategic interests in Northern Ireland " .
That they had such interests until then was for centuries the essence of the relationship .
Mrs Thatcher refused to allow that speech to be made before 1989 because nuclear submarines passed close to Northern Ireland to patrol the Atlantic approaches .
Recognition of changed geopolitical circumstances allowed the Northern Irish nationalist leader John Hume to convince Sinn Fein that a peaceful settlement was possible .
1989 liberated central and eastern European countries from totalitarian rule , enabling them to transform their political and economic systems .
It also revealed deep historical similarities between Ireland 's national question and many of those that re-erupted after 1989 .
All were products of the WWI ’ s post-imperial settlements .
The extent and role of national minorities in Ireland and central and eastern Europe are similar , as are those of external homeland nationalisms and cross-boundary agreements .
The Belfast agreement would not have been possible without the umbrella of a wider European identity and Europe ’ s political and legal order .
These created confidence amongst Irish nationalists north and south , allowing them to compromise over sovereignty , including the acceptance of multiple identities and diverse allegiances .
It helped that European integration had transformed Irish relations with Great Britain economically and politically into a more normal interdependent relationship between smaller and larger neighbours .
This process has many resonances elsewhere on the continent , which should be recognized as pan-European integration is addressed at the upcoming Helsinki European Council meeting .
