Cultural Vandalism in America
STONY BROOK – Whenever I hear about Islamic State militants bulldozing archaeological treasures and smashing sculptures and statues , I think about the assault on the scientific process being carried out by US politicians .
Our scientific infrastructure – the principal means by which we understand the world , identify and ward off threats , and pursue a better future – is coming under attack by lawmakers who regard science as an obstacle to achieving their goals , and thus as a target that must be eliminated .
The comparison may seem over the top .
Interfering with ideas , one might argue , is not in the same category as destroying precious objects , and elected officials tinkering with legislation cannot be compared to militants whose other activities include hacking off the hands and heads of innocent people .
Anyone making such comparisons might seem to have fallen victim to the irrational political rhetoric that is already pervading America ’ s presidential election campaign .
But consider this : In 2010 , the North Carolina Coastal Resources Commission ’ s Science Panel , using advanced methods , estimated a sea-level rise that could threaten certain low-lying communities over the next century .
State legislators responded by passing a bill that prohibited policymakers from using the panel ’ s findings , thereby undermining officials ’ ability to fulfill their fundamental duty to protect their state ’ s coastline , resources , and citizens .
At the national level , the US House of Representatives recently passed the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2015 , which would forbid the use of Department of Energy-funded research in policymaking .
The language , which appears in a section on energy , was apparently inserted to protect oil and gas interests from findings about their activities ’ impact on climate change .
But if the bill is passed by the Senate and signed by the president , its implications would likely extend far beyond climate change , with officials unable to use any taxpayer-funded DOE research to protect US citizens .
Meanwhile , Lamar Smith , a Texas Republican who sponsored the COMPETES Act , is continuing his two-year quest to use the House Committee on Science , Space , and Technology , which he chairs , to alter the peer-review and grant-making process at the National Science Foundation , effectively opening it up to congressional review .
These are not cases of politicians disagreeing about whether or how to address threats like sea-level rise and climate change ; those would be political issues , and appropriate topics of discussion within a democratic system .
Instead , they are examples of politicians willfully blocking critical information relating to serious threats , for entirely partisan , if not personal , reasons .
They have decided that policy should be based solely on what they have already chosen to believe , rather than empirical evidence obtained through the scientific process .
Herein lies the link between US politicians and the Islamic State : both are engaging in ideologically motivated cultural destruction .
The difference is that the politicians will not admit their ideological impulses .
Instead , they justify their positions by sowing distrust in the scientific infrastructure that produced the findings they dislike and then offering thin arguments about “ scientific uncertainty . ”
Not only is this disingenuous ; it also prevents constructive discussion of important issues and , worse , calls into question the scientific processes and institutions on which modern civilization depends .
To put it another way , suppose that your own personal intuited notion of how to travel obliges you to embark on a long car journey without basic supplies like a jack and a tire iron or any kind of map or navigation system .
Before you leave , you delete the contact information for a roadside service provider from your cell phone , based on the unfounded belief that such providers are deceitful and self-interested .
Finally , you take several others along for the journey , without informing them about how well ( or poorly ) equipped you are .
According to US law , such actions would amount to “ reckless endangerment ” or “ culpable negligence . ”
Yet politicians are taking citizens on precisely such a ride – and facing very little pushback .
Fact-based arguments , such as those in a recent editorial in Science magazine , should be enough to compel US leaders to change their approach .
But facts cannot compete with ideology .
Indeed , any opposition – even when backed by empirical evidence – is portrayed as an attack on politicians ’ own ( superior ) ideology , whether it be libertarian or informed by religious fundamentalism .
Against this background , jarring – and potentially incendiary – comparisons , such as to the Islamic State , seem to be the only hope of exposing the scale of the damage these politicians are doing .
Perhaps at the next debate among presidential candidates , participants should have to distinguish – from a moral standpoint – politicians attacking the scientific process from Islamic State militants destroying ancient artifacts .
That should get the conversation moving .
