Legislating History
NEW YORK & # 45 ; & # 45 ; In October , the Spanish parliament passed a Law on Historical Memory , which bans rallies and memorials celebrating the late dictator Francisco Franco .
His Falangist regime will be officially denounced and its victims honored .
There are plausible reasons for enacting such a law .
Many people killed by the Fascists during the Spanish Civil War lie unremembered in mass graves .
There is still a certain degree of nostalgia on the far right for Fanco ’ s dictatorship .
People gathered at his tomb earlier this year chanted “ We won the Civil War ! ” , while denouncing socialists and foreigners , especially Muslims .
Reason enough , one might think , for Socialist Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero to use the law to exorcize the demons of dictatorship for the sake of democracy ’ s good health .
But legislation is a blunt instrument for dealing with history .
While historical discussion won ’ t be out of bounds in Spain , even banning ceremonies celebrating bygone days may go a step too far .
The desire to control both past and present is , of course , a common feature of dictatorships .
This can be done through false propaganda , distorting the truth , or suppressing the facts .
Anyone in China who mentions what happened on Tiananmen Square ( and many other places ) in June 1989 will soon find himself in the less-than-tender embrace of the State Security Police .
Indeed , much of what happened under Chairman Mao remains taboo .
Spain , however , is a democracy .
Sometimes the wounds of the past are so fresh that even democratic governments deliberately impose silence in order to foster unity .
When Charles de Gaulle revived the French Republic after World War II , he ignored the history of Vichy France and Nazi collaboration by pretending that all French citizens had been good republican patriots .
More truthful accounts , such as Marcel Ophuls ’ s magisterial documentary The Sorrow and the Pity ( 1968 ) were , to say the least , unwelcome .
Ophuls ’ s film was not shown on French state television until 1981 .
After Franco ’ s death in 1975 , Spain , too , treated its recent history with remarkable discretion .
But memory won ’ t be denied .
A new generation in France , born after the war , broke the public silence with a torrent of books and films on French collaboration in the Holocaust , as well as the collaborationist Vichy regime , sometimes in an almost inquisitorial spirit .
The French historian Henri Russo dubbed this new attitude “ the Vichy Syndrome . ”
Spain seems to be going through a similar process .
Children of Franco ’ s victims are making up for their parents ’ silence .
Suddenly , the Civil War is everywhere , in books , television shows , movies , academic seminars , and now in the legislature , too .
This is not only a European phenomenon .
Nor is it a sign of creeping authoritarianism .
On the contrary , it often comes with more democracy .
When South Korea was ruled by military strongmen , Korean collaboration with Japanese colonial rule in the first half of the twentieth century was not discussed – partly because some of those strongmen , notably the late Park Chung Hee , had been collaborators themselves .
Now , under President Roh Moo-hyun , a new Truth and Reconciliation Law has not only stimulated a thorough airing of historical grievances , but has also led to a hunt for past collaborators .
Lists have been drawn up of people who played a significant role in the Japanese colonial regime , ranging from university professors to police chiefs – and extending even to their children , reflecting the Confucian belief that families are responsible for the behavior of their individual members .
The fact that many family members , including Park Chung Hee ’ s daughter , Geon-hye , support the conservative opposition party is surely no coincidence .
Opening up the past to public scrutiny is part of maintaining an open society .
But when governments do so , history can easily become a weapon to be used against political opponents – and thus be as damaging as banning historical inquiries .
This is a good reason for leaving historical debates to writers , journalists , filmmakers , and historians .
Government intervention is justified only in a very limited sense .
Many countries enact legislation to stop people from inciting others to commit violent acts , though some go further .
For example , Nazi ideology and symbols are banned in Germany and Austria , and Holocaust denial is a crime in 13 countries , including France , Poland , and Belgium .
Last year , the French parliament introduced a bill to proscribe denial of the Armenian genocide , too .
But even if extreme caution is sometimes understandable , it may not be wise , as a matter of general principle , to ban abhorrent or simply cranky views of the past . Banning certain opinions , no matter how perverse , has the effect of elevating their proponents into dissidents .
Last month , the British writer David Irving , who was jailed in Austria for Holocaust denial , had the bizarre distinction of defending free speech in a debate at the Oxford Union .
While the Spanish Civil war was not on a par with the Holocaust , even bitter history leaves room for interpretation .
Truth can be found only if people are free to pursue it .
Many brave people have risked – or lost – their lives in defense of this freedom .
It is right for a democracy to repudiate a dictatorship , and the new Spanish law is cautiously drafted , but it is better to leave people free to express even unsavory political sympathies , for legal bans don ’ t foster free thinking , they impede them .
