No Pause , Please
Pressure is building on the European Central Bank to pause from further increases in interest rates after the New Year . The ECB must not give in .
So far , the credibility of Europe ’ s central bank has been sufficient to firmly anchor inflationary expectations . But to pause now when Europe ’ s economic strength continues at a robust pace carries with it an un-necessary risk to price stability .
Even though 2006 has been an excellent growth year for Europe , real interest rates — interest rates expressed in terms of goods and services as opposed to money — have not budged from the beginning of the year . This means Europe ’ s monetary policy continues to stimulate economic growth despite the fact that , by December , money rates will have been raised 150 basis points during 2006 .
With real rates so low , a pause at the New Year would be pre-mature .
Some of the pressure for a pause has to do with the French presidential elections this spring . A rate increase during the election period clearly would make the central bank even more of an issue in the French campaign than already is the case .
This is not good .
Still , the ECB can ’ t go on hold simply because the French — or anyone else & # 45 ; & # 45 ; are having an election ( though the bank could be sensitive to the need to pick an appropriate month should a rate adjustment be needed during the election season . )
Politics must take a back seat when it comes to monetary policy decisions — otherwise , inflationary expectations won ’ t be firmly anchored for very long .
A second argument put forth for a pause is the increase in the value-added tax in Germany from 16 to 19 % at the beginning of next year .
The argument for a pause is that the central bank may want to wait and see how much damage , if any , the VAT hike imposes on the German economy before continuing on with the process of rate hikes .
But for an inflation-fighting central bank like the ECB , the risks from a pre-mature pause are greater than those from pausing too late .
With the ECB in its current tightening mode , “ better too late than too early ” must be its rule of thumb .
Finally , and perhaps most important , there is the powerful example of the US Federal Reserve .
Because the Fed has decided to pause , there is substantial pressure & # 45 ; & # 45 ; coming both from inside and outside the ECB & # 45 ; & # 45 ; that Europe ’ s central bank follow suit .
The effect of Fed ’ s policies on other central banks should not be underestimated .
ECB critics already claim there has been a certain “ follow the Fed ” quality to ECB monetary decisions , notwithstanding clear differences between the two central banks over the role the money supply should play in monetary policy decisions .
When the Fed dramatically cut interest rates to fight recession , so did the ECB .
When the Fed kept interest at unusually low levels for an extended period of time , so did the ECB .
And when the Fed decided to exit this strategy and raise rates in a steady and predictable fashion , so did the ECB .
This , by the way , may not be mere copycat , but an attempt by Europe ’ s central bankers , wary of exchange rate volatility , to loosely co-ordinate interest rates to promote stable exchange rates .
But stabilizing the euro by following the Fed carries with it an unnecessary risk for price stability .
Europe and the United States are at different phases of the business and interest rate cycles .
When the Fed paused , the US economy was in a more mature phase of the business cycle & # 45 ; & # 45 ; and the weight of accumulated interest rate increases greater — than presently is the case in Europe .
This made pausing in order to see whether past rate hikes sufficiently slow the economy to moderate inflationary pressures a good bet for the US .
It is not a good bet for Europe , however , where growth momentum remains strong despite some recent backing and filling after the torrid pace of the second quarter , where interest rates remain too low and money supply growth too high .
“ No Pause Please , We ’ re Europeans ! ” is the proper ECB response to those advocating a break after the New Year even if the euro does go up a bit as a result .
