John McCain and the Decline of America
BERKELEY – Back in 1981 , America ’ s Republican Party gave up all belief that the government ’ s budget ought to be balanced .
The idea took hold that tax cuts should be undertaken all the time , at every opportunity , because reducing taxes supposedly raised revenue .
Irving Kristol , sometime editor of the magazine The Public Interest and one of the intellectual midwives of this idea , later wrote that he was interested not in whether it was true , but in whether it was useful .
Years later , he spoke of his “ own rather cavalier attitude toward the budget deficit and other monetary or fiscal problems .
The task ... was to create a new ... conservative ... Republican majority – so political effectiveness was the priority , not the accounting deficiencies of government ... ”
Now it has become clear that John McCain – who once criticized George W. Bush ’ s tax cuts as imprudent and refused to vote for them – has succumbed to this potion .
He appears to be proposing further tax cuts that promise to cost the United States Treasury some $ 300 billion a year , to “ offset ” them with cuts in earmarked spending accounted for at $ 3 billion a year , and somehow to balance the budget .
We know the consequences : McCain ’ s fiscal policy is likely to be standard Republican fiscal policy – and since 1981 , standard Republican fiscal policy has increased the ratio of gross federal debt to GDP by nearly 2 % per year .
By contrast , a typical post-WWII Democratic administration has reduced the debt-to-GDP ratio by more than 1 % per year .
This is one of the issues at stake in this year ’ s presidential election .
Policies that ignore the level of government debt lead to the currency ’ s collapse , depression ( due to the resulting disruption of the sectoral division of labor ) , and high inflation – perhaps hyperinflation .
Often , the guilty blame the economic catastrophe on the sinister manipulations of foreigners like the “ gnomes of Zurich ” or the IMF .
The US is far from that point .
But even in the shorter run – over the next two presidential terms , say – the costs of a high deficit and rapid debt growth would be substantial .
A growing debt-to-GDP ratio would , in the first instance , crowd out investment , as resources that would otherwise go to fund productive investment instead support private or public consumption .
Since 1981 , the US has been lucky in that inflows of capital from abroad financed the growth of government debt .
At some point , this will stop , and increases in deficits will trigger capital flight from the US .
Suppose that over the next eight years larger deficits trigger neither extra capital inflows nor capital outflows , and suppose that a lower-investment America is a poorer America , with a gross social return on investment of 15 % per year .
By 2016 , America ’ s productive potential would be smaller by an amount that would reduce real GDP by 3.6 % – $ 500 billion real dollars , or roughly $ 3,000 per worker .
In a poorer America , fewer businesses would find it worthwhile to entice secondary workers from families into the labor force , and perhaps 500,000 net jobs would disappear .
In getting from here to there over the next eight years , a higher-debt America would see productivity growth slow by perhaps a third of a percentage point per year .
Average unemployment would then have to rise in order to keep workers ’ demands for real wage increases at a level warranted by productivity growth .
The gross correlations between productivity growth and average unemployment found in the 1970 ’ s , 1980 ’ s , 1990 ’ s , and 2000 ’ s would increase the economy ’ s natural rate of unemployment by about one-fifth of a percentage point , costing an additional 500,000 jobs .
And a higher-debt America is one in which savers and lenders would have a justified greater fear that the government would resort to inflation in order to repudiate part of its outstanding debt .
The Federal Reserve would then have to fight inflation – putting upward pressure on unemployment – in order to reassure savers and lenders of its willingness to guard price stability .
There are not even crude gross correlation-based estimates of the size of this effect , but economists believe that it is very real .
Would it cost a negligible number of jobs ?
A quarter-million ?
A million ?
Add it all up , and you can reckon on an America that in 2016 that will be much poorer if McCain rather than Barack Obama or Hillary Rodham Clinton is elected president .
Other countries that are counting on exporting to America would be affected by slower growth and lower employment in the US .
However , under McCain , the wedge between public spending and taxes would be larger , Americans would feel richer , and they would spend more at the expense of “ posterity ” eight years down the road .
Ronald Reagan might have approved . After all , as he put it : “ Why should I do anything for posterity ?
What has posterity ever done for me ? ”
Or was that Groucho Marx ?
