Putin ’ s History Lessons
CAMBRIDGE – Soviet ideology was always about the future .
By contrast , today ’ s official Russian ideology seems to be focused squarely on the past .
Prime Minister Vladimir Putin ’ s recent article for the Polish newspaper Gazeta Wyborcza – written to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the Nazi invasion of Poland – expresses his determination to make twentieth-century European history a major part of the Russian government ’ s business .
That article reflects the deep , unresolved problems of Putin ’ s era : the inability to distinguish between the Soviet past and the Russian present ; an unscrupulous mix of political conservatism and historical revisionism ; and indifference , bordering on incomprehension , with regard to the key values of democracy .
In his article , Putin did not mourn the collapse of the USSR , though he previously called it “ the greatest catastrophe of the twentieth century . ”
Indeed , he even praised the democratic movements that buried the Soviet Union and its sphere of influence , and he expressed no sympathy for the twentieth century ’ s revolutions , which he called “ deep wounds ” that humanity inflicted on itself .
What really worries Putin and his historical advisers is the memory of World War II .
They regard the Soviet victory over Nazi Germany as the highest achievement of the state and nation that they inherited from the USSR .
They also see this victory as the main counter-weight to the memory of the USSR as a reign of brutal , unjustified violence .
Not that Putin ’ s version of history denies this memory altogether .
This summer , he publicly instructed his education minister to include passages from Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn ’ s The Gulag Archipelago in the high school curriculum .
Rather , what concerns Putin is the balancing of WWII and Stalinism in Soviet history .
Calling for a “ contextual ” and “ causal ” view of history , he acknowledges the Stalinist terror but interprets it as a response to the extraordinary need to defeat Nazism .
Putin summarizes his understanding of the scale of the war by recalling the loss of “ 27 million lives of my compatriots . ”
That number has grown over the years , as Soviet officials broadened the definition of wartime deaths to mean total “ population loss , ” rather than direct military casualties .
Official estimates of Soviet deaths in WWII thus rose from seven million ( the figure put forth under Stalin ) to 20 million ( Khrushchev ) to 26.6 million ( Gorbachev ) , with civilian deaths accounting for at least two-thirds of Putin ’ s estimate .
Unfortunately , Putin does not explain whom he counts as his compatriots .
If he meant those who lived within Russia ’ s contemporary borders , the number would have been much lower .
Instead , he includes all citizens of the USSR who died during the war , including millions of Ukrainians , Belarusians , and others .
And , when the USSR annexed the Baltic countries , Königsberg , parts of Poland , Finland , Moldova , and Japan , their citizens , too , became Soviet compatriots .
Moreover , because Putin ’ s “ contextual ” history subordinates Soviet-era suffering to the purpose of fighting the Great Patriotic War , his number mixes those who died in battle fighting for the USSR with those whom the Soviets killed through mass murder , deportation , and forced labor .
By this logic , one could also reclassify the victims of the terror , collectivization , and famine of the 1930 ’ s in order to boost the number of Hitler ’ s casualties in the USSR .
Putin connects two events that triggered WWII , the Munich Agreement of 1938 and the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact of 1939 , in one causal construction .
Both acts of collusion with Nazi Germany were immoral mistakes , writes Putin , but the latter was merely a response to the former .
To be sure , Britain ’ s Neville Chamberlain and France ’ s Edouard Daladier signed a shameful treaty with Hitler and Mussolini in Munich .
But when Hitler breached the treaty , both Chamberlain and Daladier lost popular support , and , by the start of WWII , neither was still in office .
The dictators remained , however , Molotov and Stalin among them .
Moreover , while the Munich Agreement cynically blessed Hitler ’ s dismemberment of Czechoslovakia , it was a public document that meant what it said .
But the truly important part of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact was its Secret Protocols , which divided Europe into two imperial domains , Stalin ’ s and Hitler ’ s , without the consent – or even the knowledge – of the nations consigned to them .
Molotov , who remained in power throughout the war and until 1956 , denied the existence of the Secret Protocols until his death 30 years later .
Democracies make shameful mistakes , but they eventually correct them , or at least apologize for them .
And they dethrone those who got them into trouble .
It is wrong , and even immoral , to equate democratic and dictatorial practices .
But this is the new Russian equation .
