Asia ’ s Reform Trinity ?
SINGAPORE – Asia is poised to enter a historical sweet spot , with three of its most populous countries – China , India , and Indonesia – led by strong , dynamic , and reform-minded leaders .
In fact , China ’ s Xi Jinping , India ’ s Narendra Modi , and Indonesia ’ s Joko “ Jokowi ” Widodo could end up ranked among their countries ’ greatest modern leaders .
In China , Mao Zedong united the country in 1949 , while Deng Xiaoping was responsible for engineering its unprecedented economic rise .
For Xi to join their ranks , he must create a modern , rules-based state .
That requires , first and foremost , slaying the massive dragon of corruption .
Over the years , corruption has become endemic in China , with regional party leaders and bosses in state-owned enterprises wielding their vast privileges and authority to accumulate personal wealth .
This has severely undermined the Chinese Communist Party ’ s legitimacy , while hampering the kind of market-based competition that China ’ s economy needs to propel the country to high-income status .
So far , Xi seems to be up to the challenge .
He has been boldly pursuing major figures who were previously considered “ untouchable , ” such as General Xu Caihou , a former vice chairman of the Central Military Commission , and Zhou Yongkang , a former member of the Politburo Standing Committee , China ’ s highest government body .
But the long-term fight against corruption cannot depend on Xi alone .
It will succeed only if strong institutions are created to protect and nurture the rule of law long after Xi is out of power .
If Xi chooses to establish such institutions , he has a strong legal tradition upon which to call .
As former US Ambassador to China Gary F. Locke reported in a speech early this year , the concept of equality before the law has deep historical roots .
Indeed , in the fourth century BC , the statesman and reformer Shang Yang famously asserted that , “ When the prince violates the law , the crime he commits is the same as that of the common people . ”
Building on this tradition , Xi can create strong institutions that will stand the test of time .
If he does – recognizing that , to be credible , the rule of law must apply even to the Party ’ s most influential figures – he will become modern China ’ s third-strongest leader .
In India , Mahatma Gandhi rejuvenated the country ’ s soul , which had been battered by colonialism , and Jawaharlal Nehru established its democratic political culture .
Modi now must lay the foundations for India ’ s emergence as a global economic power .
Replicating the 10 % annual growth rates achieved in Gujarat under Modi ’ s leadership from 2004 to 2012 would obviously be a boon to India ’ s development prospects and global standing .
But achieving such high growth rates in a sustainable way will demand far-reaching , sometimes painful reforms , such as the removal of wasteful subsidies , especially for fuel , in order to free up resources for , say , increased health-care expenditure .
Other imperatives include shrinking the budget deficit , removing internal barriers to trade , and encouraging private investment .
To win the support needed to implement these reforms without undermining political stability or social cohesion , Modi must demonstrate that he is an inclusive leader capable of cooperating with Indians outside of his Hindu nationalist base – including the country ’ s 150 million-plus Muslims .
If he succeeds , he , like Xi , will become his country ’ s next iconic leader .
In Indonesia ’ s case , the two most influential leaders so far have been Sukarno , who used powerful rhetoric to foster a sense of national unity in one of the world ’ s most diverse countries , and Suharto , who overthrew Sukarno and created a strong economic base that lifted millions out of poverty .
Jokowi must now lay the institutional foundations for good governance .
Jokowi has risen from humble beginnings to the apex of power without compromising his image as a “ man of the people ” or his reputation for pragmatism and honesty .
Jokowi has a long track record of good governance , having implemented effective policies during his stint as Mayor of Surakarta ( such as refurbishing markets , relocating slum dwellers , and cutting bureaucratic red tape ) , and as Governor of Jakarta ( where he broadened access to health care and education ) .
But replicating this success at the national level will be no easy feat .
Jokowi , who takes office in October , must implement policies that address rising inequality , unsustainable fuel subsidies , entrenched corruption , inadequate infrastructure , and restrictive labor laws – all while rebuilding trust in Indonesian institutions .
The challenges facing Jokowi are compounded by the fact that his ruling coalition holds only about one-third of the seats in Indonesia ’ s parliament , with the rest loyal to the coalition of his rival in the presidential election , Prabowo Subianto .
So , in introducing a new style of governance , exemplified by merit-based cabinet appointments , Jokowi must be careful not to alienate the political and business elites who have long benefited from their tight grip on power .
In short , if Jokowi is to form a national consensus on the institutions that Indonesia needs , he will have to reach across this political divide .
To this end , Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto ’ s cross-party “ Pact for Mexico ” could serve as a useful model .
Promisingly , Jokowi has a reputation for independence from partisan and religious politics , and a talent for communicating with the people .
And , as a political outsider , he is in a unique position to direct Indonesia toward a more prosperous , united future – and vault himself into the country ’ s pantheon of great leaders .
China , India , and Indonesia are all well positioned to take important steps forward .
A commitment by Xi , Modi , and Jokowi to do what is needed would bring rapid , far-reaching progress to their respective countries , Asia , and the global order .
