A New Tang Dynasty ?
On August 8 , 2008 , the world watched with awe the amazing spectacle of the Olympics opening ceremony in Beijing .
We saw the electronic unrolling of Chinese scrolls replete with great historic symbols and were mesmerized by dancers creating “ harmony , ” using their bodies as ink brushes .
2008 martial arts students performed millennia-old moves with mechanical precision , while the flying celestials and the galloping torchbearer created a sense of heavenly abode on earth .
There was another time when China dazzled the world at its doorstep : the Tang dynasty ( 618-907 ) , often thought of as China ’ s golden age , when it was truly the “ middle kingdom ” at the center of the universe .
Its capital , Chang Àn ( modern day Xìan ) was a world-class city ; visitors came from all over the world and were dazzled by its wealth , beauty , and power .
Its emperors used silver from Persia , glass from Europe , precious stones from Central Asia , and gold implements from India .
Open , confident , and cosmopolitan , China connected with the world with ease , adopting new ideas , and projecting its own indigenous creations .
It ’ s no wonder that Chinese scholars sometimes refer to today ’ s China era as the new Tang Dynasty .
Indeed , when China was awarded the Olympic Games in 2001 , the country ’ s official news agency , Xinhua called it a “ milestone in China ’ s rising international status and a historical event in the great renaissance of the Chinese nation . ”
For seven years , Chinese officials and artists worked tirelessly to make this dream of a “ renaissance ” a glittering reality , and they exceeded all expectations .
But how should we understand the broader implications of the opening ceremony , both for China and the outside world ?
First , the good news .
In keeping with China ’ s recent efforts to project its “ soft ” side , the opening ceremony produced the idea of a historic , but dynamic culture at its best . Other than the presence of a few People ’ s Liberation Army soldiers , you would have been hard pressed to find any visible evidence of the reigning communist regime or its founder , Mao Zedong .
Equally significant was the projection of China as a nascent leader of the new international cultural order .
The “ Bird ’ s Nest ” stadium was the creation of the multinational design team of Herzog & amp ; de Meuron , with suggestions from the visual artist Ai Weiwei .
Many artists involved in the creation of the spectacle , including the fireworks specialist Cai Guo Qiang , the dance star Shen Wei , and the composer Tan Dun , earned their fame primarily in the West .
Even Zhang Yimou , the lead impresario for the event , gained fame in the West through his early films chronicling the hard life of a young modern China .
Chinese officials had clearly decided that these diaspora darlings of the international art scene should be now claimed as China ’ s own .
These artists ’ ability to the bridge traditions of East and West and to create a new space for creativity that can transcend the cultural specificities of the past in favor of a new blended future could be squarely associated with China ’ s own global aspirations .
Like the artists and their art , the country could elevate itself from the dichotomies of old-new , past-present , and traditional-modern to project an image appropriate to our globalizing age .
Not surprisingly , Chinese leadership was keen to avoid any reference to the last two centuries of struggle and humiliation , or to its problematic political agendas and thorny trade issues .
At the same time , it could be argued that the spectacle of the opening ceremony was intended to overcome China ’ s historic humiliation by the West and signal a new chapter .
The “ sleeping dragon , ” as Napoleon described China in the early nineteenth century , was now fully awake , ready to charge into the new world .
As in the Tang Dynasty , arts and culture were at center stage , reflecting the country ’ s economic prowess and political might .
But the extravaganza also left lingering doubts .
Why such a drive to prove to the world that these had to be the very best Olympics ever ?
( Chinese authorities even pressed the International Olympic Committee to make such a declaration at the conclusion of the games . )
Some have suggested that the effort suggests a hint of insecurity .
It should also be noted that while Mao was conspicuously absent in the Olympics , his communist legacy was present in subtle ways .
The relentless emphasis on the “ harmonious ” presence of large groups of performers left no room for individual voices ( even the young singer Lin Miaoke , as we now know , didn ’ t have her own voice ) .
Ironically , while younger Chinese ( products of China ’ s one-child policy ) are obsessed with personal stylistic statements , the drama of the opening ceremony consisted in collective expression at the service of the state .
Chinese intellectuals have always been cognizant of this tension between individual creativity and collective will .
How will the new China balance these two conflicting needs ?
As we contemplate the potential arrival of the new Tang Dynasty in China , we should remember the message of the old Tang Dynasty poet , Po Chü-i ( 772-846 AD ) :
Sent as a present from Annam ,
A red cockatoo .
Colored like the peach-tree blossom ,
Speaking with the speech of men .
And they did to it what is always done
To the learned and eloquent .
They took a cage with stout bars
And shut it up inside .
