Israel ’ s Mission
JERUSALEM – Israel is one of the biggest success stories of modern times .
A nation was reborn out of Holocaust survivors and uprooted Jewish communities who , mostly through the quality of their human capital , built a booming economy , created one of the world ’ s most innovative agricultures , and revived a dead language .
They also sustained , against all odds , a democracy that , however imperfect and dysfunctional , is nonetheless amazingly vibrant .
And yet , at its 60th anniversary , Israel stands at a crossroads .
Indeed , Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert has warned of “ the end of the Jewish state ” if the country remains bogged down in the occupied territories and a Palestinian state is not established .
Israel ’ s internal challenges are no less demanding .
The relatively homogeneous society envisaged by its founders has fragmented into a tense multi-ethnic tapestry comprising secular Jews , an alienated Arab minority , a prolific ultra-orthodox community living on state allowances , religious nationalists bent on a Messianic brand of Zionism , immigrants from the former Soviet Union , marginalized Ethiopians , and Oriental Jews still struggling to join the middle class .
Moreover , Israel has failed to redress a dangerous imbalance : however creative its economy may be , the burden of military expenditure is undermining its investment in education and scientific research .
Metaphorically , Israel ’ s national psyche oscillates between “ Tel Aviv ” and “ Jerusalem . ” “ Tel Aviv ” embraces secularism , hedonism , and economic growth , and views the State of Israel as a legal entity , in contrast to the dangerous , faith-driven “ Jerusalemite ” concept of “ Eretz Israel . ”
It has replaced Israel ’ s early pioneering ethos with the temptations of modernity , liberalism , and “ normalcy . ”
It aspires to be part of the “ global village , ” not an isolated , parochial Jewish outpost .
By contrast , “ Jerusalem ” regards “ Tel Aviv ’ s ” drive for “ normalcy ” as a shallow affair , one that is almost criminally indifferent to Jewish memory and the lessons of Jewish history .
The Israel of “ Jerusalem ” is one of yearning for Jewish roots , a deep-seated fear of “ the Arabs , ” and an unyielding distrust of “ Gentiles ” and their “ international community . ”
Israel was born in war and has lived by the sword ever since .
Rarely in history has a national movement marched to its Promised Land with such a brilliant display of diplomatic savoir-faire and military skill as the Zionists did on their way to statehood .
But Israel ’ s breathtaking victory against three Arab armies in 1967 brought it not only grandeur , but also moral and political decay .
Forty-one years later , Israel is still incapable of extricating itself from the corrupting occupation of Palestinian lands , and from the folly of settlements .
This is the paradox of Israel ’ s existence : a sense of power combined with an ever-present apocalyptic fear of annihilation , reflected in its hostile reaction to any initiative that touches its physical security .
Of course , Jews ’ historical experience is not conducive to easy conciliation .
The crisis of the Jewish conscience in the traumatic transition from Holocaust to statehood has not yet been fully overcome .
Israel always , it seems , opts for a fatalistic interpretation of regional challenges , and its agonizing task today is to adopt a radical change of strategy by overcoming its leaders ’ traditional tendency to make decisions only on the basis of worst-case scenarios .
It has been a sadly recurrent condition of the Arab-Israeli conflict that no war lost by a humiliated Arab side has ever ushered in a peace settlement , just as no war overwhelmingly won by Israel has ever led its leaders to be magnanimous in victory .
Peace efforts began almost invariably thanks to Arab , not Israeli , moves .
Such was the case of the 1973 war , which was started by President Anwar Sadat with the aim of forcing the United States to broker an Egyptian-Israeli peace .
Likewise , the Palestinian Intifada of 1987 forced Israel to abandon the politics of inertia and engage in a process that culminated in the Oslo accords .
Zionism ’ s unique combination of democracy and utopianism enabled the Jews to recover their birthright and gave them a key to the future .
The same tools must be used to end the conflict with the Arab world , in particular with the Palestinians .
The Jews did not survive extermination only to entrench themselves behind walls of their own making . They survived in order to resolve what for too long has looked like an insoluble conundrum : legitimizing Jewish statehood in the eyes of those who consider themselves its victims .
