The Real Lima Deal
LIMA – It was the agreement that everyone wanted , yet that no one much likes .
This year ’ s annual United Nations climate-change conference in Lima , Peru , finally concluded in the early hours of Sunday morning , more than 24 hours after the scheduled close , after fierce argument in the final days .
Negotiators from 196 countries patched together a compromise that keeps the world on course to a new global climate agreement in Paris next year ; but almost everyone was left unhappy with some provision or another .
Many critics of the deal , however , have missed the point .
The Lima deal is weak in many respects .
But it also represents a fundamental breakthrough for shaping a comprehensive global climate regime .
The Lima conference had two goals .
The first was to adopt an outline of the text of the 2015 Paris agreement .
This goal was achieved – but only by creating a huge 37-page document containing every possible option that countries may want to see in next year ’ s deal .
Delegates did not attempt to negotiate between the various options , taking to heart the old maxim “ Why do today what you can put off until tomorrow ? ”
That negotiation has been left to the five sessions of talks scheduled for 2015 , starting in February .
Given the divergence among the positions included in the Lima text , arriving at a draft fit for signing in Paris next December will be a huge task .
The second goal was to agree on the terms under which countries will devise their national commitments – officially , their “ intended nationally determined contributions ” ( INDCs ) – in 2015 .
Here , the compromises were sharply felt .
Developing countries wanted the INDCs to include plans for adaptation to climate change as well as emissions cuts , and they wanted developed countries to include financial support for poorer countries .
Instead , no commitments to new money were made , and the inclusion of adaptation plans will be optional , not compulsory .
Meanwhile , developed countries wanted all countries to provide standardized information on their emissions targets and plans , to ensure transparency and comparability .
The key elements were agreed on , but only in the form of guidance , not as requirements .
Likewise , the proposal by the European Union and the United States that countries ’ plans be subject to some kind of assessment was dropped from the final text .
But the aggregate effect of all countries ’ plans will be calculated , allowing evaluation next year of whether the world has done enough to limit average global warming to the agreed ceiling of 2º Celsius .
It almost certainly will have not .
For many of the agreement ’ s critics , particularly those in the environmental movement , these compromises made the Lima deal an excessively “ bottom-up ” agreement .
Countries have too much latitude to make whatever commitments they want , relatively unconstrained by a common set of “ top-down ” rules imposed by the agreement .
Such critics worry that this will make it harder to persuade countries to cut emissions further when it becomes clear that their collective efforts are not enough , and that it may even allow some countries to use irregular accounting methods .
But this overlooks the Lima agreement ’ s greatest accomplishment : It ends the longstanding division of the world into only two kinds of countries , developed and developing .
Ever since the original UN Framework Convention on Climate Change was signed in 1992 , countries ’ obligations have been defined according to their level of development in that year .
The rich so-called “ Annex 1 ” countries have had compulsory obligations , while poorer “ non-Annex 1 ” countries merely have been required to make voluntary efforts .
Over the last 22 years , that binary distinction has looked increasingly obsolete , as the larger developing countries , such as China and Brazil , have emerged as economic superpowers and major greenhouse-gas emitters .
For this reason , the developed world has long wanted to replace the “ firewall ” between the two historic groupings with a form of differentiation that better reflects the contemporary world .
But the developing countries – including major powers like China – have insisted that it remain .
No longer .
The Lima agreement creates obligations for countries without regard for the distinction between Annex 1 and non-Annex 1 .
Rather , it uses a new phrase drawn from the recent agreement between the US and China : countries ’ responsibilities will be based on “ common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities in light of different national circumstances . ”
The firewall has been breached .
In theory , the Lima agreement on INDCs does not determine the shape of the long-term Paris agreement .
So another fierce battle on this issue can be expected next year .
But the vast majority of developing countries – including China and Brazil – are happy with the new regime .
So it is impossible to imagine the binary model being restored – and those countries that opposed the change know it , which is why the final two days in Lima were so fiercely fought .
The Lima conference has shown just how hard the negotiations in Paris next year will be , despite recent optimism about global progress .
But one highly significant decision has now effectively been made .
Abandoning the rigid distinction between developed and developing countries paves the way toward an agreement that all countries , including the US and China , can sign .
