Is Obama Losing Iraq ?
BAGHDAD – The Obama administration ’ s Iraq policy is in chaos . Seven months after Iraq ’ s national elections , the United States has publicly denied taking sides in the wrangling over who will be prime minister .
Privately , however , the US is backing the incumbent , Nouri al-Maliki .
The US has applied tremendous diplomatic pressure on Iraq ’ s Arab neighbors to get them to accept another Maliki term .
Most have refused .
Initially , the US backed Maliki in order to keep the Sadrist bloc from gaining a share of power .
However , that has now backfired , since the Sadrists are the only group other than Maliki ’ s coalition of Shia parties that supports him .
One unsettling consequence of US diplomacy is that it has reinforced Iran ’ s role in Iraq , because Maliki is Iran ’ s preferred candidate for Prime Minister .
Thus , at the very moment that the US is leading a global campaign to isolate Iran over its nuclear program , it is strengthening Iran ’ s regional position .
The US-Iranian dispute is not limited to the nuclear issue .
American efforts to re-start Israeli-Palestinian peace talks have faced adamant opposition from Iran , which maintains its 30-year-old policy of opposing any effort to promote peace in the region .
Iran exerts significant influence on both state and non-state actors whose support is indispensible to any long-term peace in the Middle East .
First among these is Syria . Post-election Iraq was an obvious opening for the US to place a wedge between Iran and Syria .
While Iran promotes the Shia religious parties in Iraq , Syria ’ s interests there tilt toward secular nationalism , as represented by former prime minister Ayad Allawi ’ s coalition , which actually defeated Maliki in the parliamentary elections held earlier this year .
Indeed , Syria has supported Allawi for the past seven years .
Yet , in the wake of intense US and Iranian diplomatic pressure in favor of Maliki , Syria has apparently shifted its support accordingly .
The impact of this American misstep has already been felt , emboldening Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad on his provocative visit to Lebanon , which included a public appearance on Hezbollah-controlled territory near Israel ’ s northern border .
The Gulf States , especially Saudi Arabia , have so far resisted US pressure to endorse Maliki .
They cannot forget that Maliki was in charge during the ethnic cleansing of Baghdad ’ s Sunni Muslims .
They regard Iran – and thus Maliki ’ s closeness to it – as an existential threat .
Kuwait , Saudi Arabia , and Bahrain , in particular , perceive Iran as inciting unrest among their own substantial Shia populations .
Iraq ’ s political elites have resisted Maliki ’ s desire for a second term for two reasons .
First , they are weary of renewed Iranian attempts to destabilize Iraq .
Security forces recently intercepted suicide bombers entering Iraqi Kurdistan from Iran , with , Kurdish leaders believe , the support and training of Iranian intelligence .
Second , Maliki ’ s tenure has been worrying to those who believe in democracy and the peaceable transfer of power .
He has created security forces – some of which have reportedly acted as death squads – that are answerable directly to him , thus bypassing the constitutional chain of command .
He has also replaced career army and security officers with cronies .
Last March , as rumors circulated that he was losing the vote , Maliki asserted that state security would be threatened if he lost , noting his responsibility to maintain order .
When he did lose , he demanded a recount , not as a candidate , but in his capacity as Commander-in-Chief .
The fact that Maliki , despite his incumbency , has been unable to secure a second term seven months after the elections attests to the widespread opposition to his continued rule among Iraq ’ s political class .
There is only one way to explain the US administration ’ s decision to exert such diplomatic pressure in favor of Iran ’ s favorite in Iraq : Obama ’ s pledge during his presidential election campaign to disengage from Iraq during his first term .
In this , Obama is following the example of President George W. Bush , who let the US electoral agenda , rather than American – not to mention Iraqi – national interests , dictate Iraq policy .
The Bush administration insisted that Iraq achieve various “ milestones ” – elections for which the country was not ready and completing a constitution in six weeks , to name two – simply to create the appearance of substantive achievements ahead of the 2004 presidential election or the 2006 mid-term elections .
Similarly , the Obama administration is trying to force what it perceives as the easiest path to a new government in Iraq – even if it is pro-Iranian – not because it is in the US national interest , but to enable it to head for the exits more quickly in advance of the president ’ s re-election campaign .
The administration ’ s policy in Iraq is now strengthening Iran regionally at the expense of America ’ s Arab allies , undermining America ’ s own efforts to forge a Middle East peace , and weakening Iraq ’ s nascent democracy .
It is difficult to imagine a worse set of outcomes for US national security interests in this vital region .
