Russia ’ s Eurasian Vision
NEW YORK – The escalating conflict in Ukraine between the Western-backed government and Russian-backed separatists has focused attention on a fundamental question : What are the Kremlin ’ s long-term objectives ?
Though Russian President Vladimir Putin ’ s immediate goal may have been limited to regaining control of Crimea and retaining some influence in Ukrainian affairs , his longer-term ambition is much bolder .
That ambition is not difficult to discern .
Putin once famously observed that the Soviet Union ’ s collapse was the greatest catastrophe of the twentieth century .
Thus , his long-term objective has been to rebuild it in some form , perhaps as a supra-national union of member states like the European Union .
This goal is not surprising : declining or not , Russia has always seen itself as a great power that should be surrounded by buffer states .
Under the Czars , Imperial Russia extended its reach over time .
Under the Bolsheviks , Russia built the Soviet Union and a sphere of influence that encompassed most of Central and Eastern Europe .
And now , under Putin ’ s similarly autocratic regime , Russia plans to create , over time , a vast Eurasian Union .
While the EAU is still only a customs union , the European Union ’ s experience suggests that a successful free-trade area leads over time to broader economic , monetary , and eventually political integration .
Russia ’ s goal is not to create another North American Free Trade Agreement ; it is to create another EU , with the Kremlin holding all of the real levers of power .
The plan has been clear : Start with a customs union – initially Russia , Belarus , and Kazakhstan – and add most of the other former Soviet republics .
Indeed , now Armenia and Kyrgyzstan are in play .
Once a broad customs union is established , trade , financial , and investment links within it grow to the point that its members stabilize their exchange rates vis-à-vis one another .
Then , perhaps a couple of decades after the customs union is formed , its members consider creating a true monetary union with a common currency ( the Eurasian ruble ? ) that can be used as a unit of account , means of payment , and store of value .
As the eurozone experience proves , sustaining a monetary union requires banking , fiscal , and full economic union .
And , once members give up their sovereignty over fiscal , banking , and economic affairs , they may eventually need a partial political union to ensure democratic legitimacy .
Realizing such a plan may require overcoming serious challenges and the commitment of large financial resources over a period of many decades .
But the first step is a customs union , and , in the case of the Eurasian Union , it had to include Ukraine , Russia ’ s largest neighbor to the west .
That is why Putin put so much pressure on former President Viktor Yanukovych to abandon an association agreement with the EU .
It is also why Putin reacted to the ouster of Yanukovych ’ s government by taking over Crimea and destabilizing eastern Ukraine .
Recent events have further weakened market-oriented , Western-leaning factions in Russia and strengthened the state-capitalist , nationalist factions , who are now pushing for faster establishment of the EAU . In particular , the tension with Europe and the United States over Ukraine will shift Russia ’ s energy and raw-material exports – and the related pipelines – toward Asia and China .
Likewise , Russia and its BRICS partners ( Brazil , India , China , and South Africa ) are creating a development bank that is to serve as an alternative to the Western-controlled International Monetary Fund and the World Bank .
Revelations of electronic surveillance by the US may lead Russia – and other illiberal states – to restrict Internet access and create their own nationally controlled data networks .
There is even talk of Russia and China creating an alternative international payment system to replace the SWIFT system , which the US and Europe can use to impose financial sanctions against Russia .
Creating a full EAU – one that is gradually less tied to the West by trade , financial , economic , payments , communications , and political links – may be a pipe dream .
Russia ’ s lack of reform and adverse demographic trends imply low potential growth and insufficient financial resources to create the fiscal and transfer union that is needed to bring other countries in .
But Putin is ambitious , and – like other autocrats in Central Asian nations – he may remain in power for decades to come .
And , like it or not , even a Russia that lacks the dynamism needed to succeed in manufacturing and the industries of the future will remain a commodity-producing superpower .
Revisionist powers like Russia , China , and Iran appear ready to confront the global economic and political order that the US and the West built after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
But now one of these revisionists powers – Russia – is pushing ahead aggressively to recreate a near-empire and a sphere of influence .
Unfortunately , the sanctions that the US and Europe are imposing on Russia , though necessary , may merely reinforce the conviction among Putin and his nationalist Slavophile advisers that Russia ’ s future lies not in the West , but in a separate integration project in the East .
US President Barack Obama says that this is not the beginning of a new Cold War ; current trends may soon suggest otherwise .
