Piracy in China
BEIJING : China now appears to be the country with the most notorious reputation for corporate piracy .
Indeed , if multinationals and developed countries had an “ Interpol ” to track down and arrest countries charged with being havens for business piracy , China would likely top the “ Most Wanted ” list because of its lack of protection of intellectual property rights ( IPR ) .
Sadly , much of the case against China is true ; no one here should ignore this , or pretend the facts are otherwise .
Is this reputation for piracy somehow an intrinsic business “ characteristic of the Chinese ” or of “ Asians ” as a whole as some allege ?
Maybe , maybe not .
Taiwanese and Koreans were the culprits in the 1960s , and 1970s .
Today , Thai businesses are accused of piracy as often as Chinese companies .
But intellectual / corporate piracy is not confined to Asia .
Israel was once nicknamed a “ one-disc-country ” – a reference to the idea that a single software CD-Rom would be bought and then illicitly copied throughout the country .
Piracy , however , should not be used to tar an entire country ’ s economy or business structures as criminal .
It should , instead , be regarded as a problem found almost universally in countries undergoing the earliest stages of development .
A fully functioning legal system and – perhaps more importantly – the mentality associated with the rule of law are often absent , or primitive , in most developing countries .
Signing IPR conventions , and incorporating them into domestic law , means little or nothing when a country ’ s law enforcement is weak .
Moreover , law enforcement and legal sanctions don ’ t mean much if people do not own property themselves , that would be at risk through fines or other sanctions .
No surprise , then , that a backward , developing country in the early stages of “ catching up ” through learning from the developed world , sees copying the intellectual advances of others as something like a human right .
This may explain why the issues of intellectual property rights are , for most developing countries , usually treated as an “ international matter , ” not a problem for domestic politics .
Given this situation , is it actually realistic to expect politicians and government officials to work hard to protect foreigners ’ rights in face of the needs of their fellow citizens ?
The answer is an emphatic NO .
Politicians and bureaucrats , indeed , will only take action when “ domestic piracy ” starts to occur .
When people in a country begin to illicitly copy the intellectual achievements of a fellow citizen , IPR becomes a real domestic political issue dividing special interest groups .
Containing piracy then becomes a matter debated in political assemblies , in the media and - most importantly - in the courts .
When this happens , real efforts to enforce laws that previously existed only on paper to please foreigners , starts to take place .
This is now happening in China .
It offers real hope that China will improve its record of protecting intellectual property .
In recent years , Chinese companies have been suffering piracy related problems just as their foreign counterparts have .
As a result they now lobby the government vociferously and are gaining serious attention from lawmakers and law enforcement alike .
Foreign companies will no doubt also benefit from this new commitment to stamp out piracy .
China ’ s accession to the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) may help some more , but it will not solve the problem overnight .
In any case , no one should exaggerate the problem of piracy .
Quite a few foreign companies shout “ piracy ” when what is really happening is competition - ie , a company in a developing country makes a similar product but at a lower price .
Copying the idea and basic design of a product is not piracy .
As developing countries seek to create their own “ knowledge economy , ” copyright and intellectual property rights will become more and more important .
Real profits will be coming from innovations made within developing country themselves .
Here , indeed , China is particularly hopeful about its future .
Although this may mean that China is crossing the “ divide ” between the haves and have-nots of the world ’ s knowledge economy , it will not bridge that divide .
Other peoples and countries find themselves on an unequal footing in this digital age , so the problem of piracy is not likely to disappear .
The costs of acquiring and using new technologies protected by copyrights pose huge obstacles for developing countries .
Reducing those costs should be a priority in international discussions about the “ digital divide ” and “ poverty relief . ”
Poverty is no excuse for “ stealing ” or gaining a free lunch , of course , but using the protection of intellectual property to keep the poor poor is unjust , and may cause instability that harms rich countries , too .
Reducing the costs for developing countries to use new technologies may , indeed , reduce the incentives for violating copyright and other intellectual property protections .
