Pakistan after Bhutto
The assassination of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto has brought Pakistan ’ s state of turmoil to new heights .
As head of the nation ’ s most popular political party , Bhutto largely transcended Pakistan ’ s ethnic and sectarian divides .
Her return from exile in October was seen as a step toward curbing the country ’ s dangerous fragmentation ; her murder shatters those hopes .
President Pervez Musharraf must take immediate steps – most importantly , the formation of a national unity government – to prevent Pakistan from tearing apart at the seams .
In deciding that her People ’ s Party would participate in the January parliamentary election , Bhutto threw a lifeline to Musharraf , who has been beset by multiple insurgencies , a nationwide terrorist threat , and rock-bottom legitimacy .
Both Musharraf and his supporters in Washington hoped that mainstream parties ’ participation in the election would end Pakistan ’ s governance crisis and provide popular support for a decisive confrontation with the Taliban and al-Qaeda .
Now , however , the election will likely be postponed .
Indeed , Musharraf might be compelled to impose emergency rule again , as he did in November , should Pakistan ’ s stability further deteriorate .
There are reports of violence in cities across Pakistan .
Karachi , a multi-ethnic metropolis , could erupt into full-scale chaos .
During the 1990 ’ s , violence there between Bhutto ’ s party and a local ethnic party – now allied with Musharraf – took thousands of lives .
In these circumstances , a state of emergency could be warranted .
But , given Musharraf ’ s lack of legitimacy , such a move would further infuriate Bhutto ’ s supporters , whose street power Bhutto had contained since October .
This could set the stage for a violent confrontation between the Pakistani masses and Musharraf ’ s regime .
The nightmare scenario envisioned by many in Pakistan ­ ­ – a nuclear-armed country actively targeted by al-Qaeda and the Taliban – could become a reality .
But this need not be a foregone conclusion .
Musharraf , who regularly claims to act on the basis of a “ Pakistan first ” policy , must now let go of partisan objectives and form a national unity government led by a prime minister from the opposition .
Any subsequent measures , including temporary imposition of emergency rule and full-scale war against the terrorists , require the complete support of the opposition parties .
Musharraf and his political allies cannot be seen as benefiting from Bhutto ’ s assassination ; nor can they afford the perception of a cover-up .
His opponents must be incorporated into the decision-making process .
A national unity government must assume three major responsibilities .
First , it must establish an independent commission to determine who was responsible for Bhutto ’ s murder .
While political assassination is not unfamiliar – Pakistan ’ s first prime minister was killed in the same park where Bhutto was murdered – it is imperative that the culprits be apprehended and tried .
Anything short of this would permanently taint Pakistan ’ s leadership and impede all attempts at political reconciliation .
Second , it must take necessary measures to ensure public safety and political stability , while paving the way for free and fair elections .
It must offer Pakistan a consensual path toward winning back its tribal areas from the insurgents , end the wave of terror in its cities , and ensure the election of a new , legitimate government .
Finally , it must begin a dialogue with Musharraf and the military on a permanent , constitutional separation of powers .
If Bhutto had not been assassinated and , instead , successfully became prime minister , she would likely have clashed with Musharraf over his arbitrary empowerment of the presidency at the expense of the premiership .
The issue will not go away with Bhutto ’ s death .
Pakistan ’ s civil and military elite must create a broad consensus – perhaps with foreign assistance , but never with foreign meddling – on the constitutional roles of the prime minister , president , and the military .
Ravaged by endemic elite discord since its founding , Pakistan desperately needs an elite reconciliation that includes all of the country ’ s major stakeholders .
Otherwise , Pakistan ’ s terrorists , who feed off of political instability , will continue to gain , while the country ’ s poor and illiterate majority will continue to lose ground .
The murder of Benazir Bhutto need not result in the country ’ s demise .
Pakistan ’ s elite have an opportunity to overcome their differences , unite in opposition to militants , and transform their failing state into a stable and prosperous democracy .
If they succeed in bringing about a national renewal , Bhutto , a monumental political figure in Pakistani history , will not have died in vain .
