Poland \ u0027s Witch-hunters Burn Their Own
WARSAW : Control the past and you control the future .
That Orwellian maxim animated communism for decades .
It has now taken root in postcommunist Poland .
But the anti-communists in the government who seek to use it have only succeeded in burning their own supporters at the stake .
Recently , a Polish vice-premier , Janusz Tomaszewski , was sacked because a special judge sent his case to the " lustration " court .
Tomaszewski was and remains a brave man from the former opposition and the probability that he collaborated with the communist secret services seem small .
He denies ever being a collaborator .
Nevertheless he had to resign , because his colleagues from the rightist , post-Solidarity party now in power decided that anyone merely accused by the special judge ( even before conviction ) must leave his ( or her ) job in government , parliament or the judiciary .
Lustration is new in Poland .
Parliament passed this strange law a year ago .
Now people must declare if they collaborated with the secret services before 1990 .
A special judge then checks the truthfulness of their declarations .
If someone has lied , or there are ambiguities , the case goes to a special court .
But the only sentence it can inflict is a forced absence from public life for a given time .
The people subject to this law are members of parliament , of government , judges and other lawyers who volunteer to be checked .
From the moment of its passage , the law was criticized heavily .
It was introduced ten years after the transition to democracy , and the archives of the secret police are obviously neither complete nor necessarily honest .
Moreover , the law failed to define adequately what constitutes collaboration .
I would like to add two more objections .
Let me start with collaboration .
Poland was not East Germany , where the Stasi was ubiquitous .
Here , cases of collaboration were rather rare and ambiguous .
Communist party members could not – by definition – be collaborators , and the small fish from the opposition who collaborated did not know enough to be dangerous .
But the new law says that anyone who was in contact with the secret police is a collaborator .
So I must declare that I , too , had secret police contacts , and not merely during the time I spent in prison in 1968 .
In 1966 the secret police made me an offer they thought I couldn 't refuse : if I collaborated , they would drop me by parachute over England and arrange for me to study at Oxford .
Later they would contact me and tell me what to do as a secret agent .
I simply laughed in their faces and that was it .
But I was in communication with them , so therefore I should not try to become a minister or member of parliament .
This now seems funny from my point of view , but it is not funny for the politicians who do not know if they have collaborated or not according to the law .
In concocting this monstrosity the people from the former Solidarity opposition who produced this law confused two ideas : decommunization and lustration .
Poland saw no real decommunization after 1989 and this rankles many people in AWS , the Solidarity Electoral Alliance , which is the biggest group in Poland 's ruling coalition .
But now it is simply too late to turn back the clock and start outing communists .
If opinion polls are right , the most popular party in the country right now is the party of former communists .
Poland 's president , who defeated Lech Walesa at the polls , is a former communist .
Mere vengeance , however , is not the catalyst for this attempt at lustration .
It is politics , and the irony here is that the law they created is one now boomeranging against its creators .
Young politicians , simply because of their age , could not possibly have collaborated ; postcommunists can 't be charged with collaboration because you cannot attack someone for collaborating with his or her own party .
So the only political victims of this law will come , as they have , from the relatively small group of " Solidarity " activists .
From South Africa to Chile to Eastern Europe , a more general problem arises whenever governments begin to peer into the past of defeated dictatorships .
In all democratic countries people quarrel , they then negotiate and compromise .
In all democratic countries some issues are avoided or at least treated as private problems , precisely because they cannot be solved by compromise .
Such issues are history and memory .
Germany and France both witnessed debates like this after WWII , but politicians ( for the most part ) tried to keep them out of politics ( and sometimes even out of the courts ) .
South Africa 's elegant solution , its Truth and Reconciliation Commission , also tried , quite heroically , to depoliticize exploration of past political crimes .
As an historian , I know that the past is never certain ; most uncertain of all are judgments concerning human behavior .
In a society where the enormous majority of people collaborated passively , active collaboration is hard to discern from passive .
Democracy is supposed to defend us against civil strife , politicization of memory incites such strife .
With this lustration law young rightists have been handed a stick with which to beat their older colleagues for their behavior during our Stalinist period – and perhaps advance their own careers by ousting older rivals from their jobs .
Memory , indeed , is running rampant .
Serious newspapers harp on the atrocities of the gulags .
Television uses a meeting between the German and Polish presidents , a meeting of reconciliation , to uncritically recycle images of the Germans as murderous brutes .
Politicians , intellectuals , journalists focus on the past while society thinks about making money and the future .
In Poland , this split is growing and becoming dangerously undemocratic .
