Kenya ’ s Democratic Hope
Kenyans have much to celebrate this week .
They lined up in large numbers , peacefully cast their ballots , and resoundingly rejected a flawed constitution that had been hastily forced upon them .
The November 21 referendum marks another pivotal step towards consolidating Kenya ’ s transition to a real democracy .
The “ no ” vote not only forestalled attempts by President Mwai Kibaki and his inner circle to tighten their grip on power , but it also confirmed to ordinary Kenyans the power of the ballot box .
While the Kenyan public appeared to show their high regard for legal process and participatory democracy , the run-up to the referendum revealed the government ’ s much uglier face .
The Kibaki administration used this year to entrench power in the hands of a small ethnic Kikuyu clique .
Reformers within the government not only capitulated to the backsliding , but actively contributed to it .
Two years ago , the picture looked a bit brighter .
Billing itself as a reform government that would promote respect for human rights and the rule of law , the Kibaki government promised Kenyans a new constitution within 100 days of taking office in 2003 .
The draft constitution had been many years in the making and had been crafted following extensive national consultations .
It contained provisions that would have removed excessive presidential powers and given Kenyans a stronger bill of rights .
What the Kibaki government failed to mention was that it would change this draft at the last minute .
After stalling for two and a half years , the day before the draft constitution was due to expire , the government hastily pushed through Parliament an alternate draft that preserved strong presidential powers , weakened the bill of rights , and rigged the electoral percentages needed to win the presidency .
The participatory process , so critical in any constitution making , was hijacked .
The public was presented with one choice : “ yes ” or “ no . ”
The frenzied campaigning for the constitutional referendum began in uproar .
Through a combination of financial incentives and menacing threats , including two incidents of police shootings during demonstrations , the Kibaki government ordered the nation to vote yes .
The rhetoric of reform was dropped as President Kibaki handed out title deeds of national trust and parkland to gain votes .
Public employees were informed that the draft constitution was a government project that they had to support , and newspaper and broadcast journalists were warned that their licenses could be revoked after a radio station aired an interview with a parliamentarian who opposed Kibaki ’ s constitution .
Anticipating the 2007 election , the government announced the creation of 47 new electoral districts .
These steps barely veiled an agenda intended not only to guarantee electoral victory , but also to cement political dominance by the Kibaki ’ s ethnic group .
But ordinary people rejected Kibaki ’ s power play , reclaiming their nation ’ s path through the ballot box – an idea that is still almost unheard of in the Kenyan context .
Kenya ’ s bumpy road to democracy is no different from that of many other countries in Africa whose political transitions were heralded with high expectations .
Kenya has suffered the inevitable democratic backsliding , the continued corruption , and the unfulfilled reform agendas that remain persistent themes elsewhere on the continent .
One of the most important beacons of hope remains a change in mindset of the Kenyan public .
Having been buoyed by the successful and peaceful 2002 election that brought in the promise of change , the Kenyan public remains loudly outraged by the government ’ s failures to make good on its promises .
Radio call-in shows have burgeoned and public discourse is at its most lively .
While public euphoria and high hopes have been dampened , Kenyans remain resolutely engaged in the democratic process .
The Kibaki government should be acknowledged for gracefully conceding defeat , but true credit goes to the Kenyan public for its unwillingness to allow the authorities to dispense with the rule of law .
Ordinary Kenyans played a key role in changing the outcome of what , ten years ago , would have been a done deal .
The many other Africans who lament their nations ’ flagging democratic transitions would do well to draw strength from Kenya ’ s milestone .
The international community ’ s challenge will be to help ensure that the political space claimed by the Kenyan public remains open .
