The West ’ s Second Chance in Syria
NEW YORK – The last-minute agreement between Russia and the United States to put Syria ’ s chemical weapons under international control gives the West , which had run out of good options , a second chance to reach what always should have been its strategic goal : peace in Syria and an end to its people ’ s suffering .
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov took advantage of Western leaders ’ failure to formulate a clear central objective .
Did they hope to end Syria ’ s civil war by forcing a military stalemate , or to bring about the demise of President Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime ?
Did they want to strengthen international law barring the use of chemical weapons , or to send Iran a signal about their determination to enforce “ red lines ” ?
The Russian proposal forced the West to choose prohibition of chemical weapons as its immediate goal .
Given that this is one of the few areas of possible agreement in the United Nations Security Council , it is a good starting point to repair badly damaged relations among the Council ’ s five permanent members ( China , France , Russia , the United Kingdom , and the US ) .
Of course , the deal may prove to be little more than a diversion , breaking the momentum toward military action but failing to achieve its goal .
Its implementation will be a test of Russia ’ s good faith .
For their part , Western countries must avoid the traps of the difficult negotiation process that the deal demands , without losing sight of their strategic goal of ending the conflict .
The complex process of securing and destroying Syria ’ s chemical arsenal promises to be next to impossible in the midst of a civil war .
To succeed , Western leaders must reframe their approach to the Syrian endgame , rejecting the assumptions that have shaped their policies since the beginning of the crisis .
The West ’ s fundamental mistake has been consistently to underestimate the Assad regime ’ s resilience .
Despite its brutality , the Assad government retains a substantial base of supporters who are willing to fight to the death to prevent the regime ’ s collapse .
Indeed , many Syrians believe that they have no future if Assad ’ s government collapses – a belief that has been reinforced as the civil war ’ s dividing lines have become increasingly sectarian .
With regime supporters ’ physical survival seemingly at stake , the expectation of a quick collapse was illusory .
More problematic , the West ’ s loud calls for Assad ’ s exit from power , though now muted , have given false hope to the opposition , while Russia has been hiding behind the rhetoric of a “ Syrian-led process ” to avoid confronting its international responsibilities .
But a diplomatic solution guided by the Security Council ’ s permanent members is the only credible path to peace .
The alternative – an attempt at negotiation between Syria ’ s government and an increasingly fragmented opposition – would serve only to prolong the war and raise the death toll .
Likewise , the West must recognize that reconciliation in Syria will be impossible without reconciliation between the Sunni and Shia regimes in the wider region .
Several of the Sunni-ruled Gulf monarchies view Syria ’ s crisis and the prospect of Assad ’ s demise as an opportunity to compensate for Iraq ’ s rapprochement with Iran following the fall of Saddam Hussein ’ s Sunni regime and the emergence of a Shia-led government .
A year ago , the US , the UK , and France appeared to side with Saudi Arabia when they rejected former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan ’ s request that Iran be invited to the first attempt in Geneva to negotiate a settlement of Syria ’ s civil war .
They probably feared that Iran ’ s participation in the talks would enable Iranian leaders to link efforts to end the Syrian crisis to negotiations over Iran ’ s nuclear program , enhancing their ability to resist international demands that the program be terminated .
But , while Iran ’ s direct involvement in Syria – where its own Revolutionary Guards , along with its Lebanese proxy , Hezbollah , are fighting in support of Assad – is part of the problem , a long-term solution is virtually impossible without Iranian participation .
Indeed , the Middle East cannot achieve long-term stability while Iran is excluded from negotiations and the Shia-Sunni schism is allowed to deepen .
Although it is too soon to tell what , if anything , will come of the current diplomatic charm offensive by Iran ’ s more moderate new president , Hassan Rouhani , it might herald an important shift in Iranian policy that could ultimately enable regional reconciliation .
With the entire Middle East undergoing a generational transformation , regional challenges cannot be addressed separately .
Only a unified , comprehensive approach can manage the forces driving momentous change in the Middle East , prevent outside powers ’ rivalries from complicating the situation further , and ensure a peaceful outcome .
With emerging regional powers increasingly challenging the capacity of the Security Council ’ s permanent members to shape events in the Middle East , there is no time to waste .
The West ’ s lofty and self-serving rhetoric has not helped to end Syria ’ s conflict ; it may even have made the situation more dangerous .
Although the Russian initiative is not without pitfalls , it could be a crucial launchpad for more serious and constructive engagement with Syria – and with the rest of the Middle East .
