Japan Isn \ u0027t Doomed
TOKYO / STOCKHOLM : Pessimism about Japan is easy and pervasive nowadays .
Its financial crisis drags on , growth is nil , unemployment rises , and , recently , deflation appeared .
Is there any way out ?
For a Swede , Japan 's economic problems are a form of déjŕ vu .
In 1992 , Swedes accepted that their " Swedish Model " didn 't work .
This was hard to understand , because everything had gone so well in Sweden for so long .
With an economy falling apart and a bankrupt financial sector , radical reforms were needed .
Change began in banking .
Sweden 's experience suggests that Japan 's most urgent problem is its financial crisis .
As in Sweden 8 years ago , there is too much bad debt and too many banks .
Insolvency in the financial sector spills into other sectors in the form of a credit crunch , because Japanese banks are unwilling to lend money .
This type of financial crisis is not unique to Japan .
Countries where land and stock prices rose and fell dramatically also experienced similar crisis .
America in the 1930 's and 1980 's had banking crisis of this sort which had real economic effects .
So , also , Sweden in the early 1990s .
Sweden 's crisis is a case for Japan to study , not only because it was similar , but also because Sweden solved it .
Just as Japan has done , Sweden 's government took over most bad loans from private banks so that they could begin operating more normally .
In contrast to Japan , however , Sweden simultaneously restructured the entire banking sector by closing down inefficient banks .
Restructuring was crucial to revitalizing Sweden 's financial sector , and is necessary in Japan .
Quick , forceful restructuring will help end the credit crunch and lay the base for renewed growth .
Longer term , a closer look at Japanese demographic trends is crucial .
Japan recently achieved the longest life expectancy of all countries .
One-third of Japanese will be over 65 years of age in 2040 , double 1995 's level .
Simultaneously , fertility rates dropped to 1.4 per woman .
These demographic influences will incite severe labor shortages early in the 21st century , just when an aging population places severe pressure on health and welfare facilities .
Japan will likely experience a slowing in its traditionally high savings rate as its population ages .
This implies a dramatic slowdown in investment and long-term growth rates unless offsetting increases in productivity emerge .
Throughout history , however , Japan confronted big challenges by restructuring its culture and economy .
To revitalize Japan 's economy in the long run , three big adjustments are necessary .
Liberalization of labor markets and greater inclusion of women in the workforce must occur .
Conventional wisdom says that low unemployment and job turnover rates , attributable to a system of ‘ life-time employment ' and worker devotion to their firms , contributed to Japan 's rapid postwar growth .
Firms invested heavily in worker education , which focused on providing broad exposure to manufacturing activities , increasing productivity , and firm-specific innovations .
The need for narrowly specialized firm-specific workers is disappearing as service sectors like telecommunications , computers , software , and finance expand .
So the need for broad-based , firm-specific worker training in manufacturing will shrink .
In response to increasing labor shortages , the 21st century will bring new roles for Japanese women .
Women have traditionally been underutilized given their education levels .
While the increase in women in the labor force has recently been rapid , female employment is only 50 % in Japan ( relative to almost 80 % amongst men ) .
A second structural adjustment concerns regulatory reform .
Japan 's economy has been marked by high government involvement and regulation in most industries .
Japan 's postwar development strategy relied on a public-private partnership .
The government sought to modernize the economic base by selecting and nurturing promising industries - limiting competition , supporting research and development and technology transfers , and encouraging the extension of credit .
Industries with potential to achieve economies of scale and scope were most favored and permitted to form horizontal and vertical cartels that cooperated on pricing , R & D , production , etc .
The government also protected special interests , such as rice farmers and small retailers , against competition through a complex system of licensing , regulation , and quality controls .
Close partnership between business and government is in direct contrast to the western , particularly the American , model grounded in strong antitrust policy , competition , and private ownership .
Japan viewed this approach as wasteful , with firms using real resources to drive others out of business or duplicate R & D costs .
In the face of a stagnant economy and an integrated global economy , Japan is under increasing pressure to modify its regulatory framework and promote competition .
Japan 's regulatory environment must converge toward the industrial policies of other advanced nations .
This has been the case across Europe during the 1980s and 1990s .
These reforms will create new markets , stimulate competition , attract foreign investment and technology transfers , and improve consumer interests .
Finally , global economic conditions will compel even more restructuring upon Japan .
Japan has committed to further liberalization of its markets under the WTO .
While export expansion delivered growth in this century , import substitution and inward foreign direct investment ( FDI ) will lead to increasing productivity in Japan in the next .
Imports inspire a more competitive domestic business environment .
As import barriers fall and as Japan 's distribution systems become more transparent , converging to OECD standards , the import share of Japan 's GDP will rise , improving domestic productivity .
Deregulation and greater openness , moreover , will generate inward FDI .
Competitive pressure from such investment , like import competition , will improve productivity .
In Sweden we say " it is darkest before you see light at the end of the tunnel " .
Japan 's crisis may look hopeless , but don 't forget that this is not the first time Japan has faced such a challenge .
If Sweden solved its crisis , so too can Japan , where much of the basis for a prosperous future exists .
Only a few structural changes are needed to get Japan 's growth machine working again .
