Jinnah ’ s Labyrinth
NEW DELHI – Three recent events vividly illustrate the dilemmas of today ’ s Pakistan , which are in many ways the same challenges faced by the country ’ s founder , Mohammed Ali Jinnah , over six decades ago .
The foreign secretaries of India and Pakistan met in New Delhi recently , after a gap of more than 15 months , the terrorist attacks of November 11 , 2008 having frozen bilateral relations between the two countries in suspicion and mutual recrimination .
The New Delhi meeting marked a temporary thaw , yet even as Pakistan ’ s foreign secretary returned home to Islamabad , suspected Taliban bombers had attacked an Indian medical mission in the heart of Kabul , Afghanistan , killing 11 people .
Moreover , in the Pakistani province of Waziristan , three Sikhs , a minority in Pakistan , were abducted .
When the ransom could not be raised , one was beheaded .
India and the world watch such events in horror , unable to decide how to respond .
As people wonder if the United States-NATO surge in Afghanistan which began last month will succeed , all of South Asia is asking even more troubling questions : Who runs Pakistan ?
Who is really in charge of its nuclear arsenal ?
To understand where Pakistan ’ s massive problems began , we need to look back to the country ’ s founding .
At a press meeting on November 14 , 1946 , nine months before British India was partitioned into two countries , India and Pakistan , Jinnah was asked about the future of the communal situation in what would become Pakistan .
He foresaw “ a really stable and secure government in Pakistan , ” whose Muslim majority would treat minorities in their midst “ in a most generous way . ”
Seeking to dispel skepticism , he declared that “ Pakistan and Hindustan by virtue of contiguity and mutual interests will be friends in this subcontinent . ”
That was Jinnah ’ s dream , but the reality is that Pakistan has lived in high drama ever since its birth , often troubled by dark and imaginary historical shadows .
It has been a victim of its own grandiose dreams about its role in the world and place among Islamic nations , and often of intense emotionalism and an absence of calm , dispassionate logic .
Almost inevitably , or so it seems , the idea of Pakistan has been usurped , which is why Pakistan ’ s friends have so often become its masters , and why Pakistan continues to remain fragile , insecure , and tense .
But there are other , non-psychological factors for Pakistan ’ s troubles .
Founded on the notion of separateness , Pakistan has continuously had to affirm its Islamic identity , as well as its opposition to India .
So it adopted the identity of an Islamic Republic – a seemingly direct and logical evolution from “ Muslims as a distinct nation ” before partition to Pakistan as an “ Islamic State ” afterward .
In reality , this transition has impeded Pakistan ’ s evolution into a modern , functioning state underpinned by a coherent national identity .
Indeed , by becoming an Islamic state , Pakistan ultimately – and perhaps inevitably – became something of a “ jihadi ” state .
Unsurprisingly , when set on this path , it also became the chosen refuge of Osama bin Laden and of the Taliban leadership that fled Afghanistan after the US-led invasion .
Can Pakistan alter its identity ?
Peace in the region , and within Pakistan , depends on the answer to this question , which only Pakistani civil society – not the US , NATO , or any “ surge ” – can provide .
But Pakistani society is now an orphan , dependant almost totally on both the Pakistani Army and the all-pervasive Inter-Services Intelligence ( ISI ) , which has grown into a state within a state , answerable only to itself .
Of course , there are ideas of Pakistan other than that of an “ Islamic state . ”
Indeed , Pakistan aspired at one point to becoming something of a modern extension of India ’ s long-ruling Mughal dynasty .
But this aspiration grossly misread both the present and the inherited historical reality , for Pakistan also wanted to be a legatee of British India – a confused desire that made Pakistan more vulnerable to becoming a “ rented state ” than when it was part of either the Mughal or British Empire .
Likewise , dreams of cultural links with Central Asia by themselves do not make Pakistan a boundary between it and the teeming masses of India .
Indeed , the only role Pakistan plays in this respect is as an outpost for Central Asian terrorists .
There is cruel irony in the observation that in the country which Jinnah created in the name of Islam , that noble faith itself now constitutes the principal challenge to the very survival of the state .
It is no less ironic that Pakistan , once seen as the protector of Western interests in South Asia , has become the central challenge to those interests – what one high Western dignitary has undiplomatically called an “ international migraine . ”
