The Dark Side of Physics
PASADENA – Almost a century ago , the first galaxy beyond our own was discovered , and within a decade the theory that the universe is expanding was first proposed .
Since then , astounding technological developments have contributed to revolutionary progress in physics , astronomy , cosmology , and the life sciences .
Today , physics stands at a new threshold .
On July 4 , 2012 , the international physics community witnessed a monumental discovery in the history of high-energy physics : a Higgs boson .
The long-hypothesized Higgs boson is the necessary component that validates the Standard Model of elementary particles as a “ blueprint ” for the real universe .
The Higgs boson provides mass for these particles ; without it , the physical world , as we understand it , would have no atoms , chemistry , or life .
Finding what was , until then , just a theoretical prediction required one of the largest and most complex scientific undertakings ever attempted : the creation of the particle accelerator , the Large Hadron Collider , near Geneva .
The research carried out at the LHC is now likely to steer our understanding of the universe from the smallest elementary particles to our study of cosmology .
From 2010 to 2012 , the LHC produced the highest-energy proton-proton collisions ever ; and even higher-energy collisions are anticipated in 2015 .
Physicists had long expected the LHC to reveal a new sector of particles and fields associated with “ electroweak symmetry breaking ” and the dark matter of the universe .
Two major experimental observations underpinned this expectation .
The first was the masses of the W and Z bosons – the messengers of the weak nuclear interactions , responsible , for example , for the shining sun .
The second was a large set of astrophysical observations , pointing to the necessity of a gravitational “ scaffolding ” in the universe : that is , the dark matter needed to prevent the stars and galaxies from flying apart .
Although the Higgs discovery may help us to understand the source of elementary particles ’ mass ( including its own ) , nature has surprised us in two further respects .
First , the measured mass of the Higgs boson renders the full theory “ metastable ” in the absence of any new physics phenomena .
In other words , the universe might have other , more energetically favorable configurations .
Second , the LHC data seem to disfavor , though not exclude , the most aesthetically and mathematically pleasing new physics phenomenon , “ supersymmetry , ” which was theorized along with the Higgs boson before its actual discovery and is necessary to address quantum corrections .
The persistence of the dark-matter conundrum , in combination with these considerations , might alter our fundamental ideas and predictions about what might follow the discovery .
New ideas are now being formulated about the Higgs boson itself , opening a direct portal to the dark matter of the universe .
A concerted experimental and theoretical program has taken shape in the fields of particle physics , cosmology , astrophysics , and gravitational physics to discover a dark-matter particle candidate in the next decade or so .
What is at stake are paradigms that have held for the past 76 years , and that have been supported recently by spectacular measurements of the cosmos .
Some in the world of physics might call this a crisis .
However , it is quite common for a theory to lack experimental backing .
All research into the universe and the physical world struggles to achieve a complete understanding .
In that sense , we are in perpetual crisis and at the threshold of discovery .
It might be fairer to describe physics as being at a turning point or a crossroads .
Physics provides the evolving core framework on which other fields of science are built .
And now , with the technological armory and plethora of data currently available , science can go far beyond any previous expectation and extrapolation .
Indeed , in coming decades , everything will be susceptible to major revision as new cross-disciplines – and undisciplined threads of study – emerge .
Quantum engineering teams are already springing up in academic and research institutes all around the world .
The merging of computer science and engineering with neuroscience has already produced results that not long ago belonged only to science fiction .
Nature can seem complex , haphazard , and tricky ; and it can strike us as simple , symmetrical , and beautiful .
Either way , the quantum universe will continue to surprise us .
