A Step Closer to Brexit ?
LONDON – The referendum on Scottish independence , due on September 18 , comes at a time of growing opposition in the United Kingdom to remaining in the European Union .
This is significant , because Scotland is the strongest base of pro-European sentiment in the UK .
For example , a poll conducted earlier this year determined that if a referendum on continued EU membership had been held in June in the UK as a whole , 47.1 % would have voted to leave , with 39.4 % voting to remain .
But a poll in February 2014 showed that in Scotland , 48.7 % would vote for the UK to remain in the EU , with 35.4 % voting to leave .
Other polls have also shown a consistent and markedly more positive attitude toward the EU in Scotland than in England .
Of course , it is premature to draw any firm conclusions from these figures .
The referendum on exiting the EU that Prime Minister David Cameron has proposed may not take place , regardless of the success ( whatever that may mean ) of his promised “ renegotiation ” of the terms of British membership .
But , as a result of various ostensibly minor issues , the likelihood of a British exit seems to be increasing – which fundamentally alters the importance of the vote in Scotland .
For example , the proposal of the relatively unknown Jonathan Hill , the leader of the UK House of Lords , as the British member of the new European Commission headed by Jean-Claude Juncker was just the latest in a long series of British EU errors .
Cameron ’ s spokesmen said in July that , at his first meeting with the new Commission president , Cameron would seek a prestigious portfolio , such as the internal market , for Hill .
Juncker ’ s office coldly replied that important portfolios in the new Commission would go to major political figures , and that Juncker “ does not owe [ Cameron ] anything . ”
Given Cameron ’ s opposition to Juncker ’ s candidacy for the Commission presidency , the abuse to which Juncker has been subjected by the British press , and Hill ’ s lack of centrality within British politics , Cameron may be justifiably nervous when Juncker announces his appointments to the new Commission .
Juncker , after all , has many senior politicians to accommodate , and their approval by the European Parliament is no minor matter .
And , though it was perhaps unsurprising that Cameron should be unenthusiastic about Juncker ’ s candidacy , the vehemence of his opposition was extraordinary .
Cameron no doubt wished to reassure those in his Conservative Party who doubt his euroskeptic zeal .
Even so , Cameron ’ s supposed remark that the UK was more likely to leave the EU if Juncker ’ s candidacy succeeded was strange and disquieting , not least because any renegotiation of the terms of British membership will be carried out primarily with other member states , not with the Commission .
Cameron ’ s bid to thwart Juncker ’ s candidacy mirrored his unsuccessful attempt to prevent the adoption of the EU ’ s fiscal compact in 2012 .
He overestimated German Chancellor Angela Merkel ’ s willingness and ability to support the British position .
Many influential Germans are reluctant to help Cameron in what they regard as his self-created European problem .
They will not allow Merkel much latitude here , even if she seeks it .
If Cameron ’ s advisers overestimated the support that they might have received from Merkel and others , they clearly underestimated the power and effectiveness of the European Parliament .
For many months , the European Parliament had made it clear that it had specific ideas about how it would exercise its new powers , granted by the Treaty of Lisbon , over the Commission presidency .
But the rapid post-election agreement among the Parliament ’ s major political groups to support Juncker caught Cameron off guard .
Far from enhancing British influence , threats of withdrawal have undermined the Cameron government ’ s credibility and influence within the EU , as colleagues have become disinclined to engage in significant compromises with a UK that may not be a member in two years .
Traditionally , EU heads of state and governments try to help one another with their domestic political problems .
But there is a growing sense in the European Council that Cameron is abusing this goodwill .
Thus , Cameron ’ s claim that Juncker ’ s election would make it more difficult to ensure the UK ’ s continued EU membership risks becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy .
To present Juncker ’ s candidacy as a matter of high political principle , with Cameron heroically but unsuccessfully standing alone against the dark forces of federalism and centralization , could have only reinforced English feelings of alienation from Europe .
That is less likely to be the case in Scotland .
If Cameron returns as prime minister after the general election in 2015 , he will face an uphill battle in renegotiating the terms of British EU membership , owing to resistance not only from his European partners , but also from his own Conservative Party , which is close to advocating British withdrawal .
Indeed , it is difficult to see how a re-elected Cameron could maintain the Conservative Party ’ s unity without endorsing a “ no ” vote in the referendum on the outcome of his own renegotiation .
Britain ’ s EU membership will be one of the major issues at stake in next year ’ s election .
It would be a tragedy if British voters cast their ballots without fully understanding the European implications of their choice .
One thing , however , seems certain : If Scotland votes for independence in September , a referendum within the rump UK on continued EU membership would be even less likely to produce a victory for those who wish to remain .
