Is China Overplaying Its Hand ?
LONDON – Remember the G-2 ?
America ’ s financial difficulties and foreign entanglements , together with China ’ s economic ascent , led many last year to envisage the emergence of a sort of global condominium between the two countries .
The G-8 had morphed by necessity into the G-20 , which , whenever it really mattered , would shed its zero : the United States and China would call the shots .
The idea was an over-simplified reflection of global realities .
It left out other emerging powers like Brazil and India .
It exaggerated the weakness of America , which remains the world ’ s only superpower .
It also reeked of the European Union ’ s peevish realization that its inability to get its act together on contentious issues was likely to place it firmly on the sidelines .
At the Copenhagen climate summit last December , don ’ t forget , a deal of sorts was cobbled together by the US and the emerging economies over the EU ’ s head , even though Europe had the most advanced set of proposals on tackling climate change .
Despite all this , there was enough credibility in the G-2 idea to give it legs .
President Barack Obama ’ s first visit to China last November , in which he accepted the role of pliant suitor at the court of the emperor , strengthened the impression of a deal between today ’ s great power and tomorrow ’ s .
That was last year .
This is now , and the idea looks a lot less plausible .
Why has the G-2 become so far-fetched so fast ?
First , the weak and largely jobless economic recovery in America and Europe shines the spotlight on China ’ s surging exports and the non-tariff barriers confronted by would-be importers to China .
You would have difficulty finding many members of the US Congress who do not ascribe some of America ’ s problems , including the hollowing out of the middle class , to China ’ s alleged currency manipulation .
China may point to the mountain of US Treasury bonds that it has bought up , thereby helping to sustain America ’ s budget deficit .
( What China ’ s recent sell-off of US T-bills will mean is , for now , anyone ’ s guess . )
They grumble at the injustice of blaming them for the global economy ’ s imbalances .
But China does have a case to answer .
Critics think that pegging the currency below its real value is part of a deliberate strategy to keep growth rolling , thereby avoiding the tricky politics of growing unemployment in a system that has no institutionalized channels for expressing popular grievances .
Unless this issue is addressed soon , it will lead inexorably to protectionism in America and Europe .
Advocates of tit-for-tat trade polices have even found supportive quotes from Adam Smith on the subject .
A second issue likely to blow the G-2 apart before it has actually taken shape is the impact of China ’ s authoritarianism on the free movement of information .
China ’ s clash with Google and US protests at cyber attacks on American targets remind the outside world , as well as America ’ s media and political elites , of the difference in values between the two countries .
This is particularly awkward at a time when the Chinese authorities seem to be taking an even harder line on dissent .
The human rights activist Liu Xiaobo has just been locked up for 11 years , drawing widespread condemnation .
The veteran campaigner for the release of political detainees , John Kamm , argues that this was “ a tipping point ” for the Chinese authorities , and that “ they will have to work themselves out of this in a less hard-line way . ”
The outcome of the climate talks in Copenhagen is a third reason for concern .
China has been widely accused of blocking a more ambitious result , mostly because of its resistance to external surveillance of its agreed targets , appealing to state sovereignty with all the self-righteousness that the world was accustomed to hearing from former US President George W. Bush .
Maybe the criticism is unfair .
But it certainly was unwise to allow a junior official to shout and wag his finger at Obama at one of the key Copenhagen meetings .
Americans , too , Chinese officials should remember , have “ face ” that they do not wish to lose .
Some people cite the spat over arms sales to Taiwan and the Dalai Lama ’ s visit to Washington as a fourth dampener on all the G-2 talk .
I am not so convinced .
These are fairly ritualistic issues , and Chinese officials are smart enough to know that , given the Chinese government ’ s recent behavior , Obama had little choice but to decide on them as he did .
Far more worrying is an issue that is yet to play out .
How will China react to any move to introduce tougher sanctions on Iran if no progress is made in efforts to prevent it from developing nuclear weapons ?
If China blocks action in the United Nations Security Council , relations with America will be set back to a point where any G-2 talk will seem laughable .
Deng Xiaoping , the architect of China ’ s economic rise , advised his colleagues to move stealthily in dealing with the rest of the world .
“ Hide your brightness , bide your time , ” he counseled .
As someone who believes that China ’ s rise should be good for the world , I hope that Deng ’ s wise advice will be heeded by those Chinese officials who seem to think that this is a good moment to start stamping their feet .
