Kill and Let Die
NEW YORK – By a strange but fitting coincidence , US President Barack Obama and his Republican challenger , Mitt Romney , held their final debate – which focused on foreign policy – & nbsp ; just as the new James Bond film , Skyfall , had its world premiere in London .
Although 007 , who turned 50 this year , is a British-born global brand , his influence on the American political psyche – and that psyche ’ s influence on Bond – is obvious .
Indeed , the latest production is a British-American partnership , and the violent special-operations action hero that Bond has come to embody reflects US assumptions about foreign policy and the rule of law .
The presidential debate merely reinforced the dominant real-time plotline : Assassinating people ( including US citizens ) solely on the president ’ s orders , once considered a war crime , has become an applause line .
That is as true for Romney as it has been for Obama .
Romney asserted that his foreign policy was “ pretty straightforward . ”
It was , he said , “ to go after the bad guys , to make sure we do our very best to interrupt them , to kill them , to take them out of the picture . ”
In other words , he would “ kill them ” where they were found , not only on the battlefield , but also in other sovereign countries , such as Pakistan , without charge or trial .
Obama , for his part , scored points by shaming Romney for having opposed the illegal raid that killed Osama Bin Laden .
Later , he championed the drone-strike strategy that he has used to “ kill bad guys ” without charge or trial .
Romney cheered .
Neither candidate mentioned that , by some estimates , the drone strikes have killed far more civilians than “ suspected terrorists . ”
The most authoritative study puts civilian deaths from drone strikes between June 2004 and mid-September 2012 at 474-881 , including 176 children .
Prior to the debate , CNN Chief White House correspondent Jessica Yellin asked Obama about his drone strategy .
His vaguely worded answer – the attacks “ must be authorized by our laws ” – made no mention of trials for those accused of terror crimes , of international war-crimes treaties , or any other bow to legality .
Indeed , US law cannot “ authorize ” drone strikes if they are carried out in countries with which the US is not at war .
Not even Americans are exempt .
Obama averred that American citizens “ are subject to the protections of the constitution and due process . ”
But Anwar al-Awlaki was a US citizen whom Obama directed to have killed in just this way .
So was al-Awlaki ’ s 16-year-old son , who was deliberately killed by a drone strike two weeks later .
I happened to watch the debate while surrounded by other American teenagers .
They had grown up in a post-9 / 11 environment saturated with the claim that US presidents may call anyone anywhere a “ bad guy ” and order his or her summary assassination .
“ That ’ s illegal , ” I kept saying when the candidates spoke of “ killing bad guys ” rather than arresting or extraditing them to face criminal charges .
None of these well-educated teenagers believed me .
Having grown up with presidents and presidential candidates tossing around the Bond meme virtually without challenge , they thought I was making things up .
“ Of course it ’ s legal , ” they said .
Both candidates had just told the entire world that they planned to continue to engage in what are , according to both US and international law , criminal acts .
The debate ’ s moderator , Bob Schieffer , who should have known better , said nothing .
In the background of this legal and moral failure is major cheerleading about the Bin Laden raid , in which a US Navy SEAL team swarmed a compound in a residential Pakistani neighborhood and assassinated a lot of people .
The book No Easy Day , written by a team member , is a bestseller .
Likewise , this month the magazine Vanity Fair published a hagiographic behind-the-scenes look at the steps that Obama and his team took in the run-up to the raid .
What is striking about No Easy Day and the Vanity Fair article is that the rationale for legal due process is reflected in every other paragraph .
The sources cited by Vanity Fair confirm that the intelligence on which the team made the decision to “ go in ” was impressionistic and incomplete ( that is , the target , judging from the length of his shadow , was “ tall and thin ” like Bin Laden , but his identity was not 100 % certain ) .
It was also clear from the piece that arresting the man would have been no more difficult – and perhaps easier – than killing him and jeopardizing his family .
Like the Navy SEALs and other special-ops teams now roaming the planet in secrecy , Bond is an extrajudicial killer , whether for personal revenge , as in Quantum of Solace ; geopolitical reasons , as in Die Another Day ; or simply because someone is in his way .
His bosses , too , identify targets from afar and order their annihilation , without revealing any awareness of ambiguity concerning who is a “ bad guy ” or acknowledging the possibility of poor intelligence or mistaken identity .
His innocent victims , meanwhile , are invisible .
Fabulous military technology is part of the spectacle and becomes its own justification – a character in the hero ’ s story line .
For 50 years , James Bond and his “ license to kill ” have stood for imperial justice beyond the limits of law .
But he is imaginary , as are his victims .
America ’ s violation of domestic and international law – and the bodies of innocents mown down by drones or operatives – are all too real .
