North Korea and Asia ’ s Widening Arms Race
North Korea ’ test of a long range missile may have failed , but that will not relieve regional jitters .
Indeed , it will only confirm what is already underway – an arms race across the region .
Southeast Asia ’ s return to prosperity since the financial crisis of 1997 has brought a region-wide splurge on new weapons .
Most Southeast Asian countries are busily modernizing their armed forces .
So far , most have done so without compromising their autonomy in security matters .
But , with China ’ s military build-up causing nervousness everywhere , and with North Korea a perpetual source of insecurity , many governments in the region are starting to work with outside powers .
Indonesia ’ s President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono has perhaps been the most assertive .
In addition to becoming more active in world diplomacy , Yudhoyono will meet Russian President Vladimir Putin in Moscow this month to discuss buying Russia ’ s newest fighter jets .
Indonesia is seeking to form an air-defense squadron of 12 jets , with eight Russian fighters to complement the two Russian Su-27SK ’ s and Su-30MKM ’ s that it has already bought .
Elsewhere in the region , Singapore has apparently opted to purchase 12 new F-15SG fighter aircraft from the United States .
Thailand ’ s Prime Minister , Thaksin Shinawatra , met Putin late last year and tentatively agreed to purchase 12 Su-30MKM ’ s .
Malaysia has agreed to buy 18 Su-30MKM ’ s over the next two years , while Vietnam has purchased 36 SU-27SK ’ s , 12 of which are already in service .
With the exception of Singapore , it seems that Russian fighter-attack aircraft are the region ’ s weapon of choice at the moment .
Russia ’ s growing slice of the local arms market worries the US , the world ’ s biggest weapons supplier and still Asia ’ s greatest military power .
Thus , for example , last November , the US lifted its six-year embargo on military sales to Indonesia , imposed in 1999 in response to human rights abuses in East Timor .
Indonesia immediately expressed its intention to purchase C-130 transport aircraft , as well as fast patrol boats to conduct “ anti-terrorism and anti-piracy measures . ”
Yet Indonesia is also trying to align itself with Asia ’ s rising power , China , by seeking greater defense and security cooperation .
As a result of these improved relations , Indonesia has received Chinese short-range missile technology .
The possibility that Southeast Asia ’ s governments might begin to play America and China off against each other is one of the concerns that most animates the latest US quadrennial defense review , which is intended to “ focus on the Pacific Ocean ” in awareness of China ’ s growing naval power .
Undoubtedly , the US will try to build closer ties with Indonesia through greater military cooperation , because Indonesia borders the region ’ s key sea lines of communications .
In particular , Indonesia will inevitably become involved in the tug of war between the US and China for influence over the vitally important Malacca Strait .
Because China must import vast quantities of oil through the Malacca Strait , that sea lane has become a central element in the country ’ s security strategy .
For this reason , China is attempting to use economic and military aid as leverage to improve relations even with countries with which it has had military confrontations with in the past , most prominently Vietnam and the Philippines .
India , too , is now joining the military build-up .
It has actively led regional multilateral joint exercises , such as the naval joint exercise that India ’ s navy hosted in the Andaman Sea , in the eastern Indian Ocean , earlier this year .
Nine Asian-Pacific countries took part , including Indonesia , Malaysia , Singapore , and Thailand .
Both India and China are each seeking greater influence over the strategically important country of Myanmar .
For example , after Myanmar signed an agreement with China in 2005 to supply natural gas , India responded by cutting its own gas deal with Myanmar .
South Korea has also , of course , joined the scramble .
President Roh Moo-hyun visited Malaysia and agreed to expand mutual economic cooperation mainly in information technology , bio-technology , and resources and energy .
Roh reportedly also discussed exporting defense materials worth $ 2.3 billion , including training aircraft , destroyers , and armed vehicles .
Moreover , in January 2006 , Korean Defense Minister Yoon agreed with the Philippines to deliver two used patrol boats .
In this crowded power play , only Japan is left out , choosing for the most part to remain aloof and cultivate its relations with the US , which is now to supply anti-missile technology to counter the North Korean threat .
But , despite deep historical animosity over World War II , there are increasing calls in the region for Japan to expand its influence to counterbalance China .
In reality , Japan is not ready for this , because it still strongly adheres to “ self-imposed restraints ” against “ influence over other countries in security and defense , ” including weapons exports .
In the 1960 ’ s , as its economic takeoff was proceeding , Japan initiated a serious dialogue with regional players , aiming to build stronger relations with countries that it had once conquered and occupied .
It is no overstatement to say that those efforts , which boosted trade and investment in the region , formed the foundation of Japan ’ s national power today .
But now Japan ’ s political and economic influence in South East Asia is gradually declining , owing in part to its failure to exert influence over security and defense matters .
At a time of regional uncertainty about North Korea and China – including the looming prospect of China ’ s first aircraft carrier – Japan ’ s participation in the evolving Asian security framework is fundamental to stability .
The time when Japan could remain on the sidelines is over .
