Nuclear Disarmament Disarmed
SINGAPORE – US President Barack Obama ’ s foreign-policy landscape is littered with deflated balloons .
Soaring speeches , high hopes , and great expectations have yielded minimal returns .
Across the Islamic world – from North Africa to Iraq , Afghanistan , and Pakistan – we see fragile relationships , unhappy transitions , unresolved conflicts , and outright attacks on the United States , despite Obama ’ s case for a new beginning , movingly articulated in his June 2009 speech in Cairo .
Israel , deaf to Obama ’ s urging , is further from reconciliation with Palestine , and closer to war with Iran , than it has ever been . & nbsp ;
Likewise , for all the effort put into improving America ’ s most important bilateral relationships – those with China and Russia – ties with both countries have become increasingly tense , owing most recently to the Kremlin ’ s intransigence over Syria and official Chinese behavior in the South China Sea .
But the balloon that has deflated the most may be the one that Obama sent aloft in Prague in April 2009 , when he made the case for rapid and serious movement toward a world free of nuclear weapons .
A good start was made with the US-Russia New START treaty to limit significantly strategic-weapon deployments , the largely successful Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) Review Conference , and the productive , US-hosted Nuclear Security Summit .
But , over the last year , the spirit of optimism that energized these developments has , sadly , gone missing .
This month , a group of former prime ministers , foreign and defense ministers , and military , diplomatic , and scientific leaders from 14 countries met in Singapore as the Asia Pacific Leadership Network for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament ( APLN ) .
They expressed their profound disappointment at what they described as the “ evaporation of political will ” evident in global and regional efforts toward nuclear disarmament .
Apart from another reasonably productive Nuclear Security Summit in Seoul in March 2012 , the news on the disarmament front over the last year has certainly been bleak .
Further US-Russia arms-reduction negotiations ground to a halt long before the American presidential election season began .
Meanwhile , no other nuclear-armed state has expressed the slightest interest in bilateral or multilateral reduction negotiations until the two major powers , which currently hold 95 % of the world ’ s stockpile , make further major cuts .
Cautious initial moves by the US to modify its nuclear doctrine – toward accepting that nuclear weapons ’ “ sole purpose ” is to respond to nuclear threats , and not any other kind – have gone nowhere .
Negotiations to “ de-alert ” the 2,000 nuclear weapons that remain at absurdly dangerous , Cold War-era launch readiness have never really started .
There are also no signs of movement on bringing into force the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty ( CTBT ) .
And there has been zero progress on breaking the negotiating stalemate on a new treaty to ban production of fissile material for nuclear weapons ; negligible progress on a conference to create a nuclear-weapons-free zone in the Middle East ( a key outcome of the 2010 NPT Review Conference ) ; and actual acceleration of nuclear-weapons programs in India , Pakistan , and China .
So who is to blame ?
Some charge the Obama administration itself with sending mixed signals or worse : The US , they note , has modernized its own nuclear arsenal , developed new ballistic-missile defense and conventional weapons systems , and been too willing to accommodate its European and Northeast Asian allies ’ nervousness about limiting the nuclear dimension of the extended deterrence umbrella under which they shelter .
But it is hard to ignore the huge constraint that an intensely partisan and negative political environment in the US has imposed .
Republican intransigence has precluded US ratification of the CTBT , which would be a big international circuit-breaker ; almost killed the New START treaty at birth ; and has caused the bar for further negotiations with Russia and China to be set almost impossibly high .
Nor is there any sign that any of these positions would be modified should Mitt Romney , the Republican challenger , become president .
International concerns have been compounded – certainly for the APLN leaders – by the shrillness of Romney ’ s statements on China and Taiwan , as well as his extraordinary identification of Russia as America ’ s “ number one geopolitical foe . ”
There are those who will say that it is naïve to want a world free of nuclear weapons , much less to think that it can be achieved .
But it is not naïve to be concerned about the most indiscriminately inhumane weapons of destruction ever invented – 23,000 of which still exist – with a combined destructive capability of 150,000 Hiroshima bombs .
And it is not naïve to believe that non-proliferation and disarmament are inextricably connected : that so long as any state retains nuclear weapons , others will want them .
The genuinely naïve – or ignorant – position is to believe that statesmanship and foolproof controls , rather than sheer dumb luck , have enabled the world to go almost seven decades without a nuclear-weapons catastrophe .
It is not naïve to believe that nuclear deterrence is both fragile operationally , and of thoroughly dubious utility in sustaining the peace .
Nor is it naïve to believe that even if nuclear weapons cannot be un-invented , they can ultimately be outlawed .
Obama cannot be faulted for trying .
Even deflated balloons are better than a devastated planet .
