An India-China Axis ?
Is a new alignment between India and China rising to balance America ’ s global power ?
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao just completed a four-day visit to India during which 11 agreements were signed , including a comprehensive five-year strategic cooperation pact .
In addition , Wen announced that China would support India ’ s bid for a permanent seat on an expanded UN Security Council , and opposed the inclusion of Japan , which the United States supports for a Council seat .
With over a third of the world ’ s population and two of the globe ’ s highest economic growth rates , an alliance between China and India could be a serious factor in world politics .
While both are developing countries – many of whose people remain impoverished – they also boast impressive capabilities in information age technologies both for civilian and military purposes .
As Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh put it during Wen ’ s visit , “ India and China can together reshape the world order . ”
The two countries ’ recent rapprochement marks a huge change from the hostility that bedeviled their relations following their 1962 war over a disputed border in the Himalayas .
When I first visited India as an American government official in the late 1970 ’ s , I was struck by my Indian hosts ’ fixation on gaining equal status with China .
In 1998 , when India tested its nuclear weapons , the defense minister referred to China , and then Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee spoke of China as India ’ s number one enemy .
By contrast , on more recent visits to India , I have found my hosts referring to the need to learn from China .
Trade between the two giants has grown from $ 100 million in 1994 to nearly $ 14 billion last year , and India ’ s minister of commerce and industry has predicted that it will double by this decade ’ s end .
One agreement signed during Wen ’ s visit was a new set of guiding principles on how to settle boundary disputes between the two countries .
While improved relations and diminished prospects for conflict are welcome , relations between India and China are more complex than they appear at first .
Not long before the visit of the Chinese premier , India hosted US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice .
Ever since President Bill Clinton ’ s visit to India , but especially under President George W. Bush , the US has moved from relative indifference to India to the development of a strong strategic relationship .
This new approach might have seemed threatened by Al Qaeda ’ s attacks on America , which led to a strengthening of US relations with Pakistan ’ s General Parvez Musharaff .
But the US reassured India that they faced a common threat from transnational terrorism , and that the old Cold War pairings of India and Pakistan were outdated .
Secretary Rice made this plain during her March visit , stressing the importance of a strategic relationship , including a willingness to consider trade in high technology , nuclear energy , and co-production of fighter aircraft such as F-16 ’ s and F-18 ’ s .
Shortly after Rice ’ s visit , the US announced that it would honor a long-standing promise to sell F-16 ’ s to Pakistan .
While the announcement incited Indian protests , they were relatively muted compared to the past .
One reason is that the State Department also issued a statement that America would help India to become a major world power in the twenty-first century , involving both a strategic and economic dialogue .
Several factors underpin this new American attitude toward India .
Rhetoric about “ the world ’ s two largest democracies ” is not new , but it fits with the Bush administration ’ s new emphasis on promoting democracy .
The increasing role of the Indian diaspora in the US , particularly in the information industries , also had an influence , as has the rise in bilateral trade accompanying India ’ s surging economic growth .
Equally important are strategic concerns about transnational terrorism and the rise of Chinese power .
The rise of China is a major factor in the politics of the twenty-first century .
China has tripled the size of its economy in the past two decades , and has been increasing its military strength .
While both India and the US seek trade and good relations with China , both are aware – and wary – of China ’ s growing strength .
Thus , both seek to hedge their bets , and what better way to do so than by improving their strategic relationship ?
Neither country aims to restrain China in the way the “ containment ” strategy aimed at an aggressive Soviet Union during the Cold War , but both want to create an international structure that does not tempt China to throw its weight around .
India has a 3,000-kilometer border with China , a 2,000-kilometer border with Pakistan ( which has been the beneficiary of Chinese military and nuclear assistance ) , and growing concerns about the security of sea routes in the Indian Ocean over which oil and other trade move .
As one Indian strategist put it to me during a recent visit , “ By 2030 , we envisage the US , China , and India as the three largest powers in world politics .
We don ’ t want a China- or a US-dominated world , but if we had to choose , it would be easier for us to live with the latter . ”
So , while improvement in India-China relations is welcome , it is unlikely to herald the beginning of an India-China alliance against the US .
Rather , it more likely represents another move in India ’ s age-old tradition of managing regional balances of power .
