In Defense of World Government
WASHINGTON , DC – Unlike in the past , there probably will not be large protests at the upcoming Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank , or at the subsequent World Trade Organization meeting of trade ministers in Bali .
But that is not because these international institutions are perceived as effective and legitimate .
It is because , compared to a decade ago , they are seen as too small and impotent in the face of larger market forces to bother about .
The 2008 global financial crisis and its aftermath have caused a loss of faith not only in markets , but also in the ability of democratic governments to ensure that the benefits of market-led growth are widely shared .
On economic , financial , tax , trade , and climate issues , many people around the world are fearful or angry , believing & nbsp ; that a worldwide cabal of bankers , corporations , and G-20 elites uses insider deals to monopolize the benefits of globalization .
But few people – whether ordinary citizens or internationally oriented economists – recognize that our seemingly weak and ineffectual multilateral institutions are the world ’ s best hope for managing and democratizing the global market .
Only these institutions are capable of preventing the elite capture and insider rents that are putting global prosperity at long-term risk .
To be sure , a growing number of mainstream economists are paying attention to the costs of unfettered global markets .
There is greater concern that cross-border capital mobility makes it harder to collect taxes and enforce financial regulations at home ; and that trade agreements , combined with global supply chains , are exacerbating job losses in developed economies .
Likewise , global integration means that eurozone distress threatens the US economy , while the US debt-ceiling standoff threatens financial markets everywhere .
Yet many economists are as ambivalent about “ global ” rules and institutions as ordinary people are .
They worry that international bodies , lacking democratic oversight , make it easier for the rich , powerful , and well connected to run things to their own advantage .
Dani Rodrik ’ s 2011 book The Globalization Paradox criticizes globalization enthusiasts for wanting full liberalization of foreign trade and capital movements ; he argues that when democratically established social arrangements clash with the demands of globalization , national priorities should take precedence .
True , global “ government ” can go too far – for example , when WTO rules conflict with sensible local environmental safeguards , or when IMF requirements for developing-country borrowers narrow the scope for creative heterodoxy in growth and poverty-reducing policies .
It is also true that countries dependent on official aid and IMF loans can face unwarranted pressure to conform to outsiders ’ wrongheaded policy views – from premature opening of capital markets in Asia in the 1990 ’ s to force-fed austerity in Greece and Spain today .
But there is a more positive way to look at the issue .
Sometimes , even powerful sovereign states use global commitments to help them lock in sensible policies that might otherwise be difficult to initiate and sustain .
A 2009 G-20 agreement to refrain from protectionism in the aftermath of the global financial crisis helped to fend off protectionism .
Today , a G-8 or G-20 agreement on exchanges of tax information could help to shore up national revenue bases and the reputations of governments for tax fairness .
Less obviously , when governments provide funding for the IMF , they can side-step domestic political resistance to assisting countries in trouble and to rules that yield benefits only in the long term .
Indeed , embedding fair rules on trade , finance , development , climate change , and other issues in the major global institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank is more important than ever , given the rise of China and other emerging-market economies .
With these new powers seeking a place at the geopolitical table , they and the older powers can benefit from mutually agreed global “ containment ” of their domestic parochialism and short-sightedness .
In other words , global rules and institutions can make it easier and more likely that all involved will hew to their own citizens ’ broader interests – and thus to the global commonweal as well .
For example , pledges to cut carbon emissions , while lacking any enforcement mechanism , may be helping countries to do the right thing for their own citizens ’ children and grandchildren .
Moreover , fair global rules can help to “ democratize ” the global market , especially if they are embedded in institutions with a degree of autonomy for highly professional staff who can act with some independence from short-term political pressures .
It should come as no surprise that the anti-globalists ’ erstwhile punching bags – the World Bank and , increasingly , the IMF and the WTO – are more open and transparent than many of their member states .
They thus provide a vehicle for ordinary people to lobby for fairer rules and policies , not only in their own countries but also in others .
One example of this was the citizen-based movement that fought WTO intellectual-property rules , adopted at the behest of the US and other rich countries , that were sustaining high prices for anti-AIDS drugs in Africa .
The campaign succeeded , resulting in changes that dramatically increased poor countries ’ access to such drugs .
Ultimately , as I argue in greater detail in a paper for the Global Citizens Foundation , ordinary people are better off with global institutions , notwithstanding their weakness relative to their most powerful sovereign members and their lack of legitimacy relative to their democratic members .
Of course , a world “ government ” could never have democratic legitimacy ; for this reason , it is a scary idea .
But , like a socialist utopia or pure libertarianism , the idea of world government can illuminate a sensible path for capturing the benefits of a more effective global polity .
Given a fully interdependent global market , we should worry less about the risk of bad rules and policies from imperfect global institutions and more about how to exploit these institutions ’ potential to lock in policies at home and abroad that minimize risks and maximize opportunities for people everywhere .
