Madonna and Africa ’ s Children
Madonna usually only makes headlines in the world ’ s tabloids .
But her adoption of a boy from Malawi whose mother had died and whose farmer father could not feed him has filled opinion pages in serious papers everywhere .
Her decision has raised the profile of Malawi , home to recurrent food shortages and seasonal famines .
A crucial experiment is now underway in Malawi and other places that may help to expand farm output so that other poor farmers need not surrender their children for adoption .
In the past few years , there has been a sea change in attitudes among African governments towards the importance of farming .
Once pushing industrialization at the expense of agriculture , African leaders routinely ignored ordinary farmers .
Now they are showing a new respect for tillers of the land , realizing that the fastest way out of extreme poverty for ordinary people is to increase both farm output and crop prices .
Yet getting farmers to grow the right crops , and more of them , is easier said than done .
Farmers lack the money for crucial inputs such as fertilizer .
They also lack critical skills .
Sadly , African governments have failed miserably in teaching farmers improved methods .
In Malawi , for example , where nearly everyone farms for a living , a confidential study by the British government this year found that “ the agricultural extension service has collapsed , ” a victim of the same bureaucratic ineptitude and petty corruption that undermines public services throughout this poor country .
The costs of the government ’ s failure to support farmers can be seen in the stunted bodies of children and the poor diets of adults , even in a year when Malawi is witnessing bumper harvests of corn , the country ’ s staple .
“ Where are we going to get proteins ? ” Philere Nkhoma , an adviser to farmers in Malawi , asks .
“ Let ’ s have milk .
Let ’ s have meat .
Let ’ s have eggs . ”
In pursuit of protein-rich meals , Nkhoma is pushing her cluster of villages , representing a thousand households in all , to begin raising chickens for eggs and meat , cows for milk , and “ exotic ” vegetables such as cabbage for vitamins .
Her can-do attitude is matched by remarkable energy .
In the space of just three weeks , she visited 96 villages to promote chicken-raising .
To be sure , Nkhoma ’ s ideas about how to transform the lives of peasant farmers in Africa are not new .
Experts have been preaching crop diversity , irrigation , and improved soil nutrients for decades .
What has been missing , however , are energetic extension workers , brimming with pride in their own people and passion for new approaches .
Nkhoma is one of the best front-line farm advisers in Malawi , which is why she works on the country ’ s United Nations-sponsored Millennium Village , one of only 12 in Africa .
Nkhoma ’ s own story mirrors the shift in the status of farming in Africa .
She is part of a new generation of urban Africans committed to integrating farmers and markets – and to getting their hands dirty .
“ The field is my office , ” she says .
After working for more than ten years as a government farm adviser and accomplishing little , she was chosen by a foreign donor to gain a bachelor ’ s degree in agriculture .
After graduation , she joined the Millennium Village project , which gives her wide latitude to innovate , together with the resources to set in motion her inspired plans .
“ If you have an energetic extension worker , you only need to change the mindset of the people , ” she says .
“ When that happens , change can occur very quickly .
But you must have the resources , the support .
If you don ’ t have the resources , all your work is for nothing . ”
That ’ s where the UN and the economist Jeffrey Sachs come in .
Sachs has raised about $ 150 million for the villages , enough for five years of support .
Each household in the project receives about $ 100 a year in seeds , fertilizers , and other supports .
Sachs knows the freebies to farmers guarantee gains in the short run , but he ’ s convinced that African villagers , once freed from “ the poverty trap , ” can thrive on their own .
Nkhoma wants this dream of global technocrats to become a reality for her fellow Malawians .
She recognizes that any lasting transformation in African agriculture will take place , not only village by village , but also farmer by farmer .
“ Even if you teach people in groups , they experience their problems individually , ” she says .
“ So I must help them one by one . ”
Personal assistance is “ time consuming , ” she admits , but it is individuals who “ make the difference . ”
The same is true of advisers like Nkhoma .
African farmers need improved technologies and better access to agricultural markets in Europe and the United States .
Instead of more Madonnas , who in the glare of global publicity saves a lone child ’ s life , Africa needs more Nkhomas : passionate cheerleaders with deep local knowledge and a willingness to stand alongside peasants in the fields in order to grow food for all the other children .
