It ’ s Politics , Not a Pogrom
MOSCOW : First it was Yids ( Jews ) .
Then the Romanovs , the nobility , and the kulaks .
After 1991 , it was Lenin and the communists .
Now , it seems , its is the turn of the Jews again .
Like history in the old saying , Russian hatreds repeat themselves .
Luckily , the other half of that saying also appears to be true , for Moscow ’ s most recent bout of anti-Semitism is a case of history repeating itself , not as tragedy , but as farce .
The October Revolution of 1917 , with its attractive slogans of internationalism , multi-culturalism and ethnic equality was a liberating time for Russian Jews .
It didn ’ t last long .
With Lenin 's death in 1924 , Stalin embarked on another round of chest thumping for " Russia 's Greatness " .
This chauvinist period , however , lasted for over six decades , and was marked by quotas for all those with not-quite-Russian-sounding names .
Jews in particular were restricted in their numbers at universities , research institutes , the foreign service , and in government .
One notation in the Soviet passport was a sad reality for those who could not list themselves as Russian under " nationality , " but were , instead , labeled " Georgian " or " Armenian " or , God forbid a policeman was examining it , " Jewish . "
No talking your way out of trouble with that in your documents .
The August revolution of 1991 appeared to undo much of the anti-Semitic nastiness imposed since 1917 .
Other nationalities , including people of Jewish origin , began to appear in the political spotlight .
Chubais , Livshitz , Nemtsov , Yavlinksy , and Kiriyenko among the reformers .
Berezovsky and Guzinsky among the new plutocrats .
Vladimir Zhirinovsky among the ranting would-be fascists .
Russia , freed from its ethnic and mental straitjacket , was letting its most resourceful , entrepreneurial , vibrant , and yes , cynical , citizens climb to the top .
With so many " different " names bestriding society , it is no surprise that some Russians , reared on the endemic paranoia of communism , smelled a conspiracy .
The hysterical Zhirinovsky , denying his roots , said " Jews are the most powerful , the most talented and the most rich , " and so were able to take over in 1917 and again after 1991 .
Communists , too , following the good old Russian slogan " kill the Yids , save Russia " insisted that , yes , the Jews were conspiring , once again , to ruin Russia .
So communist General Albert Makashov ’ s recent remarks that " the Russian Government should impose quotas on hiring non-ethnic Russians " should not have been surprising .
No , the surprise was that it took so long for communists to trot out this old card , and that the echo was so feeble .
The two leading " nationalist " candidates for president in 2000- Aleksander Lebed , and Moscow mayor Yuri Luzhkov - were conspicuous in not picking up this old battle cry .
That the Communist party leader Gennady Zyuganov didn 't rebuke Makashov right away , and that the Duma voted against depriving the general of his parliamentary immunity and special rights ( it did , however , pass a resolution against stirring up ethnic conflicts , mentioning Makashov by name ) probably reflects mental inertia rather than outright support .
For Duma members , the majority being communist , there yet remains the notion that only they , as communists , represent the country .
Everyone else really isn ’ t Russia at all .
Here the old Leninist idea is in play : the party isn ’ t just part of society , it is society .
As for Zyuganov , he couldn ’ t publicly disagree with a party member , again on hoary Leninist grounds : division within the party will bring an end to the party .
What is surprising though is the reaction ( at home and abroad ) to General Makashov ’ s tantrums and the actions and inactions in the Duma and Communist Party .
Over more than a month every TV show , every newspaper in Russia and abroad has been discussing , condemning , and thus reinforcing the incident .
This focus has , however , smoked out what may be the real target of communist rage : the media .
Another communist Duma deputy , the First Secretary of the city of Moscow ’ s communist organization , Alexander Kuvaev called for the formation of a special organization to deal with journalists who " sold themselves to the regime , and have become the enemies of the people . "
War to the last breath was declared by Kuvaev on the media , and he was soon echoed by the feral Makashov , who suddenly found reporters " acting worse than the worst of the Yids . "
Here Zyuganov reacted quickly , saying that " prosecution is not the tool communists should exercise , and the Communist Party is the party of the future , not the party of revenge . "
The saddest part of this rhetoric of hate is not that pogroms are poised to be unleashed , but that so little has changed for so many in their mindsets .
People continue to think in ways typical to authoritarian / totalitarian regimes , where blaming others is the standard escape for your own inadequacies , and where anyone who is even the slightest bit different may be an enemy .
So the search for scapegoats proceeds , not in earnest and with energy , but as a reflex , the death throes of the old ways of doing things .
For the cries of the anti-Semites cannot hide the fact that the man the Communists now support as prime minister , Yevgeny Primakov , is himself of Jewish origins .
No , what is important is not the rants of men like Makashov and Kuvaev , but the ditherings of Zyuganov and the general silence of the Duma .
In that , there is a sign that even the Communists recognize that , at the end of one century and the beginning of a new one , the old vulgar tricks are not enough .
