Is Greece Japan ’ s Future ?
TOKYO – The Greek fiscal crisis has sent shockwaves through markets around the world .
In just two years , Greece ’ s budget deficit jumped from 4 % of GDP to 13 % .
Now other European Union countries seem under threat , and the EU and the International Monetary Fund are grappling to stem the crisis before another nation trembles .
But the problem of excessive government debt is not confined to the EU .
Indeed , Japan ’ s debt-to-GDP ratio is around 170 % – much higher than in Greece , where the figure stands at around 110 % .
But , despite the grim parallel , Japan ’ s government does not seem to think that it needs to take the problem seriously .
Last year ’ s general election brought regime change to Japan .
Yukio Hatoyama ’ s Democratic Party of Japan ( DPJ ) thrashed the Liberal Democratic Party , which had governed almost continuously for a half-century .
But Hatoyama ’ s government has ignored macroeconomic management by abolishing the policy board charged with discussing economic and fiscal policy .
Instead , the government has focused on increasing spending to meet its grand electoral promises , including a huge amount for new grants to households and farmers .
As a result , the ratio of tax revenue to total spending this fiscal year has fallen below 50 % for the first time in Japan ’ s postwar history .
If the government continues on this path , many expect next year ’ s budget deficit to widen further .
Despite the weakness of Japan ’ s fiscal position , the market for Japanese Government Bonds ( JGBs ) remains stable , at least for now .
Japan had a similar experience in the 1990 ’ s , the country ’ s so-called “ lost decade . ”
At that time , Japan ’ s budget deficit soared after the country ’ s property bubble burst , causing economic stagnation .
But JGBs are mostly purchased by domestic organizations and households .
In other words , the private sector ’ s huge savings financed the government ’ s deficit , so that capital flight never occurred in the way it has in Greece , despite the desperate budget situation .
But this situation has deteriorated recently , for two reasons .
First , the total volume of JGBs has become extremely high relative to households ’ net monetary assets , which stand at roughly ¥ 1,100 trillion .
But in a mere three years , total JGBs will exceed this total .
This suggests that taxpayer assets will no longer back government debt , at which point confidence in the JGB market is likely to shatter .
Second , Japanese society is aging – fast .
As a result , the country ’ s household savings rate will decrease dramatically , making it increasingly difficult for the private sector to finance budget deficits .
Moreover , an aging population implies further pressure on fiscal expenditure , owing to higher pension and health-care costs , with all of Japan ’ s baby boomers set to reach age 65 in about five years .
The increase in social-welfare costs is expected to start around 2013 , three years from now .
Given these factors , the JGB market , which has been stable so far , will face serious trouble in the years ahead .
After averting its eyes since coming to power , Japan ’ s new government has finally started discussing tax hikes .
One possibility is an increase in the consumption tax , which currently stands at 5 % – low in comparison with other industrialized countries .
But tax hikes alone with not close Japan ’ s fiscal black hole .
What is most needed is consistent and stable macroeconomic management .
Such management is possible .
Between 2001and 2006 , Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi aggressively tackled Japan ’ s fiscal problems .
Koizumi sought smaller government and set clear numerical targets for fiscal consolidation , including a primary budget balance in 10 years .
Surprisingly , Koizumi was almost successful .
Japan ’ s primary deficit of ¥ 28 trillion in 2002 was reduced to only ¥ 6 trillion by 2007 .
If this effort had been continued for two more years , a primary budget surplus could have been realized .
But over the past three years , the prime minister changed each year , and a populist trend in fiscal expenditure took hold .
What is needed most now is for the DPJ government to restore comprehensive economic management .
A tax hike is only part of that .
Without a strategy for growth , an effort to reduce government spending , and a policy to stop deflation , a tax hike will not solve the problem .
Indeed , some economists fear that a fiscal crisis could erupt even aftera tax hike is passed .
Once that happens , the impact on neighboring countries – and on the world economy – will be huge compared to the current European problem .
After all , Japan remains the world ’ s second largest economy , accounting for about one-third of Asia ’ s GDP , and 8 % of global output , whereas the GDP share of Greece in the EU is about 3 % .
In some countries , lower military expenditures and interest rates has helped to improve a weak fiscal position .
But in the case of Japan , military spending is already low , as are interest rates .
This suggests that fiscal rescue will be extremely difficult if and when trouble starts – and underscores the urgent need for real political leadership now .
