Putin \ u0027s Dictatorship of Law Begins Lawlessly
BOSTON : Wide agreement exists among Russian intellectuals as well as foreign observers that one of the most important – if not the most important task – facing post-Soviet Russia is establishment of the rule of law , the foundation of democracy and a free market economy .
Yet doubts persist whether President Putin and his associates realize this fact .
Some of their actions and pronouncements suggest that in their pursuit of a " strong state , " they may be willing to sacrifice law to political expediency .
During nearly all her history , Russia was a stranger to law as a principle binding ruler and ruled .
Until the beginning of the twentieth century , tsars knew no legal constraints , such as impeded the absolutism of West European sovereigns .
They did not have to respect private property in land because until 1785 they owned all the land .
Nor did they have to honor the rights of the nobility , inasmuch as until the middle of the eighteenth century all nobles were their servants .
The peasants , who made up nine-tenths of the population , consisted overwhelmingly of serfs of the Crown or the gentry and as such enjoyed no legal rights whatsoever .
The first Russian legal codes were compiled in the 1830 's and the first effective courts appeared in the 1860 's .
Law , of course , did exist but it did not serve to protect people from the arbitrary authority of government : instead , it was an instrument of administration .
Suffice it to say that tsarist officials could not be sued without the permission of their superiors .
And as for private persons standing up to the government in court , the idea was utterly inconceivable .
The traditions of law were , therefore , very shallow in Russia when the Bolsheviks seized power .
The seven decades of their dictatorship blighted the little bits of a law-based society that had taken root root .
Lenin defined his " dictatorship of the proletariat " as " power that is limited by nothing , by no laws , that is restrained by absolutely no rules , that rests directly on coercion . "
Such , indeed , it was .
President Putin has asserted that in contemporary Russia law will be a " dictator " .
But some evidence suggests that he conceives law in the traditional Russian sense , that is , not as a principle binding equally the state and its citizens , but as device by means of which the state promotes its own interests .
One illustration of this attitude is the recent raid on the headquarters of the Media-Most conglomerate whose television and radio stations , as well as newspapers , have been critical of the Chechnya campaign .
The raid – by heavily armed and masked men ! – was allegedly carried out to investigate unlawful actions by the company 's personnel .
But it was a highly unlawful procedure in itself , for which no apologies have been offered as of yet .
Another instance has to do with Putin 's effort to rein in the governors in charge of Russia 's 89 provinces .
During the past decade these elected officials have acquired the powers of feudal barons and in some cases act in clear violation of the constitution .
To bring them to heel , Putin has appointed seven officials ( mostly ex-generals and KGB men ) resembling tsarist Governors-General who will serve as his agents .
In announcing this move , Putin added , ominously , that he would " dismiss " governors who were found to act have acted unlawfully .
This statement itself was unlawful because , according to Russia 's constitution , dismissals of duly elected officials should occur only by virtue of court orders .
Perhaps this was a slip of the presidential tongue .
But a faux pas of this kind , if that is what it was , reflects a mentality that places power over law .
A third illustration concerns Moscow 's recent defiance of the United Nations war crimes tribunal by hosting a visit of Yugoslav Defence Minister , Dragoljub Ojdanic .
Mr Ojdanic was indicted a year ago by the Hague-based tribunal , a court established with Moscow 's assent , for crimes against humanity in Kosovo .
As a member of the UN Security Council , Russia was duty-bound to arrest him .
Yet it treated him as an official guest , granting him meetings with the Defense Minister and chief of staff of the armed forces .
The trouble is that Vladimir Putin , although a graduate of Saint Petersburg University Law School , served many years in the KGB and surrounds himself with veterans of the KGB , an institution whose main domestic function was repressing dissent .
The mind-set of these people is geared to achieving their objectives without regard to legal niceties .
Such a background is difficult to overcome , especially if the new mission is the establishment of a " strong state . "
It bodes ill for Russia which has yet to learn that political strength derives not from riding roughshod over the civil rights of the citizenry but from creating , through strict observance of the law , a sense of shared interest between government and people .
