Obama the Pragmatist
CAMBRIDGE – Last month , in his address to the graduating cadets at the US Military Academy at West Point , President Barack Obama stated that some of America ’ s most costly mistakes since World War II were the result not of restraint , but of a “ willingness to rush into military adventures without thinking through the consequences . ”
Though Obama may be right , the speech did little to mollify critics who have accused him of passivity and weakness , particularly regarding Syria and Ukraine .
This frustration can be blamed partly on the impossibly high expectations that Obama set in his early speeches , in which he inspired voters with promises of systemic transformation .
Unlike most candidates , Obama maintained this transformational rhetoric even after it secured him his victory in the 2008 campaign .
Indeed , a series of addresses in the first year of his presidency raised expectations even higher , by establishing the goal of a nuclear-weapons-free world , promising to revamp America ’ s approach to the Middle East , and pledging to “ bend history in the direction of justice . ”
It is often said that democratic politicians campaign in poetry and govern in prose .
But there is no reason to believe that Obama was being disingenuous about his objectives .
His vision simply could not withstand the recalcitrant and difficult world that confronted him ; so he had to adjust .
After just one year in office , the man who had promised transformational leadership became a “ transactional ” leader – pragmatic to a fault .
And , despite what his critics say , this was a positive development .
While vowing to use force when America ’ s vital interests are at stake and rejecting pessimistic projections of national decline , Obama has – unlike his predecessor , George W. Bush – relied more heavily on diplomacy than force .
For this , his critics have accused him of failing to promote American values and retreating into isolationism .
But restraint is not isolationism .
No one accused President Dwight Eisenhower of isolationism when he accepted a stalemate in the Korean War , refused to intervene at Dien Bien Phu , resisted recommendations from senior military officers regarding islands near Taiwan , watched the Red Army invade Hungary , or refused to back allies in the Suez Canal crisis .
Nor did those who now disparage Obama ’ s measured response to Russian President Vladimir Putin ’ s recent annexation of Ukrainian territory call Bush an isolationist for his weak response to Putin ’ s invasion of Georgia in 2008 .
In fact , Obama ’ s response to Russia ’ s aggression in Ukraine reflects his long-term vision .
Though Putin has gained possession of Crimea , he has lost access to some of the resources that he needs to achieve his goal of restoring Russia ’ s former glory as a great power – and has reinvigorated NATO in the process .
Effective foreign policymaking requires an understanding of not only international and transnational systems , but also the intricacies of domestic politics in multiple countries .
It also demands recognition of just how little is known about “ building nations , ” particularly after revolutions – a process that should be viewed in terms of decades , not years .
In 1789 , few observers in Paris would have predicted that a Corsican would lead French forces to the banks of the Nile within ten years .
And foreign intervention in the French Revolution only fanned nationalist flames .
In such a complex and uncertain context , prudence is critical , and bold action based on a grandiose vision can be extremely dangerous .
This is what advocates of a more muscular approach to today ’ s revolutions in the Middle East often forget .
Of course , it makes sense for US leaders to nudge events at the margins in an effort to advance democratic values in the long term .
But attempting to direct revolutions that they do not fully understand would be a mistake , with potentially serious negative consequences for all parties involved .
In fact , in the twentieth century , US presidents who pursued transformational foreign policies were neither more effective nor more ethical .
Woodrow Wilson ’ s bet on the Versailles Treaty of 1919 contributed to the disastrous isolationism of the 1930 ’ s .
And the bets that John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson made in Vietnam had devastating consequences , some of which are still being felt today .
More recently , George W. Bush – who famously declared that he did not play “ small ball ” – attempted to transform the Middle East with his “ freedom agenda . ” More than a decade later , the US is still struggling to withdraw from the conflicts that he initiated .
Obama ’ s foreign-policy mistakes , by contrast , have had only modest repercussions . To use Obama ’ s own baseball metaphor , aiming for achievable singles and doubles is often a more effective strategy than swinging wildly in an effort to hit a home run , only to strike out .
President George H. W. Bush understood this .
A transactional leader , he famously stated that he did not do “ the vision thing . ”
But , like Eisenhower , he steered the US through multiple crises , overseeing one of the more successful periods of US foreign policy in the last half-century .
Of course , some of the criticism of Obama ’ s speech was valid .
But much of it was just partisan politics .
To be constructive , the debate about Obama ’ s foreign policy must account for twentieth-century US history .
In foreign policy , as in medicine , leaders must “ first do no harm . ”
Obama understands that .
One hopes that the relentless uninformed criticism that his pragmatic policies have elicited does not drive his successor to revert to a risky transformational approach .
Read more from " The Middle East Meltdown "
