Japan As Number Three
TOKYO – China has now officially supplanted Japan as the world ’ s second largest economy .
The question for Japan is whether or not the country will continue to tumble down the list of the world ’ s great economies , or whether its politicians will return to a path of reform that can revive growth .
That the ruling Democratic Party of Japan now seems trapped in a power struggle between Prime Minister Naoto Kan and party power broker Ichiro Ozawa suggests that serious economic reform is not at the top of the DPJ agenda .
In the 1980 ’ s , Japan ’ s annual GDP growth averaged 4.5 ％ ; since the early 1990 ’ s , the economy has been virtually stagnant , averaging barely 1 % annual growth .
In the 1990 ’ s , Japan ’ s government , grossly misjudging the sources of the economy ’ s difficulties , vastly increased government expenditures on public works , but ignored supply-side adjustments .
This policy created new vested interests , and thus a new political environment , as construction companies and other beneficiaries of government contracts began donating heavily to the ruling Liberal Democratic Party .
This kept the LDP ’ s coffers brimming , but posed the risk of a serious financial crisis in the late 1990 ’ s .
It was in these circumstances that Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi took office in April 2001 .
Under Koizumi ’ s leadership , insolvent banks were made whole again .
At the start of Koizumi ’ s government , 8.4 % of bank loans in Japan were non-performing .
By the end of his tenure , the rate was down to 1.5 % , restoring the country ’ s potential for growth .
Indeed , this was one reason why Japan was so little affected by the “ Lehman Shock ” that incited the global financial crisis .
But macroeconomic reform came to a screeching halt after Koizumi stepped down in 2006 .
A series of short-term prime ministers began a pattern of huge government outlays .
Not surprisingly , the economy deteriorated .
Frustrated by the long-ruling LDP ’ s poor political and economic management , voters opted last year for change at the top .
But the pattern of economic mismanagement , far from being reversed , has only become worse .
Huge spending increases were directed at farmers and households .
As a result , the share of tax revenue to total spending this fiscal year slipped below 50 % , something unseen in Japan ’ s entire post-war history .
Despite the parlous fiscal position , for now the market for Japanese government bonds ( JGBs ) remains stable .
But this is because government bonds are purchased mostly by domestic organizations and households .
In another words , the government ’ s negative saving is financed by the private sector ’ s positive savings .
But that private-sector safety net of savings is fraying .
Japanese households hold savings of about ¥ 1.1 trillion in net monetary assets .
In about three years , however , the amount of JGBs will exceed the total assets of Japanese households .
Government debt will no longer be backed up by taxpayers ’ assets .
Confidence in the JGB market will likely decline .
Moreover , as Japan ’ s society ages , the household savings rate will decrease dramatically .
This will make it difficult , if not impossible , for the domestic private sector to finance the budget deficit indefinitely .
And new demands for fiscal expenditures are expected to grow as the country ages .
In about five years , all baby boomers will be over 65 , but pressure on government expenditures for pensions and health care is expected to start sooner , around 2013 .
Japan ’ s new government , led by Prime Minister Naoto Kan , started discussing a consumption-tax hike to offset the growth in spending .
But a consumption-tax hike is no panacea , particularly given the government ’ s lack of a growth strategy .
Although a tax increase will undoubtedly be needed , it is the wrong priority at the moment – and could prove counter-productive if it causes the economy to decline dramatically .
Indeed , Koizumi ’ s government demonstrated the best way to tackle fiscal consolidation .
Koizumi decided that a primary budget balance should be restored in 10 years .
And he came close to being successful , as the primary deficit of ¥ 28 trillion in 2002 was reduced to just ¥ 6 trillion in 2007 . Had this effort been continued for two more years , a primary surplus could have been realized .
Without a strategy for growth , which includes efforts to reduce government expenditures and a policy to stop deflation , Japan ’ s economy will remain in the doldrums .
But Kan still seems unwilling to focus on growth .
Instead , like so many other leaders before him , he proclaims his desire to find a “ third way . ”
But , as history has shown , no third way exists .
Kan continues to believe that a large government , with growing social-welfare expenditures , is the way to get the economy moving .
This should not be surprising .
He used to be involved in civic movements and groups – like environmental organizations – that take little heed of the need for economic growth .
Increasing the tax burden seems almost a natural part of such a mindset , as does ignorance of the need for increased economic competition .
Without that , and a renewed focus on growth , Japan will continue to climb down the global ladder of success .
Indeed , any Japanese who thinks that complacency is an option should look to Argentina .
A hundred years ago , Argentina was arguably the world ’ s second wealthiest economy .
Now , thanks to bad policies , and even worse politicians , it ranks among the world ’ s also-rans .
