Lucky Putin , Unlucky Yeltsin
Russian President Vladimir Putin ’ s assertive foreign policy stance of recent years reflects the confidence that comes with a booming economy .
In 1999 , the year before Putin succeeded Boris Yeltsin as president , Russia ’ s GDP was a paltry $ 200 billion .
By last year , it had reached $ 1 trillion .
Real growth has averaged 7 % for eight years , and real incomes have grown by roughly 10 % per year .
Russia ’ s budget surplus has stood at more than 7 % of GDP in the last two years , public debt has dwindled to only 8 % of GDP , from 100 % in 1999 , and the current account surplus has averaged at 10 % of GDP for the last eight years .
But Russia ’ s stellar economic performance has little to do with Putin ’ s policy , and a lot to do with the reforms Yeltsin embraced .
By 1998 , Russia already had achieved a critical mass of markets and private enterprise , while the financial crash of that year worked like a catharsis , forcing the government to abolish enterprise subsidies that underpinned a devastating budget deficit of some 9 % of GDP .
Moreover , world oil prices that had fallen to $ 10 a barrel started rising toward the stratosphere .
The whole success story thus was in place in early 1999 , one year before Putin entered the stage .
To be sure , Putin should be praised for substantial economic reforms during his first three years .
A new tax code was adopted , with lower and fewer taxes , notably a flat income tax of 13 % .
The civil code was completed , a new customs code was enacted , and substantial judicial reform was implemented .
At the same time , however , Putin has systematically eliminated the rudimentary democracy Yeltsin had build .
One television channel after another was taken over by the state under various pretexts , as were major newspapers .
Opposition candidates and parties were denied registration for the slightest formal complaint .
Falsification of elections became the rule .
Many prominent Russians favored the Pinochet model of authoritarian politics and liberal economics .
But growing authoritarianism also hit business .
In October 2003 , Putin cracked down on Mikhail Khodorkovsky , the CEO and main owner of Yukos oil , Russia ’ s most valuable company , who was thrown into prison on dubious charges of tax fraud after backing Putin ’ s political opponents .
Moreover , Putin ’ s associates wanted Yukos ’ wealth , which was confiscated by the state oil company Rosneft through lawless taxation , leaving Putin ’ s tax reform and judicial reform in tatters and severely undermining property rights .
In fact , since 2003 , Putin ’ s main economic policy has been re-nationalization .
Well-run private companies have been more or less forced to sell out to state-dominated companies .
Gazprom is buying up oil ( Sibneft ) , gas , and power companies at knockdown prices , reinforcing its monopoly .
That , in turn , allows Gazprom to boost its profitability through price increases , despite stagnant production .
Indeed , with state companies now producing one-third of Russia ’ s oil , output growth has plummeted , as owners of private enterprises – the source of dynamism in the sector – are now afraid to invest in new capacity .
Among foreign investors , both Shell and TNK-BP are being pushed out by Gazprom in their main gas fields in Russia .
Beyond oil and gas , Russia ’ s arms export agency , Rosoboronexport , has just seized Avtovaz , the giant dysfunctional Soviet car factory , and VSMPO-Avisma , Russia ’ s big titanium company , while all aircraft production has been concentrated in one state company .
The government cheers this re-nationalization , although it has reduced Russia ’ s industrial growth from 8.3 % in 2004 to 4 % in the last two years .
Similarly , inefficient state banks – far inferior to private banks even in Kazakhstan or Ukraine – dominate the banking system .
The not very profitable state-owned Vneshtorgbank , for example , is on a buying spree , aggravating the quality of Russian banking .
Increasingly , Russia ’ s oil surpluses drive economic growth through rising investment , which boosts construction and consumption , in turn benefiting retail trade and finance .
With personal incomes rising strongly , poverty is declining , while 68 % of Russia ’ s college-age youth now attend universities .
But other social indicators are unimpressive .
Life expectancy for men is stuck at 59 .
The murder rate is even higher under Putin than it was under Yeltsin , as is the traffic death rate .
None of the big public systems – education , health care , or the military – has been reformed , and the regime shows little interest in doing so .
Instead , the Kremlin is preoccupied with the profitability and value of the state-dominated companies that it controls .
Not surprisingly , all corruption indicators have been rising since Putin took over from Yeltsin , whereas they are falling in most post-communist countries .
Although corruption is pervasive , no top official has been prosecuted .
Putin and his KGB friends from St. Petersburg sit safely on all this wealth , thanks to their authoritarian governance and control over all security organs .
Such a powerful apparatus cannot retire to a quiet life in a dacha as Yeltsin did – it would have to privatize everything first – which implies that Putin has no choice but to remain in office , regardless of what he says about not seeking a third presidential term .
But if he holds on to power contrary to the constitution , his popularity could easily collapse , especially as his economic policy has thrived on luck , not reform .
