Putin ’ s Crooked Road to Damascus
MOSCOW – When Russian President Vladimir Putin addressed the United Nations General Assembly on September 28 , he knew he would grab the world ’ s attention and upstage US President Barack Obama with his call for a united front in the battle against the Islamic State .
But Putin was addressing Russians , too , knowing full well the need to distract them from their country ’ s increasingly obvious economic woes .
Last year , the distraction was the annexation of Crimea , followed by the encouragement of pro-Russia separatists in eastern Ukraine .
The recent dispatch of Russian aircraft , missiles , and a few thousand troops to Syria is a flag-waving substitute for that failed “ Novorossiya ” project .
Putin ’ s critics rightly see his Syrian adventure as yet another appeal to Russian nostalgia for the Soviet past : the USSR was mighty – and Putin claims that Russia can and does have the same power .
But to what end ?
Wrong-footing the United States and the West may be good tactics in the short term , but there seems to be no long-term vision of the purposes that Russian power is supposed to serve , other than to preserve the power of Russia ’ s elites .
As a result , the regime mimics the forms of democracy while using its propaganda to foment an aggressive form of nationalism .
In the early years of this century the combination of high oil prices and economic growth dulled the elites ’ appetite for strategic thinking and allowed them to ignore the subsequent rollback of health-care , education , and social-welfare reforms .
The regime and the public now see the current situation as more or less normal – a “ non-crisis crisis . ”
Because perception shapes reality , everything is normal , nothing has to be done , and Putin – having supposedly restored Russia ’ s dignity – can enjoy his approval ratings of more than 80 % .
To Putin , restoring Russia ’ s dignity is the same as resurrecting its “ great-power status ” following the collapse of the Soviet Union and its humiliating “ defeat ” by the West in the Cold War .
Exercising power externally apparently compensates for the fact that dignity within the country is far from restored : Today ’ s Russian citizen remains defenseless before his bosses , the utility companies , the courts , and the police – and yet , whatever his hardships , he remains proud of his nation and its leader .
There is , of course , another explanation of why Putin ’ s popularity is still growing in the face of a worsening economy : those unable to fend for themselves naturally look to the state for help – and are hardly likely to bite the hand feeds them .
What Westerners decry as human-rights abuses ordinary Russians are likely to praise as policies to rid the country of “ alien ” practices and protect the majority from the “ subversive ” minority .
The regime ’ s hostility toward gays and lesbians may offend the West , but it strikes a sympathetic chord with most Russians .
Because those same Russians regard the war in Ukraine as defensive and just , war becomes justified ; history ’ s dark pages are rewritten ; and hostile language becomes the norm .
Not long ago , ordinary Russians spoke openly about the number of deaths and casualties suffered in their country ’ s military operations ; now , following Putin ’ s presidential decree on “ secret losses , ” they keep quiet .
Even though the decree may well conflict with the Russian Constitution and the Law on State Secrets , the list of classified information now includes Russian military losses during peacetime operations .
The consequence is a country divided between loyal and disloyal , patriotic and unpatriotic – that is , between those who toe the party line and those who refuse .
If the polls are accurate , the loyal and obedient are a clear majority – at least so far .
This explains support for the separatists in eastern Ukraine ’ s Donbas region and for Putin ’ s intervention in Syria .
If the US cannot accept this , it merely proves that America insists on hegemony , whether in Europe , through NATO , or in the Middle East .
Such logic is bolstered by Putin ’ s self-interested reinterpretation of history , which justifies the 1939 Winter War against Finland , the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact of 1939 , and the 1979 Soviet invasion in Afghanistan .
The Attorney General ’ s Office has even been occupying itself with a ludicrous retrospective analysis of the decision in 1954 to transfer Crimea from the jurisdiction of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic to that of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic .
Worryingly , the same analysis is being carried out on the legality of the independence of the Baltic states after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
Where will all this lead ?
Just as in the Soviet era , today ’ s rulers equate themselves with the state .
The state is then reduced to the leader ’ s inner circle and the top echelon of the financial and political elites , secure in their power because ordinary citizens have been duped into an uncritical and extreme form of nationalism .
Putin ’ s embattled opponents can safely predict a long period of political , economic , and intellectual stagnation – certainly until the parliamentary election next year and the presidential election two years later .
The stagnation will probably last into the following political cycle , too .
But it cannot last forever : at some point , the regime ’ s survival will require offering the public something other than nationalism and nostalgia .
The question is whether Putin , now deepening Russia ’ s involvement in yet another foreign military adventure , understands this .
