Reform is Feasible for Russia
PARIS : Who lost Russia ?
Who is responsible for Russia 's economic meltdown since 1990 ?
Are bumbling politicians guilty , or grasping oligarches , corrupt apparatchiks , the mafia , or the IMF ?
Accusations and finger pointing abounds , but the facts remain obscure .
Ordinary Russians throw up their hands thinking everyone with power is tainted .
A new study by the consultants McKinsey , however , sheds some light on this question and moves the debate forward .
The goal of the study ( which is available at www.mckinsey.com ) was simple : to study , in detail , how ten key economic sectors are faring .
The conclusions are equally simple : in all sectors , average productivity is only at 19 % of levels prevailing in the United States .
The cause of this very weak productivity is the same for all sectors : Russia 's complex system of disguised subsidies , heavy regulations and price distortions protects state owned firms , whose productivity is abysmal , and hinders the development of new firms , whose productivity is a lot higher .
The study of each of these sectors allows for a better understanding of the nature of the system of subsidies .
At times , the rules of the game are transparent and still the established and incompetent triumph .
In the construction sector , for example , when bids are solicited publically and therefore should be open to all , contracts simply go to the old , established firms .
Others have to fight endlessly in order to obtain their construction permit from a myriad of government authorities , or clarify their property rights to the land they wish to build on .
Subsidies are often hidden .
Many firms would have to close shop if they purchased the oil and electricity and gas they use at prevailing market prices .
As a result , they rely on barter , using goods of little value ( such as empty residential buildings ) in order to pay their suppliers .
And the distortions don 't stop there .
To keep oil suppliers from selling their products at market prices , the government discourages petroleum exports and the development of new pipelines to the East .
These measures lead to unproductive businesses , to a lack of transparency that fosters the worst cases of abuse and corruption , and the loss of potential export revenues , which , at this stage , are invaluable for Russia 's development .
What explains this systematic , almost suicidal discrimination against new businesses ?
Is it the political influence of former directors of state-owned enterprises ?
Is it local governments trying to avoid an increase in unemployment associated with the closing-down of large enterprises ?
Is it the result of widespread corruption , where each potential entrepreneur knows that whatever profits could be made will go toward both taxes and bribes ?
All these possible explanations contain grains of truth .
Yet they also imply the possibility of , if not magical , some certainly reform-oriented partial solutions to Russia 's crisis .
For now , because of the relation between the different levels of government , local governments have very little to gain from an economic upswing within the areas that they administer .
Allowing local governments to have a greater say in regional economic growth , and thus benefit directly from it , would provide an incentive to promote new businesses , at least as far as they do not pose a threat to jobs in existing local firms .
Competition would thus spread outward .
Such developments would encourage putting a lid on corruption at the local level .
The McKinsey study shows how this was done in the Novgorod region .
The results are impressive and constitute a reason for hope .
Indeed , there are reforms in today 's Russia that are both politically viable and economically promising .
