The Myth of Isolationist America
CAMBRIDGE – Is the United States turning inward and becoming isolationist ?
That question was posed to me by a number of financial and political leaders at the recent World Economic Forum at Davos , and was heard again a few days later at the annual Munich Security Conference .
In a strong speech at Davos , Secretary of State John Kerry gave an unambiguous answer : “ Far from disengaging , America is proud to be more engaged than ever . ”
Yet the question lingered .
Unlike the mood at Davos a few years ago , when many participants mistook an economic recession for long-term American decline , the prevailing view this year was that the US economy has regained much of its underlying strength .
Economic doomsayers focused instead on previously fashionable emerging markets like Brazil , Russia , India , and Turkey .
The anxiety about US isolationism is driven by recent events .
For starters , there is America ’ s refusal ( thus far ) to intervene militarily in Syria .
Then there is the coming withdrawal of US troops from Afghanistan .
And President Barack Obama ’ s cancellation of his trip to Asia last autumn , owing to domestic political gridlock in the US Congress and the resulting government shutdown , made a poor impression on the region ’ s leaders .
Indeed , with Kerry ’ s time and travel focused on the Middle East , many Asian leaders believe that Obama ’ s signature foreign policy – strategic “ rebalancing ” toward Asia – has run out of steam , even as tension between China and Japan , evident in their leaders ’ statements at Davos , continues to mount .
Particularly egregious from the point of view of “ Davos ” was the recent refusal by Congress to approve the reform and refunding of the International Monetary Fund , even though a plan that added no significant burden to the American taxpayer had been agreed years earlier by the G-20 under Obama ’ s leadership .
When I asked a prominent Republican senator why Congress had balked at keeping an American commitment , he attributed it to “ sheer orneriness , ” reflecting the mood of right-wing Tea Party Republicans and some left-wing Democrats .
Further evidence of American isolationism can be found in a recent opinion poll taken by the Pew Research Center and the Council on Foreign Relations .
According to the survey , fifty-two percent of Americans believe that the US “ should mind its own business internationally and let other countries get along the best they can on their own . ”
About the same number said that the US is “ less important and powerful ” than it was a decade ago .
The problem with these perceptions – both at home and abroad – is that the US remains the world ’ s most powerful country , and is likely to remain so for decades .
China ’ s size and rapid economic growth will almost certainly increase its relative strength vis-à-vis the US .
But even when China becomes the world ’ s largest economy in the coming years , it will still be decades behind the US in terms of per capita income .
Moreover , even if China suffers no major domestic political setback , projections based on GDP growth alone are one-dimensional and ignore US military and soft-power advantages .
They also ignore China ’ s geopolitical disadvantages within Asia .
America ’ s culture of openness and innovation will ensure its role as a global hub in an age when networks supplement , if not fully replace , hierarchical power .
The US is well positioned to benefit from such networks and alliances , if American leaders follow smart strategies .
In structural terms , it matters greatly that the two entities in the world with economies and per capita income similar to the US – Europe and Japan – are both American allies .
In terms of balance-of-power resources , that boosts America ’ s net position , but only if US leaders maintain these alliances and ensure international cooperation .
Decline is a misleading metaphor for today ’ s America , and Obama fortunately has rejected the suggestion that he should pursue a strategy aimed at managing it .
As a leader in research and development , higher education , and entrepreneurial activity , the US , unlike ancient Rome , is not in absolute decline .
We do not live in a “ post-American world , ” but we also no longer live in the “ American era ” of the late twentieth century .
In the decades ahead , the US will be “ first ” but not “ sole . ”
That is because the power resources of many others – both states and non-state actors – are growing , and because , on an increasing number of issues , obtaining America ’ s preferred outcomes will require exercising power with others as much as over others .
The capacity of US leaders to maintain alliances and create networks will be an important dimension of America ’ s hard and soft power .
The problem for US power in the twenty-first century is not just China , but the “ rise of the rest . ”
The solution is not isolation , but a strategy of selectivity similar to what President Dwight Eisenhower advocated in the 1950 ’ s .
A smart power strategy starts with a clear assessment of limits .
The preeminent power does not have to patrol every boundary and project its strength everywhere .
That is why Eisenhower prudently resisted direct intervention on the French side in Vietnam in 1954 .
Eisenhower was right about something else , too : America ’ s military strength depends on preservation of its economic strength .
Nation-building at home is not the isolation that critics fear ; on the contrary , it is central to a smart foreign policy .
A smart strategy would avoid involvement of ground forces in major wars on the Asian continent .
Yet such prudence is not the same as isolationism .
The US needs to combine its soft- and hard-power resources better .
As Obama said in his 2014 State of the Union address , “ in a world of complex threats , our security depends on all elements of our power – including strong and principled diplomacy . ”
Eisenhower could have said that , and no one would accuse him of being an isolationist .
