Reincarnating Evita
If myths could come true through sheer willpower , Cristina Kirchner , the wife of Argentine President Néstor Kircher , would already be a 21st-century Evita Perón .
But myths are a collective and mysterious construction .
Otherwise , they would be for sale .
In Argentina ’ s recent legislative election , Cristina Kirchner became a political force in her own right , making the Kirchners a ruling couple from now on – the second in the country ’ s history after Juan Perón and Evita .
Mrs. Kirchner was elected Senator for the province of Buenos Aires , where much of the country ’ s economic might is based .
It is also where most of Argentina ’ s poor live .
True , the Kirchner name helped , and perhaps tradition also played a part .
After all , Isabelita – a very small woman in every sense and Perón ’ s third wife after Evita – became the country ’ s first female President only because she was Perón ’ s widow .
Cristina Kirchner , however , is no small woman .
As a lawyer and legislator since 1989 , she enjoys a privileged role in developing the strategies of her husband ’ s government .
Unlike any first lady in Argentine history , she is capable and well prepared when discussing complex issues such as money laundering or labor law .
Yet myth-making was not absent on the night of her victory .
Newspapers depicted her against the background of the Argentinean flag , with her head bathed in a halo of sunshine .
The image seemed to evoke the Virgin of Luján ( the religious figure who attracts the most worshipers in Argentina ) , as well as that of the Evita who was sanctified by the poor while still alive .
It also seemed like an illustration of her authorized biography , entitled Reina Cristina ( “ Queen Cristina ” ) .
Argentina is a country of strong women – more than one has become a myth that transcends cultures .
The most recent is a women ’ s collective , the Madres y Abuelas de Plaza de Mayo ( Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo ) .
These brave women constituted the only opposition that dared to confront the savage military junta in the late 1970 ’ s , demanding to know the fate of their “ disappeared ” children .
The other myth is , of course , Evita .
But Cristina is no Evita .
In the Argentina of the 1940 ’ s and 1950 ’ s , Evita gathered multitudes .
In Cristina ’ s victory , and that of her husband , there were no mass celebrations .
Perhaps this is just politics in the era of modern media .
In her speeches , Cristina modulates her voice as Evita did .
But , where Evita ’ s voice was full of the “ pathos ” of poverty and injustice , of passion and tenderness , Cristina evokes more anger and defiance .
No compassion is heard .
Instead , there is defiance and self-affirmation : “ They will not do that to me ... ”
Evita was the wife who would intercede before her husband to defend her “ children , ” the crowds of “ descamisados , ” or shirtless people .
Her powerful myth made her a sort of primal woman .
The Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo became the same : they would put their motherhood above their lives .
Defenseless against the state ’ s power , they were invincible because they had nothing else to lose .
Cristina is partly a “ wife ” like Evita , but she doesn ’ t portray herself as a mother figure .
She is a woman with her own ideas , who will fight for them in the political project that she shares with her husband .
It is a very modern model , perhaps in transition to something else .
But to what ?
Perhaps the key difference between Evita and Cristina is the fact that Evita , the “ standard-bearer of the poor , ” was an actress hunting for her destiny when she met Perón .
Cristina dreamed and built her project together with her husband from the start , acquiring more visibility every day .
That makes her akin to Hillary Clinton .
Like the Clintons , the Kirchners knew from early on in their marriage that they wanted to reach the top , and the best way to do it , they concluded , was together .
They are political partners .
Cristina loves being compared to Hillary .
Bill Clinton ’ s wife could run for president in 2008 , and Cristina could do the same in 2007 , if her husband doesn ’ t pursue re-election , or in 2011 , if he does , according to government officials .
If Néstor and Cristina alternate as heads of state , they could do so indefinitely , because Argentina ’ s constitution allows for only one consecutive reelection but no limit on the total number of electoral terms .
Marriage and political partnership can , in any case , keep the tandem intact .
Few doubt that Bill Clinton will be a powerful force in America if his wife becomes president .
Kirchner , too , is not going to retire and put his slippers on in 2007 or 2011 if Cristina heads the government .
This new “ monarchical ” presidential model deserves study by political scientists and jurists .
But , as the Kirchners dream their mythic dreams , they will also be confronted with reality .
And reality is even harder to shape than a myth .
