Models of Madness
Mental health services around the world are largely based on the assumption that being upset or disoriented is a sort of condition like medical illnesses .
Here in Australasia , we imported this perspective from overseas , actively suppressing more holistic Maori and Aboriginal understandings about human distress .
We did so despite numerous studies that show that recovery rates from “ mental illness ” in “ underdeveloped ” countries are far superior to those in “ advanced ” societies .
Nowadays , more and more problems are being redefined as “ disorders ” or “ illnesses , ” supposedly caused by genetic predispositions and biochemical imbalances .
Life events are relegated to mere triggers of an underlying biological time bomb .
Thus , feeling very sad has become “ depressive disorder . ”
Worrying too much is “ anxiety disorder . ”
Being painfully shy has become “ avoidant personality disorder . ”
Beating up people is “ intermittent explosive disorder . ”
Excessive gambling , drinking , drug use , or eating are also illnesses .
The same applies to having too little food , sleep , or sex .
Our Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders has 886 pages of such illnesses .
Unusual or undesirable behaviors are called “ symptoms ” and the labels are “ diagnoses . ”
Our children are labeled , too .
Being bad at math has become “ mathematics disorder . ”
Ignoring other people ’ s feelings ( once called being naughty ) means that the child is suffering from “ conduct disorder . ”
If this includes getting angry at grownups , he or she ( usually he ) has “ oppositional defiant disorder . ”
A “ diagnosis ” frequently in the news is “ attention-deficit / hyperactivity disorder . ” The “ symptoms ” include fidgeting , losing things , talking excessively , and difficulty playing quietly or taking turns .
Of course some children sometimes have problems .
But does anyone help them ?
Perhaps it sometimes conceals the causes , while locating the problem entirely within the child , who is often stigmatized as a result .
Indeed , making lists of behaviors , applying medical-sounding labels to people who manifest them , and then using the presence of those behaviors to prove that a person has the illness in question is scientifically meaningless .
It tells us nothing about causes or solutions .
How did this simplistic , certainly unscientific , and frequently damaging approach gain such dominance ?
First , it is tempting to avoid facing the painful events in our lives that might be the cause of our difficulties .
If we just accept the diagnosis on offer , nobody is to blame .
Nobody needs do anything differently – except take the tablets .
We were just unlucky enough to get the “ illness . ”
Second , a model of individual pathology is invaluable to politicians .
They don ’ t need to spend money on prevention programs to address the psycho-social problems – overwhelming stress , poverty , discrimination , child neglect and abuse , and loneliness , to name but a few – that research has repeatedly demonstrated play a large role in undermining mental health .
Third , exciting developments in technologies for studying our brains and genes have created the hope that we are about to discover the biological causes of , and solutions to , human misery and confusion .
Finally , a new player has entered the nature-nurture debate .
The pharmaceutical industry , fueled by our desire for quick fixes , has effectively deployed its considerable power to promulgate the notion of “ disorders ” and “ illnesses ” in all domains of our lives .
The fundamental purpose of drug companies is to produce profits for shareholders .
Naturally , they encourage us to diagnose eating , sleeping , or feeling too much ( or too little ) as illnesses requiring a chemical cure .
Having listened for 20 years to people unfortunate enough to be labeled “ schizophrenic , ” considered to be the most extreme form of “ mental illness , ” and having subsequently researched the causes of hallucinations and delusions for ten years , I believe that the public understands madness better than we experts .
Surveys of public opinion all over the world find that most people believe that emotional problems , including those deemed severe , such as hearing voices , are primarily caused by bad things happening to us rather than by faulty brains or genes .
The public also favors psycho-social approaches , such as talking to someone and getting advice , or help finding friends or a job , rather than drugs , electro-shocks , or admission to psychiatric hospital .
Some experts , however , dismiss these views as “ mental health illiteracy . ”
They continue to insist that mental illness is an illness like any other , despite many studies showing that the more we adopt this medical model , the more prejudiced and frightened we become .
Mental health services should offer something more than having our feelings chemically suppressed , or having our children ’ s difficulties sitting still controlled by amphetamines ( which , apart from teaching children that problems are best solved with drugs , stunt growth by an average of one centimeter per year ) .
A wide range of effective treatments are available that don ’ t cause weight gain , sexual dysfunction , diabetes , memory loss , or addiction .
Funders and policymakers who keep up with the relevant research are slowly beginning to introduce more talking therapies ( such as cognitive therapy and trauma-focused counseling ) , more alternatives to hospitalization , more culturally appropriate services , more family-focused therapy and , most importantly , more genuine consultation with service users about what actually works .
If these new treatments aren ’ t used more frequently , this isn ’ t because they don ’ t work .
The main obstacle is that they won ’ t increase the profits of drug companies , on which , in the absence of adequate government funding , our professional organizations , conferences , journals , research , and teaching institutions have become so dependent .
