Good Governance and Economic Performance
BERLIN – The debate about emerging countries ’ growth prospects is now in full swing .
Pessimists stress the feared reversal of private capital flows , owing to the US Federal Reserve ’ s tapering of its purchases of long-term assets , as well as the difficulties of so-called second- and third-generation structural reforms and the limits to “ catch up ” growth outside of manufacturing .
Optimists argue that the potential for rapid growth remains immense , owing to better macroeconomic fundamentals and the promise of best-practice technology spreading throughout the emerging world .
So who is right ?
Recent events point once again to the importance of good governance and responsive political systems , a familiar topic in studies of long-term economic growth .
Countries that appeared successful for a long time , such as Turkey or Thailand , suddenly seem to face obstacles related to governance and the ability to forge domestic political compromises .
The resulting divisiveness and dysfunction are surely bigger threats than the Fed ’ s tapering .
It is the nature of governance that determines whether people deploy their talents and energy in pursuit of innovation , production , and job creation , or in rent seeking and lobbying for political protection .
And here the contrast between Egypt and Tunisia may turn out to be an object lesson in what makes the difference between success and failure .
In Egypt , the old regime under Hosni Mubarak , having failed to democratize , collapsed in the face of massive protest .
A low-turnout election gave a plurality of the popular vote to the Muslim Brotherhood , which came to power alone and proceeded to ignore good governance and alienate all except its most fervent followers .
The Brotherhood ’ s approach to governance also explains the mess it made of the economy .
Instead of trying to build non-partisan and competent regulatory institutions , all positions were stacked with political followers .
Unfortunately , the military intervention last July gave rise to yet another regime that seems unable to build durable institutions that could foster political reconciliation and deliver inclusive growth .
Tunisia may give us an example of the opposite scenario : a real constitutional compromise supported by an overwhelming majority ( reflected in a 200-16 vote in the National Constituent Assembly ) .
If that compromise holds , stability will take hold , markets will function , Tunisia will attract investment , and tourism will thrive again .
At the heart of the difference between the two cases is a vision of governance that makes such compromise possible .
Such a vision presupposes an assurance that a winner-take-all system will not be established , as well as broad agreement that regulatory institutions should be reasonably non-partisan and staffed with competent professionals .
China ’ s long-lasting success is sometimes given as a counterexample to the importance of good governance for economic performance .
The Chinese example certainly calls into question a strong correlation between multi-party democracy and economic growth .
Democracy is of course something valuable in itself and can be desired independently of its effect on economic growth .
But , in the context of economic performance , it is important to emphasize that there is a huge difference between dictatorial regimes , where a single individual monopolizes all power – à la Mubarak or Syrian President Bashar al-Assad – and China , where there has been competition and contestability within a large communist party .
And it is the party , operating as a fairly inclusive and meritocratic institution , not an autocratic leader , that has governed in the post-Mao period .
Lack of reasonably independent regulation and competent public administration – or , worse , one-person dictatorships – lead inexorably to economic waste and inefficiency , and eventually to political turmoil .
This is true even in cases like Venezuela , where large oil revenues masked the underlying weakness for a while .
In the complex global economy of the twenty-first century , sustained good economic performance requires a panoply of well-functioning institutions that do not fall within a single leader ’ s purview .
For example , successful economies require a reasonably independent central bank , and competent bank supervision that does not get dragged into short term politics .
They also need regulatory agencies in sectors such as telecommunications and energy that can pursue policies in accordance with broad goals established by the political process , but with appointees selected according to nonpartisan criteria who then exercise their authority in a way that fosters competition open to all .
When credit decisions , public procurement , construction contracts , and price determination reflect only short-term and purely political goals , good economic performance becomes impossible – even in countries with large natural-resource endowments .
In countries with little or no such endowments – where innovation , competitive efficiency , and a focus on production rather than rents is all the more important – the lack of good governance will lead to failure more rapidly .
All of this implies that analyzing the determinants of economic success is a subject not just for economists .
Why do some societies achieve the compromises needed to sustain an independent judiciary and a modern regulatory framework – both necessary for an efficient modern economy – while others perpetuate a partisan , winner-take-all approach to governance that weakens public policy and erodes private-sector confidence ?
The contrast is starkest in emerging countries , but differences also exist among the advanced economies .
Perhaps Germany ’ s ability to reach sociopolitical compromise – again demonstrated by the formation of a right-left coalition after the 2013 elections – has been more fundamental to its recent economic success than the details of the fiscal and structural policies it has pursued to achieve it .
