A Papal Success
LONDON – To the surprise of many in the media – at home and abroad – Pope Benedict XVI ’ s just completed visit to Britain was an outstanding success .
As a Roman Catholic and as the person asked by Prime Minister David Cameron to supervise government arrangements for the visit , I was naturally delighted .
But , I was also pleased from the point of view of a citizen , with a strong dislike of the herd mentality .
The media tends to move like market sentiment .
One moment , the public square is full of bulls ; the next you ’ re being clawed by bears .
We were told before the visit that the British public would be at best indifferent and at worst hostile .
Even some in the Vatican feared this outcome .
But , from the moment that the Pope arrived in Scotland , he was overwhelmed by enthusiastic crowds of well-wishers , Catholic and non-Catholic alike .
I drove in the papal cavalcade along the motorway from Edinburgh , where Benedict met Queen Elizabeth , to Glasgow , where he celebrated an open-air mass .
All along the road were throngs of people .
From the first day , the media understood that they had badly misread the public mood .
The visit went from incipient disaster to huge success overnight .
The public had poked a sharp stick into the eye of metropolitan cynicism and know-all journalism .
The message conveyed by the pope and by the religious leaders with whom he met defied the contemporary assumption that the public cannot understand anything longer or more complicated than a sound bite .
The late American politician Adlai Stevenson once said that the average man ( or woman ) was a great deal better than average .
Voters should be treated as equals , and politicians should not talk down to them .
Mind you , this was not enough to win Stevenson the presidency in the 1950 ’ s .
“ All the intelligent people in the country are supporting you , ” he was told .
“ That ’ s not enough , ” he replied .
“ In order to win , I need a majority . ”
Nevertheless , I think we have suffered too much from politics by simplistic slogans .
Making a coherent , well-argued case is surely the best way in the long-term of trying to mobilize consent for any course of action .
It dignifies an argument – and those to whom it is addressed – to set it out thoughtfully .
This is what Benedict does , as does his interlocutor in Britain , the head of the Anglican Communion , Rowan Williams , Archbishop of Canterbury .
Both are intellectuals and address difficult questions in a quiet , carefully considered way .
This has led Williams , in particular , into several run-ins with the media .
For example , he was widely criticized for a lecture in 2008 in which he spoke about the relationship between Islamic Sharia law and the British legal system .
What he said was both interesting and correct , but it was ripped out of context , and he was unfairly pilloried as a result .
The pope ’ s main speech was delivered to an audience of the great and the good in Westminster Hall , a medieval building whose use over the centuries has been intimately tied up with some of the greatest dramas in British history .
It was here that Thomas More , later canonized , was put on trial for defying his master , King Henry VIII .
More would not accept the king ’ s assertion of supremacy over the church .
His conscience would not allow him to bend to Henry ’ s will .
He was executed in the Tower of London , martyred because of his conscience .
St. Thomas More is regarded as the patron saint of politicians , which is rather flattering to many of those over whose spiritual interests he presumably presides .
After all , not every politician is widely commended for following his conscience .
But the story of More , and the fact that the British legal system in its early years evolved under the high wooden beams of Westminster Hall , gave Benedict a good hook on which to hang a sermon about the importance of ethics and religion in public life .
Many secularists argue that ever since the Enlightenment , reason has been enough to guide governance and policymaking , buttressed by the rule of law if a community is lucky .
But Benedict asserted the importance of faith alongside reason and law in safeguarding our civilization .
Europe ’ s foundations lie not just in Aristotle , reason , and classical Greece , and not just in Rome with its understanding of the importance of the law , but also in Jerusalem and the Abrahamic faith groups – Christian , Jewish , and Muslim .
Reason devoid of ethics can prove insufficient to support the survival of civilization , a point that the pope ’ s own homeland , Germany , discovered in the 1930 ’ s .
To illustrate his argument , Benedict noted that the international financial crash , partly a consequence of insatiable greed , had provoked debate about the need for an ethical basis for economic behavior .
Have we forgotten so readily the repugnance with which we discovered the dishonesty and extravagance that helped to wreck our prosperity in the West ?
Another example of the relationship between ethics and policy is the response that rich countries have made to global social inequity , a deep moral affront to everyone with even a modicum of conscience and sensibility .
In the midst of a gloomy crisis for public spending in Britain , the government has committed itself to sticking to its pledge of spending 0.7 % of GDP on development assistance in poor countries .
If only others would do the same , like rich Italy , which spends only 0.15 % of its GDP on overseas aid .
So Benedict set off a serious debate in Britain and beyond .
Where can and should religion and ethics contribute to our political discourse ?
That is a central issue , and not just for Europe .
