An Obama Moment for India ’ s Untouchables
NEW DELHI – Among the many international consequences of Barack Obama ’ s stunning victory in the United States is worldwide introspection about whether such a breakthrough could happen elsewhere .
Could a person of color win power in other white-majority countries ?
Could a member of a beleaguered minority transcend the circumstances of his birth to lead his or her country ?
While many analysts in a wide variety of nations , especially in Europe , have concluded that such an event could not occur there in the foreseeable future , India is an exception .
Minority politicians have long wielded authority , if not power , in its various high offices .
Indeed , India ’ s last general election , in 2004 , was won by a woman of Italian heritage and Roman Catholic faith ( Sonia Gandhi ) who made way for a Sikh ( Manmohan Singh ) to be sworn in as Prime Minister by a Muslim ( President Abdul Kalam ) in a country that is 81 % Hindu .
Not only could it happen here , Indians say , it already has .
Such complacency is premature .
The closest Indian analogy to the position of black Americans is that of the Dalits – formerly called “ Untouchables , ” the outcastes who for millennia suffered humiliating discrimination and oppression .
Like blacks in the US , Dalits account for about 15 % of the population ; they are found disproportionately in low-status , low-income jobs ; their levels of educational attainment are lower than the upper castes ; and they still face daily incidents of discrimination for no reason other than their identity at birth .
Only when a Dalit rules India can the country truly be said to have attained its own “ Obama moment . ”
In theory , this already has happened : K. R. Narayanan , born into a poor Dalit family , served as India ’ s president , the highest office in the land , from 1997 to 2002 .
But the Indian Presidency is a largely ceremonial position : real power is vested in the office of prime minister , and no Dalit has come close to holding that post .
Since independence in 1947 , a majority of India ’ s prime ministers have been Brahmins , the highest Hindu caste .
Yet the next national elections , due before May 2009 , may produce a plausible Dalit contender for the job of prime minister – Kumari Mayawati , the female chief minister of India ’ s largest state , Uttar Pradesh .
Since 1991 , no Indian governing party has enjoyed a secure parliamentary majority on its own , necessitating multi-party coalition governments .
The current Congress Party-led government of Manmohan Singh comprises 20 parties ; it succeeded a 23-party coalition headed by the Bharatiya Janata Party ’ s Atal Bihari Vajpayee .
When the election results are declared next year , no one doubts that the first challenge will be to cobble together another coalition .
Both the Congress and the BJP will seek to make alliances with the dozens of smaller parties likely to be represented in parliament .
But this time they are likely to face a third alternative : Mayawati , whose Bahujan Samaj Party ( BSP ) may command a bloc of at least 50 seats . She has publicly expressed her disdain for both large national parties ; she would much rather lead a coalition than join one .
And if the electoral numbers break down right , she could conceivably assemble a collection of regional and left-wing parties and stake a claim to rule India .
This is a remarkable development : the idea that a Dalit woman could lead India has been inconceivable for 3,000 years .
But India ’ s democracy has opened new pathways to empowerment for its underclasses .
The poor and the oppressed may not have much , but they do have the numbers , which is what matters at the ballot box .
Dalits and India ’ s aboriginals ( listed in the Constitution as “ Scheduled Castes and Tribes ” ) are entitled to 85 seats in India ’ s 543-member parliament that are “ reserved ” for candidates from their communities .
Mayawati ’ s shrewd alliances , including with some members of the upper castes , which propelled her to power in Uttar Pradesh , give her party a fighting chance to win a number of other seats as well .
In a coalition-dependent parliamentary system , that could be all she needs to become prime minister .
The daughter of a government clerk , Mayawati studied law and worked as a teacher before being spotted by the BSP ’ s founder , the late Kanshi Ram , and groomed for political leadership .
Her ascent has been marked by a heavy emphasis on symbolism – her rule in Uttar Pradesh has featured the construction of numerous statues of Dalit leaders , notably herself – and a taste for lavish celebrations .
Mayawati ’ s weakness for “ bling ” has been demonstrated at her extravagant birthday parties , which she presides over laden with diamonds , saying ( rather like Evita Peron ) that her luster brings glamour and dignity to her people .
She takes pride in being the Indian politician who pays the highest income taxes – about $ 6 million last year – though the sources of her income are shrouded in controversy .
She has been accused , but not convicted , of corruption several times , with one notable case involving the construction of an elaborate shopping complex near the Taj Mahal , in violation of zoning laws .
Critics argue that Mayawati ’ s promotion of Dalit welfare seems to start with herself .
But there is no denying that her rise to power in India ’ s largest state , which sends 80 members to parliament , has given her a vital platform to bid for India ’ s most powerful job .
With her diamonds and her statues , and a reputation for dealing imperiously with her subordinates , she ’ s clearly no Obama .
But if she succeeds , she will have overcome a far longer legacy of discrimination .
