Japan \ u0027s Emerging China Strategy
Football hooliganism and nationalism create a witch 's brew that , until lately , has rarely been sipped in Asia .
That changed at the recent Asian Football Cup .
Wherever Japan 's players went , they were met by hostile crowds , which culminated in the championship match with China before a huge - and hugely hostile - crowd in Beijing .
This is especially worrisome because , unlike elsewhere in the world , official manipulation helps fan the flames of nationalism in China .
Young Chinese have been thoroughly indoctrinated with anti-Japanese sentiments .
China 's former President Jiang Zemin systematically and relentlessly pursued a " Resistance and Victory-over-Japan Campaign " throughout the 1990 's - a sinister device used to divert popular grievances and to legitimize continuing Communist rule by making the Party appear to be the defender of Chinese honor .
At the same time , the ancient sense of cultural superiority that runs in Chinese veins makes feelings of inferiority hard to bear .
With China 's growing sense of itself as a superpower , resentment about the country being poorer and less admired than some other nations has become intolerable .
Now the young people who make up the vanguard of China 's economic modernization are also nationalist-minded football hooligans .
Instead of providing an early showcase of decent spectator manners for the Beijing Olympics of 2008 , the Asian Cup provided a glimpse at the rage that seethes beneath China 's economic boom - and exposed the government 's inability to control its increasingly restless people .
Of course , the bitterness of Sino-Japanese relations since the end of WWII helps set the stage for such nationalist outbursts , but the roots of China 's rage go deeper . Even as China grows richer and more powerful , memories of its past suffering and humiliation at the hands of the West and Japan remain alive - particularly because the Communist Party finds such memories so useful .
China 's modern view of foreigners and their intentions is necessarily refracted through the prism of such history .
Perhaps inevitably , the recent anti-Japanese rage during the Asian Cup left most Japanese with a strong sense of China as an irreconcilable and unfriendly nation .
As usual , Japan 's government reacted meekly , offering superficial complaints about China to assuage domestic displeasure .
But these complaints fail a vital diplomatic test - preservation of national dignity , prestige , and the honor of one 's citizens .
So how should Japan respond ?
Should Japan fight fire with fire ?
Part of the problem lies in Japan 's educational system .
Owing to a curriculum controlled by the powerful Japan Teachers Union , since the end of WWII many Japanese youth have viewed the Japan-China relationship with a consciousness of the need for atonement for the Sino-Japanese War .
Today , however , calls are growing to promote a more accurate and balanced historical education that focuses on modern history after the Meiji Restoration and WWII , and that reflects the reality of the Sino-Japanese relationship free from an obsession with " atonement . "
Obviously , calls for greater balance in historical education raise the specter of reactionary overkill : either complete affirmation of past Japanese conduct or other forms of anti-Chinese bias .
But the majority of reform advocates seek something else : fairness and objectivity in history education , including studying the differences between Japan and China in their historical interpretations of the Sino-Japanese War .
Equally important , unlike the subject of WWII , Japanese history education barely addresses the two countries ' post-war relations .
Japanese textbooks , indeed , hardly touch upon the enormous economic aid that Japan has given to China - which , not surprisingly , is ignored completely in China 's history curriculum .
But the issue goes beyond education .
Coerced into feeling the need to atone to China , Japan passively tolerated recent episodes of worrying Chinese behavior .
This attitude contributed to inattention by Japan 's political , administrative , academic , and media elite toward China 's unlawful advance toward Japanese territories and neighboring waters , including Japan 's Exclusive Economic Zone ( EEZ ) .
China 's recent and recurrent actions - such as ocean surveys for economic and military purposes , conducted without notification by navy or survey ships in Japanese territorial or EEZ waters - have , however , finally awakened Japan 's elite from its inertia .
In response , the ruling Liberal Democratic Party established a Working Team on the Protection of Maritime Interests .
Based on the team 's recommendations , the government established an inter-ministerial commission on the survey of continental shelves and maritime resources .
The Japanese media 's attention to the issue has also grown .
More is at stake than maritime interests .
With a revision of Japan 's National Defense Program expected by year 's end , the prime minister 's Council on Security and Defense Capabilities has indicated a need to respond to China 's military expansion , particularly its buildup of armed forces . " China is now in the stage of surging nationalism , and the trend is expected to continue in the future , " the Council warned in its interim report , concluding that , " Japan must take appropriate actions in response to each incident " in which China attempts to " gradually advance its defense line [ ocean-ward ] . "
Japan seems to be departing from its conventional low-profile diplomacy toward China , and readying itself to construct a comprehensive long-term national and regional security strategy .
The military core of such a strategy must include appropriate maritime tactics to respond to China 's assertiveness .
But , ultimately , the effectiveness - and hence the success - of such a strategy will depend on how Japan positions itself in the region , especially in the relationship with China .
The Asian Football Cup highlighted not only China 's growing nationalism , but also the parlous state of relations with Japan .
A glimpse of the silent rage of China 's populace has awakened Japan to the need for a comprehensive regional strategy .
