Reforming Bank Reform
LONDON – Over the last three years , oceans of ink ( or bytes ) have been expended on articulating schemes to solve the conundrum of “ too big to fail ” banks .
Many academics and pundits have castigated regulators and central bankers for their inability to understand the obvious attractions of so-called “ narrow banking , ” a restoration of Glass-Steagall-era separation of commercial and investment / merchant banking , or dramatically higher capital requirements .
If only one of these remedies were adopted , the world would be a safer and happier place , and taxpayers would no longer be at risk of bailing out feckless financiers .
In response , bankers have tended to argue that any interference in their business would be an unconscionable assault on their inalienable human right to lose shareholders ’ and depositors ’ money in whatever way they please .
Moreover , they argue that the cost of any increase in required equity capital would simply be passed on to borrowers in the form of higher interest rates , bringing economic growth to a grinding halt .
One might characterize this as a dialogue of the deaf , except that most deaf people manage to communicate with each other quite well , through sign language and other means .
Onto this fiercely contested terrain marches the United Kingdom ’ s Independent banking Commission , set up last year by Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne , with a brief to examine possible structural reforms to the banking system aimed at safeguarding financial stability and competition .
The Commission is chaired by Sir John Vickers , the Warden of All Souls College , Oxford , which in British academia is about as good as it gets .
At his side sits Martin Wolf of The Financial Times , so a good reception in the pink pages can be expected .
The Commission ’ s interim report , published on April 11 , is both lucid and penetrating .
It also persuasively demonstrates that all the proposed remedies come with significant costs .
The reader is obliged to conclude that regulators might not have been so dim after all .
One obvious point is that it is hard to identify a clear relationship between the financial industry ’ s structure and success or failure in the crisis .
Some universal banks did well , others badly .
Some investment banks prospered ( in Goldman Sachs ’ case , perhaps too much ) , others collapsed .
Some retail banks went belly-up , like Northern Rock , while others stayed afloat ( Santander ’ s UK subsidiary , for example ) .
Vickers gives short shrift to some of the more beguiling options .
Narrow banking , which entails retail deposits being kept in distinct entities , backed only by safe and liquid assets like government bonds , does not fare well under the All Souls microscope .
“ The social costs would be significant , ” he warns , as the synergies between deposit-taking and lending would be lost .
And governments would almost certainly have to back some lending banks , too , so the claimed benefits in terms of insulating the public purse would not be realized .
Vickers is no more enamored of so-called “ limited purpose banking , ” in which all debt is effectively securitized .
“ There would be a decrease in economic value added from intermediation , ” and loans to small and medium-size enterprises would be badly affected .
Straightforward size limits on banks also find no favor .
The Volcker rule ?
“ It is unlikely that the impact would be significant in the UK , ” or , by implication , elsewhere outside the US .
Glass-Steagall detains the Commission for rather longer , but also comes up short : “ the costs of full separation could be higher than is necessary to address the problems , ” owing in part to potential “ economies of scope between retail and wholesale / investment banking services . ” Moreover , “ full separation would remove all intra-bank diversification benefits and so eliminate the possibility that one part of the group could save another part . ”
By this point in the report , readers in the boardrooms of British banks were looking forward to a three-set walkover .
The knighted Professor was heading for the Freedom of the City of London ( an obscure but valued honor that entitles the holder to drive a flock of sheep across London Bridge ) .
But there is a sting in the tail .
One reform that does find favor is what the Commission describes as a “ retail ring-fence . ”
The impact would be to require a bank carrying out retail activities in the UK to put them in a separately capitalized subsidiary .
The capital requirements attached to that subsidiary would be more burdensome , with minimum Tier One capital set at 10 % , compared to the new Basel 3 standard of 7 % .
Such a requirement would impose costs on universal banks by constraining their ability to transfer capital within the group .
The scale of these costs is unknown , but the share prices of the banks that could be affected ( Barclays and Royal Bank of Scotland in particular ) rose when the report was published , suggesting that they are not as high as had been feared .
The major advantage of the scheme is that it dovetails with other reforms under development in Basel .
A retail ring-fence makes most sense if coupled with new a new resolution regime , which would allow a retail subsidiary to be wound up without contagion across the group .
If efforts to produce a parallel bail-in arrangement , which allows bondholders to share the pain , are also successful , we might be within sight of a sensible and not-too-costly reform with which the market can make peace – and which regulators would have a realistic chance of managing .
Those who want the banks “ cut down to size , ” even if it is a case of cutting off one ’ s nose to spite one ’ s face , are not happy with Vickers .
But , by providing an honest , rigorous assessment of the major reform proposals , the Independent Banking Commission has performed an invaluable service , and deserves recognition for a job elegantly done .
