Obama ’ s Pacific Pivot
CAMBRIDGE – Asia ’ s return to the center of world affairs is the great power shift of the twenty-first century .
In 1750 , Asia had roughly three-fifths of the world ’ s population and accounted for three-fifths of global output .
By 1900 , after the Industrial Revolution in Europe and America , Asia ’ s share of global output had shrunk to one-fifth .
By 2050 , Asia will be well on its way back to where it was 300 years earlier .
But , rather than keeping an eye on that ball , the United States wasted the first decade of this century mired in wars in Iraq and Afghanistan .
Now , as US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton put it in a recent speech , American foreign policy will “ pivot ” toward East Asia .
President Barack Obama ’ s decision to rotate 2,500 US Marines through a base in northern Australia is an early sign of that pivot .
In addition , the November Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting , held in Obama ’ s home state of Hawaii , promoted a new set of trade talks called the Trans-Pacific Partnership .
Both events reinforce Obama ’ s message to the Asia-Pacific region that the US intends to remain an engaged power .
The pivot toward Asia does not mean that other parts of the world are no longer important ; on the contrary , Europe , for example , has a much larger and richer economy than China ’ s .
But , as Obama ’ s national security adviser , Tom Donilon , recently explained , US foreign policy over the past few years has been buffeted by the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , concerns about terrorism , nuclear-proliferation threats in Iran and North Korea , and the recent Arab uprisings .
Obama ’ s November trip to Asia was an effort to align US foreign-policy priorities with the region ’ s long-term importance .
In Donilon ’ s words , “ by elevating this dynamic region to one of our top strategic priorities , Obama is showing his determination not to let our ship of state be pushed off course by prevailing crises . ”
The Obama administration also announced that , whatever the outcome of the defense-budget debates , “ we are going to make sure that we protect the capabilities that we need to maintain our presence in the Asia-Pacific ” region .
Obama ’ s November trip was also a message to China .
After the 2008 financial crisis , many Chinese expressed the mistaken belief that the US was in terminal decline , and that China should be more assertive – particularly in pursuing its maritime claims in the South China Sea – at the expense of America ’ s allies and friends .
During Obama ’ s first year in office , his administration placed a high priority on cooperation with China , but Chinese leaders seemed to misread US policy as a sign of weakness .
The administration took a tougher line when Clinton addressed the South China Sea question at the Association of Southeast Asian Nations meeting in Hanoi in July 2010 .
Chinese President Hu Jintao ’ s subsequent official visit to Washington in January 2011 was successful , but many Chinese editorialists complained that the US was trying to “ contain ” China and prevent its peaceful rise .
China ’ s anxiety about a supposed US containment policy is on the rise again , now that Clinton is insisting that the country ’ s maritime disputes with its neighbors be placed on the agenda at next year ’ s East Asia Summit in Manila , which will be attended by Obama , Hu Jintao , and other regional leaders .
But American policy toward China is different from Cold War containment of the Soviet bloc .
Whereas the US and the Soviet Union had limited trade and social contact , the US is China ’ s largest overseas market , welcomed and facilitated China ’ s entry into the World Trade Organization , and opens its universities ’ gates to 125,000 Chinese students each year .
If current US policy towards China is supposed to be Cold War-style containment , it seems unusually warm .
The Pentagon ’ s East Asia Strategy Review , which has guided American policy since 1995 , offered China integration into the international system through trade and exchange programs .
Although the US hedged its bet by simultaneously strengthening its alliance with Japan , this does not constitute containment .
After all , China ’ s leaders cannot predict their successors ’ intentions .
The US is betting that they will be peaceful , but no one knows .
A hedge expresses caution , not aggression .
American military forces do not aspire to “ contain ” China in Cold War fashion , but they can help to shape the environment in which future Chinese leaders make their choices .
I stand by my testimony before the US Congress of 1995 in response to those who , even then , wanted a policy of containment rather than engagement : “ Only China can contain China . ”
If China becomes a bully in the Asia-Pacific region , other countries will join the US to confront it .
Indeed , that is why many of China ’ s neighbors have strengthened their ties with the US since 2008 , when China ’ s foreign policy became more assertive .
But the last thing the US wants is a Cold War II in Asia .
Whatever the two sides ’ competitive positions , Sino-American cooperation on issues like trade , financial stability , energy security , climate change , and pandemics will benefit both countries .
The rest of the region stands to gain , too .
The Obama administration ’ s pivot towards Asia signals recognition of the region ’ s great potential , not a clarion call for containment .
