Immigration and the New Class Divide
SINGAPORE – The British shadow minister for Europe , Pat McFadden , recently warned members of his Labour Party that they should try to make the most of the global economy and not treat immigration like a disease .
As he put it , “ You can feed on people ’ s grievances or you can give people a chance .
And I think our policies should be around giving people a chance . ”
In a world increasingly dominated by grievances – against immigrants , bankers , Muslims , “ liberal elites , ” “ Eurocrats , ” cosmopolitans , or anything else that seems vaguely alien – such wise words are rare .
Leaders worldwide should take note .
In the United States , Republicans – backed by their Tea Party activists – are threatening to close the government down just because President Barack Obama has offered undocumented immigrants who have lived and worked in the US for many years a chance to gain citizenship .
The United Kingdom Independence Party ( UKIP ) wants to introduce a five-year ban on immigration for permanent settlement .
Russia ’ s deputy prime minister , Dmitry Rogozin , once released a video promising to “ clean the rubbish ” – meaning migrant workers , mostly from former Soviet republics – “ away from Moscow . ”
Even the once famously tolerant Dutch and Danes are increasingly voting for parties that fulminate against the scourge of immigration .
Always keen to assert the freedom to insult Muslims , the Dutch Freedom Party wants to ban all mosques .
And the tiny and much-harassed opposition parties in Singapore – a country where almost everyone is descended from immigrants – are gaining traction by appealing to popular gripes about immigrants ( mostly from India and China ) who are supposedly taking jobs from “ natives . ”
What can American Tea Party enthusiasts , Russian chauvinists , fearful Dutch and Danes , and Singaporean leftists possibly have in common that is driving this anti-immigrant sentiment ?
Retaining one ’ s job in a tightening economy is undoubtedly a serious concern .
But the livelihoods of most of the middle-aged rural white Americans who support the Tea Party are hardly threatened by poor Mexican migrants .
UKIP is popular in some parts of England where immigrants are rarely seen .
And many of the Dutch Freedom Party ’ s voters live nowhere near a mosque .
Anti-immigrant sentiment cuts across the old left-right divide .
One thing Tea Party or UKIP supporters share with working-class voters who genuinely fear losing their jobs to low-paid foreigners is anxiety about being left behind in a world of easy mobility , supranational organizations , and global networking .
On the right , support for conservative parties is split between business interests that benefit from immigration or supranational institutions , and groups that feel threatened by them .
That is why the British Tories are so afraid of UKIP .
Nigel Farage , UKIP ’ s leader , is less concerned with economic growth than with pursuing his extreme conception of national independence .
On the left , opinion is split between those who oppose racism and intolerance above all and those who want to protect employment and preserve “ solidarity ” for what is left of the native-born working class .
It would be a mistake to dismiss anxiety about immigration as mere bigotry or apprehension about the globalized economy as simply reactionary .
National , religious , and cultural identities ( for lack of a better word ) are being transformed , though less by immigration than by the development of globalized capitalism .
In the new global economy , there are clear winners and losers .
Educated men and women who can communicate effectively in varied international contexts are benefiting .
People who lack the needed education or experience – and there are many of them – are struggling .
In other words , the new class divisions run less between the rich and the poor than between educated metropolitan elites and less sophisticated , less flexible , and , in every sense , less connected provincials .
It is irrelevant that the provincials ’ political leaders ( and their backers ) are sometimes wealthier than the resented metropolitan elites .
They still feel looked down upon .
And so they share the bitterness of those who feel alienated in a world they find bewildering and hateful .
Populist rabble-rousers like to stir up such resentments by ranting about foreigners who work for a pittance or not at all .
But it is the relative success of ethnic minorities and immigrants that is more upsetting to indigenous populations .
This explains the popular hostility toward Obama .
Americans know that , before too long , whites will be just another minority , and people of color will increasingly be in positions of power .
At this point , all Tea Partiers and others like them can do is declare , “ We want our country back ! ”
Of course , this is an impossible demand .
Short of unleashing massive and bloody ethnic cleansing – Bosnia , on a continental scale – Americans and others have no choice but to get used to living in increasingly diverse societies .
Likewise , economic globalization cannot be undone .
But regulation can and should be improved .
After all , some things are still worth protecting .
There are good reasons not to leave culture , education , lifestyles , or jobs completely exposed to the creative destruction of market forces .
McFadden has pinpointed the central solution to globalization ’ s challenges : giving people “ the tools to reap the benefits ” of the globalized world , thereby making the “ connected world work better for people . ”
The problem is that this call is more likely to appeal to the highly educated , already privileged classes than to those who feel disenfranchised in today ’ s global economy .
This is a serious problem for political parties on the left , which increasingly seem to be speaking for the metropolitan elites , while provincial populists are pushing traditional conservatives further to the right by fishing in the dark waters of popular resentment .
