Paul Krugman and the Obama Recovery
NEW YORK – For several years , and often several times a month , the Nobel laureate economist and New York Times columnist and blogger Paul Krugman has delivered one main message to his loyal readers : deficit-cutting “ austerians ” ( as he calls advocates of fiscal austerity ) are deluded .
Fiscal retrenchment amid weak private demand would lead to chronically high unemployment .
Indeed , deficit cuts would court a reprise of 1937 , when Franklin D. Roosevelt prematurely reduced the New Deal stimulus and thereby threw the United States back into recession .
Well , Congress and the White House did indeed play the austerian card from mid-2011 onward .
The federal budget deficit has declined from 8.4 % of GDP in 2011 to a predicted 2.9 % of GDP for all of 2014 .
And , according to the International Monetary Fund , the structural deficit ( sometimes called the “ full-employment deficit ” ) , a measure of fiscal stimulus , has fallen from 7.8 % of potential GDP to 4 % of potential GDP from 2011 to 2014 .
Krugman has vigorously protested that deficit reduction has prolonged and even intensified what he repeatedly calls a “ depression ” ( or sometimes a “ low-grade depression ” ) .
Only fools like the United Kingdom ’ s leaders ( who reminded him of the Three Stooges ) could believe otherwise .
Yet , rather than a new recession , or an ongoing depression , the US unemployment rate has fallen from 8.6 % in November 2011 to 5.8 % in November 2014 . Real economic growth in 2011 stood at 1.6 % , and the IMF expects it to be 2.2 % for 2014 as a whole .
GDP in the third quarter of 2014 grew at a vigorous 5 % annual rate , suggesting that aggregate growth for all of 2015 will be above 3 % .
So much for Krugman ’ s predictions .
Not one of his New York Times commentaries in the first half of 2013 , when “ austerian ” deficit cutting was taking effect , forecast a major reduction in unemployment or that economic growth would recover to brisk rates .
On the contrary , “ the disastrous turn toward austerity has destroyed millions of jobs and ruined many lives , ” he argued , with the US Congress exposing Americans to “ the imminent threat of severe economic damage from short-term spending cuts . ”
As a result , “ Full recovery still looks a very long way off , ” he warned .
“ And I ’ m beginning to worry that it may never happen . ”
I raise all of this because Krugman took a victory lap in his end-of-2014 column on “ The Obama Recovery . ”
The recovery , according to Krugman , has come not despite the austerity he railed against for years , but because we “ seem to have stopped tightening the screws : Public spending isn ’ t surging , but at least it has stopped falling .
And the economy is doing much better as a result . ”
That is an incredible claim .
The budget deficit has been brought down sharply , and unemployment has declined .
Yet Krugman now says that everything has turned out just as he predicted .
In fact , Krugman has been conflating two distinct ideas as if both were components of “ progressive ” thinking .
On one hand , he has been the “ conscience of a liberal , ” rightly focusing on how government can combat poverty , poor health , environmental degradation , rising inequality , and other social ills .
I admire that side of Krugman ’ s writing , and , as I wrote in my book The Price of Civilization , I agree with him .
On the other hand , Krugman has inexplicably taken up the mantle of crude aggregate-demand management , making it seem that favoring large budget deficits in recent years is also part of progressive economics .
( Krugman ’ s position is sometimes called Keynesianism , but John Maynard Keynes knew much better than Krugman that we should not depend on mechanistic “ demand multipliers ” to set the unemployment rate . )
Deficits were not increased enough in 2009 to escape from high unemployment , he insisted , and were falling dangerously fast after 2010 .
Obviously , recent trends – a significant decline in the unemployment rate and a reasonably high and accelerating rate of economic growth – cast doubt on Krugman ’ s macroeconomic diagnosis ( though not on his progressive politics ) .
And the same trends have been apparent in the United Kingdom , where Prime Minister David Cameron ’ s government has cut the structural budget deficit from 8.4 % of potential GDP in 2010 to 4.1 % in 2014 , while the unemployment rate has fallen from 7.9 % when Cameron took office to 6 % , according to the most recent data for the fall of 2014 .
To be clear , I believe that we do need more government spending as a share of GDP – for education , infrastructure , low-carbon energy , research and development , and family benefits for low-income families .
But we should pay for this through higher taxes on high incomes and high net worth , a carbon tax , and future tolls collected on new infrastructure .
We need the liberal conscience , but without the chronic budget deficits .
There is nothing progressive about large budget deficits and a rising debt-to-GDP ratio .
After all , large deficits have no reliable effect on reducing unemployment , and deficit reduction can be consistent with falling unemployment .
Krugman is a great economic theorist – and a great polemicist .
But he should replace his polemical hat with his analytical one and reflect more deeply on recent experience : deficit-cutting accompanied by recovery , job creation , and lower unemployment .
This should be an occasion for him to rethink his long-standing macroeconomic mantra , rather than claiming vindication for ideas that recent trends seem to contradict .
