America ’ s Lethal Fear of Science
NEW YORK – A rare , deadly , and highly contagious disease is spreading across the United States , having infected more than 100 people since the beginning of the year , with thousands more at risk .
This is not the doomsday Ebola scenario that so many were envisioning when the first case in the US was diagnosed five months ago .
The resurgence is of the measles – a disease that the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention declared eradicated in 2000 , thanks to a highly effective and safe vaccine .
What went wrong ?
Since 2000 , measles cases in the US have been attributed largely to travelers bringing the disease into the country .
In recent years , however , measles has become increasingly common , with the number of cases climbing above 150 in 2013 , and then jumping to 644 last year – the most cases recorded in a single year since the late 1990s .
This year already appears likely to top that record .
The upsurge in cases can be explained largely by the increase in the number of unvaccinated children .
Americans are learning the hard way that scientifically baseless skepticism about the safety of vaccines is extremely dangerous .
Measles may have a lower mortality rate than Ebola , but its potential to inflict suffering and death – especially on young children – remains considerable .
Indeed , before vaccination made measles a rarity , the disease was widely feared , killing thousands of children every year .
The tragic irony of vaccination in America is that it has become a victim of its own success .
As the number of people who have witnessed firsthand the effects of measles and other childhood diseases – such as mumps , rubella , polio , and whooping cough – has declined , so has society ’ s commitment to keeping them away .
Even after panicked claims that vaccines cause visible conditions like autism were proved to be nonsense , they remain more compelling than the threat of a disease that people have never seen or do not remember .
Of course , vaccinations can have some side effects , such as a rash , fatigue , headache , or a fever .
But claims that significant , permanent damage resulting from vaccines is widespread are entirely unfounded .
Andrew Wakefield first claimed that there was a relationship between the measles , mumps , and rubella vaccine and autism in 1998 . But it soon came to light that he had falsified his evidence , and his “ research ” was retracted .
Wakefield was later banned from practicing medicine in his home country , the United Kingdom , for “ serious professional misconduct . ”
But the damage had been done .
Despite Wakefield ’ s ostracism from the medical community and the exposure of his deceptions – not to mention numerous scientific studies that did not find any link whatsoever between vaccines and autism – he has retained a devoted following in the US .
Making matters worse , irresponsible and ignorant celebrities have seized upon his lies , using their access to the media to spread conspiracy theories and propaganda against vaccinations .
As a result , vaccination rates continue to decline – and in some communities , especially in California and Oregon , they have plummeted .
From 1996 to 2015 , there was a six-fold increase in the rate of vaccine exemptions for students entering elementary school in California .
This has contributed to the spread not only of measles , but also of whooping cough and mumps .
Parents argue that vaccination , like all other decisions about how to raise and care for their children , should be their choice .
But , when it comes to vaccination , one family ’ s poor judgment can mean sickness or even death for another ’ s .
When enough members of a community are vaccinated , a sort of “ immunity buffer ” is created , adding an extra layer of protection for vaccinated individuals , while shielding those who are not eligible for particular vaccines , such as infants or people with compromised immune systems – individuals for whom disease-mortality rates are highest .
This phenomenon is called “ herd immunity , ” and it has been vital to vaccines ’ effectiveness .
This is not the first time that the American public has allowed fear to dictate public policy .
Just a few months ago , Americans were terrified that Ebola could take hold in their country .
Rather than providing responsible leadership , politicians like New Jersey Governor Chris Christie and Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky stoked the panic in an effort to win support in advance of last November ’ s midterm elections .
Experts ’ attempts to impress upon Americans how difficult Ebola is to transmit , and how unlikely an Ebola epidemic in the US was , fell largely on deaf ears .
Today , Americans are again refusing to heed experts ’ advice – only , this time , they really are facing a serious threat .
Worse , politicians like Christie and Paul have tacitly ( or not so tacitly ) supported parents who choose not to vaccinate their children , regardless of the scientific consensus that such parents are contributing to a genuine public health crisis .
Paul – who is , ironically , a physician – went so far as to mention the many children he knew who suffered “ profound mental disorders ” after having had vaccinations , indulging the anti-vaccination advocates who might support him politically , while stopping short of making a false scientific claim .
( By his logic , vaccines make people taller , too ; after all , nearly every child I have known has grown taller after being vaccinated . )
The scientific method is perhaps the greatest arbiter of truth humanity has ever devised .
We must trust in it to help make sense of an uncertain world , and to help us determine how best to nourish and protect our children and ourselves .
When parents are allowed – or , worse , encouraged – to choose fear over science , we all pay the price .
