Israel ’ s Victory of Fear
TEL AVIV – Binyamin Netanyahu is probably the most deficient prime minister in Israel ’ s history .
His blunders and vices have been laid bare in great abundance during his nine years in power .
When he embarked on his most recent campaign for re-election , even his own supporters and constituents could not hide their disgust at his egomaniacal behavior and his wife ’ s embarrassing public conduct .
Beyond Netanyahu ’ s noxious personal characteristics , Israel has consolidated its position as one of the OECD ’ s most unequal countries under his rule .
Netanyahu , the most fanatic neo-liberal leader in Israel ’ s history , asked the country ’ s penurious middle class and poor to re-elect him on a record of high living costs , unaffordable housing , and a 21 % poverty rate .
Yet re-elect him they did .
Nor could Netanyahu find any respectable security experts to vouch for his return to power .
Some 180 generals and war heroes , chief among them Meir Dagan , one of the most revered former heads of Mossad , Israel ’ s intelligence service , came together to oppose the re-election of a man they described as a threat to Israel ’ s security .
But one does not have to be a security icon to see how Netanyahu has burned Israel ’ s bridges with the international community , particularly the United States , Israel ’ s most indispensable ally and benefactor .
Not only did he openly seek to sabotage President Barack Obama ’ s negotiations with Iran by aligning himself with Obama ’ s Republican opponents ; two days before the election , he suddenly reneged on his commitment to the two-state solution , the cornerstone of the international community ’ s vision for achieving peace in the Middle East .
Given all of this , why did Israeli voters reward Netanyahu with a third consecutive term as prime minister ( indeed , with his most comfortable margin of victory since his first election in 1996 ) ?
Quite simply , the vast majority of Israelis agree with Netanyahu in a fundamental respect : A small country surrounded by enemies , in a chaotic region of failing states and vicious non-state actors like Hamas , Hezbollah , and now the Islamic State , cannot afford to run elections on socioeconomic platforms as if it were a peaceful West European duchy .
The pathetic attempt by Netanyahu ’ s opponents to shift the campaign to the spiraling cost of living and prohibitive housing prices was easily defeated by that compelling message .
One must , after all , ensure life , before working on the cost of living .
Like their prime minister , this ever-growing constituency does not trust Arabs , including those who are their fellow citizens .
Liberal Israelis were shocked by Netanyahu ’ s warning on Election Day of “ Arabs voting in droves , bussed in by the left . ”
But to his constituents , emulating the racist politics of Europe ’ s far right was a legitimate exhortation to turn out .
Nor were they scandalized when Netanyahu reneged on his commitment to the creation of a Palestinian state .
The Palestinians , having turned down the peace proposals of left-leaning governments as well as the most comprehensive US peace proposal , the so-called Clinton parameters , appear to such voters as not really interested in peace .
They also agree with Netanyahu that Israel ’ s disengagement from Gaza , and the subsequent rise of Hamas there , proves that every piece of land that Israel relinquishes is destined to turn into a base for launching missiles against the country .
There is , however , another reason for Netanyahu ’ s victory .
The left failed to recognize that Israeli elections are not strictly political affairs ; they are an expression of an ongoing Kulturkampf in an ethnically kaleidoscopic society .
Israeli elections are in some ways a tribal affair ; people vote on the basis of memories , insults , religious sensibilities , and group grievances .
The Israeli right ’ s current political dominance is fed by a widespread yearning for Jewish roots , a deep-seated fear of Arabs , and an uncompromising mistrust of a “ world , ” the so-called international community , with which Jews have a centuries-old dispute .
The left ’ s yearning for peace is seen as naive , if not an exercise in political lunacy ( and in either case an unpardonable betrayal of Jewish identity ) .
Netanyahu positioned himself as a magnet for the fears and complexes of a broad array of aggrieved voters , including Russian immigrants , Orthodox Jews , most traditionalist Israelis , and religious settlers .
Whether motivated by tribal animosities , an ideological rejection of the peace process , or cultural estrangement from Israel ’ s liberal elites , anyone who feels alienated – ethnically , culturally , or socially – joined Netanyahu to defeat those on the left who had usurped Jewish history and betrayed Eretz Israel .
Achieving a two-state solution would be a formidable task even if Israel had not explicitly voted against it .
Indeed , the hope that Netanyahu ’ s opponents could achieve a breakthrough is misplaced .
The Palestinians , after all , never accepted any of the left ’ s peace proposals over the years , and the current fragmentation of Palestinian politics – defined by a weak and ineffective PLO and a Hamas obsessed with an irrational and self-defeating war option – does not give room for much optimism .
The Israeli left certainly cannot be expected , after years in opposition , to crack the code of Israel ’ s labyrinthine politics and lead the country toward a peace agreement with Palestine .
If the Palestinians are to avoid the sad destiny of the Kurds , the world ’ s largest stateless nation , and if Israel is to extricate itself from its suicidal march to an apartheid state , both parties need the world to save them from themselves .
But does the world have the will , and the wisdom , to act ?
