Raising The Left From The Dead
LONDON : Victory by the Labour Party in the British election is an historic event , whose implications will spread far beyond Europe .
It reminds us that in a democracy no ideology or party can ever take success for granted .
Under Margaret Thatcher , Britain 's Conservatives secured a seemingly unbreakable grip on power , dominating political and economic debate .
In fact , Conservatives have ruled Britain for 70 out of the last 100 years , almost the same proportion of this century that the Communists ruled Russia .
Such was the confidence in the Conservatives ' political monopoly that , after the last elections , many commentators doubted whether a Labour government would ever be returned to office .
Five years later , the same question is being asked about the tattered , demoralised Conservatives , who seem on the verge of a party split which could condemn them to opposition for decades .
Shattering political monopolies is what democracy is all about .
A second lesson from Britain is that politics is not always driven by economics .
This election has proved that a booming economy is not enough to assure a government of re-election or even protect it from electoral catastrophe .
As the Conservatives ' unpopularity plumbed depths never before recorded in the public opinion polls , cynics in Britain said that people might talk from their hearts , but vote from their wallets .
They might tell pollsters they were prepared to pay higher taxes for better public services and a more compassionate attitude to the poor .
But in the end they would do exactly what they had done in each of the previous four elections - vote for a Party which proclaimed " every man for himself " .
Today this pseudo-Marxist theory for economic determinism has been refuted once and for all .
In 1992 , John Major ran for re-election in the midst of an economic slump , a vicious monetary squeeze and the aftermath of a rapid inflation .
Economic determinists predicted that he did not stand a chance .
He won .
Five years later , Britain has the strongest economy in Europe , with unemployment halved and inflation a non-issue .
Voters showed their gratitude by crushing John Major .
Rarely , has history provided a more precise controlled experiment to test a political proposition - and prove it false .
We can now say with confidence that Marx was wrong : politics does not follow economics .
What account for this dramatic change ?
Half the explanation lies in the weakness and incompetence of John Major .
In trying to explain the astonishing repudiation of Major 's government , British commentators have quoted a comment made by Harold Macmillan in the 1960s , when he was asked what was the greatest problem a Prime Minister faced : " Events , dear boy , events " .
It was Major 's complete inability to deal with the unexpected , his capacity to turn small political setbacks into major crises , which incited public contempt for his government .
While many of his policies achieved satisfactory results , especially in economics , Major always looked like a victim of events , rather than their master .
The other half of the explanation is to be found in the Labour opposition and its leader Tony Blair .
Blair completed the purge of the party 's marxist left-wingers which began almost 10 years ago .
He repudiated its traditional socialist ideology , rewriting the party 's constitution to remove all references to state ownership .
He abandoned even the social democratic commitment to redistribution of income through taxes and public spending .
Blair has proposed a new version of left-wing politics , completely detached from the economic preoccupations of the Marxist tradition .
For him , the difference between left and right is moral , not economic .
The great divide in politics is not about how the economy should be run , but instead over the social relationship between the government and the people .
During the right-wing ascendancy of the past 20 years , the pendulum of politics swung too far towards individualism and ignored the capacity of collective action , regulated or organised by governments , to achieve what individuals could not do .
This may sound abstract , but British voters seemed to understand what Blair meant .
According to the polls , voters were not moved by questions about personal prosperity and taxes .
They were more interested in social issues such as improving hospitals and schools and preventing crime .
Voters were also surprisingly indifferent to the issue of Europe , which obsessed the Conservatives and dominated domestic and international politics in the Major years .
In every western country - first in America , now in Britain and soon perhaps in France and Germany too - there seems to be a growing sense that the domestic problems which really matter to voters have been neglected by politicians who prefer to strut the international or European stage .
( Even in Russia , the issue of Nato enlargement has failed to excite widespread public outcry , despite the focus on it by the new Kremlin elite . )
Blair 's election could mark a renationalisation of politics in Europe .
Blair is the first leader of a major European country with no memories of WWII or the hardships of post-war reconstruction .
Europe , for him , is a simply a practical and geographic reality -- neither a shining vision nor a mortal threat .
Here is an attractive , intelligent young leader of the Left with a belief in social solidarity and a strong social conscience -- but with none of the paranoia so evident in Europe about global competition and American domination and very little interest in the massive bureaucratic structures of trans-national integration which in Europe have become identified with left-wing ideals .
In opposition Blair showed there was life after Thatcherism for the Left .
Now that he is in government , he will inspire new hope for the Left across Europe .
He may even offer an alternative vision to the bureaucratic bankers ' Europe promoted by Helmut Kohl and the Franco-German centre-right .
