Read China ’ s Lips
NEW HAVEN – The Chinese have long admired America ’ s economic dynamism .
But they have lost confidence in America ’ s government and its dysfunctional economic stewardship .
That message came through loud and clear in my recent travels to Beijing , Shanghai , Chongqing , and Hong Kong .
Coming so shortly on the heels of the subprime crisis , the debate over the debt ceiling and the budget deficit is the last straw .
Senior Chinese officials are appalled at how the United States allows politics to trump financial stability .
One high-ranking policymaker noted in mid-July , “ This is truly shocking … We understand politics , but your government ’ s continued recklessness is astonishing . ”
China is no innocent bystander in America ’ s race to the abyss .
In the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990 ’ s , China amassed some $ 3.2 trillion in foreign-exchange reserves in order to insulate its system from external shocks .
Fully two-thirds of that total – around $ 2 trillion – is invested in dollar-based assets , largely US Treasuries and agency securities ( i.e. , Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac ) .
As a result , China surpassed Japan in late 2008 as the largest foreign holder of US financial assets .
Not only did China feel secure in placing such a large bet on the once relatively riskless components of the world ’ s reserve currency , but its exchange-rate policy left it little choice .
In order to maintain a tight relationship between the renminbi and the dollar , China had to recycle a disproportionate share of its foreign-exchange reserves into dollar-based assets .
Those days are over .
China recognizes that it no longer makes sense to stay with its current growth strategy – one that relies heavily on a combination of exports and a massive buffer of dollar-denominated foreign-exchange reserves .
Three key developments led the Chinese leadership to this conclusion :
First , the crisis and Great Recession of 2008-2009 were a wake-up call .
While Chinese export industries remain highly competitive , there are understandable doubts about the post-crisis state of foreign demand for Chinese products .
From the US to Europe to Japan – crisis-battered developed economies that collectively account for more than 40 % of Chinese exports – end-market demand is likely to grow at a slower pace in the years ahead than it did during China ’ s export boom of the past 30 years .
Long the most powerful driver of Chinese growth , there is now considerable downside to an export-led impetus .
Second , the costs of the insurance premium – the outsize , largely dollar-denominated reservoir of China ’ s foreign-exchange reserves – have been magnified by political risk .
With US government debt repayment now in play , the very concept of dollar-based riskless assets is in doubt .
In recent years , Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and President Hu Jintao have repeatedly expressed concerns about US fiscal policy and the safe-haven status of Treasuries .
Like most Americans , China ’ s leaders believe that the US will ultimately dodge the bullet of an outright default .
But that ’ s not the point .
There is now great skepticism as to the substance of any “ fix ” – especially one that relies on smoke and mirrors to postpone meaningful fiscal adjustment .
All of this spells lasting damage to the credibility of Washington ’ s commitment to the “ full faith and credit ” of the US government .
And that raises serious questions about the wisdom of China ’ s massive investments in dollar-denominated assets .
Finally , China ’ s leadership is mindful of the risks implied by its own macroeconomic imbalances – and of the role that its export-led growth and dollar-based foreign-exchange accumulation plays in perpetuating those imbalances .
Moreover , the Chinese understand the political pressure that a growth-starved developed world is putting on its tight management of the renminbi ’ s exchange rate relative to the dollar – pressure that is strikingly reminiscent of a similar campaign directed at Japan in the mid-1980 ’ s .
However , unlike Japan , China will not accede to calls for a sharp one-off revaluation of the renminbi .
At the same time , it recognizes the need to address these geopolitical tensions .
But China will do so by providing stimulus to internal demand , thereby weaning itself from relying on dollar-based assets .
With these considerations in mind , China has adopted a very transparent response .
Its new 12th Five-Year Plan says it all – a pro-consumption shift in China ’ s economic structure that addresses head-on China ’ s unsustainable imbalances .
By focusing on job creation in services , massive urbanization , and the broadening of its social safety net , there will be a big boost to labor income and consumer purchasing power .
As a result , the consumption share of the Chinese economy could increase by at least five percentage points of GDP by 2015 .
A consumer-led rebalancing addresses many of the tensions noted above .
It moves economic growth away from a dangerous over reliance on external demand , while shifting support to untapped internal demand .
In addition , it takes the heat off an undervalued currency as a prop to export growth , giving China considerable leeway to step up the pace of currency reforms .
But , by raising the consumption share of its GDP , China will also absorb much of its surplus saving .
That could bring its current account into balance – or even into slight deficit – by 2015 .
That will sharply reduce the pace of foreign-exchange accumulation and cut into China ’ s open-ended demand for dollar-denominated assets .
So China , the largest foreign buyer of US government paper , will soon say , “ enough . ”
Yet another vacuous budget deal , in conjunction with weaker-than-expected growth for the US economy for years to come , spells a protracted period of outsize government deficits .
That raises the biggest question of all : lacking in Chinese demand for Treasuries , how will a savings-strapped US economy fund itself without suffering a sharp decline in the dollar and / or a major increase in real long-term interest rates ?
The cavalier response heard from Washington insiders is that the Chinese wouldn ’ t dare spark such an endgame .
After all , where else would they place their asset bets ?
Why would they risk losses in their massive portfolio of dollar-based assets ?
China ’ s answers to those questions are clear : it is no longer willing to risk financial and economic stability on the basis of Washington ’ s hollow promises and tarnished economic stewardship .
The Chinese are finally saying no .
Read their lips .
