An Assassination in Belgrade
Not since Archduke Franz Ferdinand 's assassination has a murder shaken Belgrade as much as the killing of Serbian Premier Zoran Djindjic .
The bullets that killed Djindjic may also have slain Serbian hopes for normalcy at the very moment that we were emerging from the nightmare of Slobodan Milosevic 's long misrule .
With the bloody wars of the Yugoslav succession still etched deeply in everyone 's minds , does Djindjic 's assassination herald the end of an era of political violence or the dawn of a new one ?
Milosevic 's ouster two years ago was turbulent , but no one was killed .
Serbs were justly proud : a dictatorship was ended in a democratic , peaceful way .
Milosevic 's extradition to face charges of war crimes before the Hague Tribunal--a trial that has proceeded without incident in Serbia--was also peaceful .
With relations in the region and with the West approaching something like normalcy , Serbs were beginning to feel , at long last , that they were finding peace with themselves and the world .
Of course , assassinations are nothing new in Serbia .
" Arkan , " the leader of the most murderous paramilitary group in the wars in Bosnia and Kosovo , and a political power even after Milosevic 's fall , was murdered in Belgrade last year .
Djindjic himself narrowly escaped a highway assassination attempt only last month .
But most Serbs were beginning to believe that the ballot and not the gun was becoming the dominant tool of politics .
Djindjic 's effective leadership brought about this change .
Although the most popular politician of the uprising against Milosevic was Vojislav Kostunica , who replaced him as president , it was Djindjic who skillfully coordinated the volatile coalition that opposed the regime .
His boundless energy and quick thinking delivered success from behind the scenes .
As Serbia 's prime minister after Milosevic , he resembled a corporate CEO more than the Heidelberg-educated philosophy professor that he was .
Djindjic remained pragmatic , never doctrinaire .
As a result of Serbia 's predicament , he accumulated more power than prime ministers typically wield .
Milosevic 's regime left behind crippled institutions , with large sections of the police and judiciary and many state-owned companies remaining under the control of Milosevic 's clique .
With little trust in existing institutions to implement reforms , Djindjic often took shortcuts , using extra-legal means and improvised parliamentary majorities to push through legislation .
Only prosperity and a " European Serbia " mattered .
Did these short cuts help incite his death ?
Who can say ?
They certainly did little to build respect for the rule of law .
Yet the immediate consequences of Djindjic 's death will be tragic .
He was seen in the West as a reformer , and reform may not proceed without him .
If it does not , urgently needed Western investment won 't materialize .
Serbia will again seem a benighted and lawless land .
Although Djindjic was not popular , only extreme nationalists and die-hard Milosevic supporters are cheering .
They regard his murder as just punishment for the " traitor " Djindjic 's decision to extradite Milosevic--and other Serbian " heroes " --to The Hague .
The more dangerous outcome is that the assassination may reinforce the belief in Serbia that only authoritarian rule is possible .
Given the prevalence of this belief , Djindjic 's death creates a serious power vacuum precisely because his vast personal power was moving Serbia in some of the right directions .
Now , it is feared , organized crime will intimidate his less talented successors .
For now , Serbia 's government has imposed a state of emergency .
But effective or quick suppression of the organized criminals who were almost certainly behind Djindjic 's murder is unlikely .
The reason for this also explains why Djindjic could not rely on the Serb state to carry out his policies .
Many policemen and intelligence officers are on the crime bosses ' payrolls .
The fact that a former president of Serbia , Ivan Stambolic , could disappear without a trace in 1999 is grim testimony to the power of Serbia 's criminal underworld .
Indeed , Djindjic may well be a victim of his recent moves to root out organized crime .
He was initially slow in fighting organized crime , because he did not want to alienate the bulk of Milosevic 's mafia-infested establishment at once .
He preferred to confront corrupt institutions one at a time as he consolidated his rule .
Sadly , he may also have needed the support of some crime bosses at the outset .
Djindjic 's murder will make the fight against crime the country 's main political goal .
In this , politicians will at last have something like united public support .
But crime would not be as powerful as it is , and the police and judiciary would not be as corrupt , if Serbia 's economy were in better shape .
Serbia is poor and Western aid is desperately needed .
Djindjic 's murder shows that the situation is so dire that aid should no longer be strictly conditional on harsh reforms .
For the moment , extreme nationalists and Milosevic supporters may feel triumphant .
But the one certain success of Djindjic 's era is that they will never return to power .
Their vision of a chauvinistic , inward-looking Serbia has been discredited , while Djindjic 's stance may become more popular due to his martyrdom .
Moments of defeat have always been history 's turning points in Serbia .
Once again , Serbs face such a moment .
This time , however , we must resolve to remember Zoran Djindjic 's cause--political and economic liberty--more than his blood sacrifice .
