Kosovo \ u0027s Constitutional Fiction
PRISTINA , KOSOVO : One year after NATO 's war over Kosovo , renewal is to be seen everywhere : in reconstructed houses ; in the many shops opened in the ground floors of ruined buildings ; in the budding cultural , intellectual , and journalistic life of Pristina .
In only one area – politics – do these energies face a serious obstacle .
Kosovo 's political logjam is due , in part , to the inexperience of Kosovo 's political parties , but it is mostly the result of a contradiction in UN Resolution 1244 which serves , for now , as a kind of constitution for Kosovo .
This document maintains the fiction that Kosovo is subject to the " sovereignty " of the " Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . "
In the resolution 's words , the UN mission for Kosovo ( UNMIK ) must provide " substantial self-government for Kosovo " while " taking full account " of " the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . "
Considering that it was Yugoslavia under the Slobodan Milosevic , an indicted war-criminal , which attempted genocide against the Albanian majority of Kosovo , the requirement seems akin to telling someone to jump ten feet into the air while taking into full account the need to keep his feet on the ground .
The provision , adopted to satisfy countries worried about their own potential breakaway regions ( Chechnya in Russia , and Tibet in China ) , violates the principle , engraved in common sense if not in international law , that genocide nullifies sovereignty – that a state cannot seek to extinguish a people and yet insist on governing them .
UNMIK , of course , was not established to carry out the orders of Slobodan Milosevic and does not do so .
Nevertheless , the contradiction at the heart of 1244 hinders Kosovo 's administration .
Consider privatization of the economy , formerly run on socialist lines .
Under the Yugoslavian constitution of 1974 now provisionally used in revised form by UNMIK , industry is " owned " by parliament .
( In reality , of course , the Communist Party was in charge . )
However , Kosovo has no parliament , while Yugoslavia ( meaning , Serbia ) does .
Theoretically , funds from privatization in Kosovo should go to Serbia .
UNMIK scarcely intends to send money to Milosevic ; yet neither , thanks to 1244 , can it set up a Kosovar parliament .
Legal limbo is the result .
Ajri Begu , head of the Bank for Payments and Transfers and co-head of UNMIK 's economic policy board , comments , " Life started here from the first day after the war .
Now we have done what we can do as citizens , and we need someone to play the role of a state to set the rules for investment . "
But a state is what Resolution 1244 rules out .
Kosovo is something utterly new : an internationally mandated stateless state .
It has every form of political organization : NGOs , an international governing authority , political parties of every stripe .
But what it needs most , namely government , it is denied .
So everything is improvised .
Those doing the improvising , unfortunately , are not only UNMIK , but criminals , both international and domestic , who revel in a legal vacuum .
Their specialties are drugs , smuggling , and , recently , traffic in women .
Corruption may become what it has nearly become in Russia : not the exception to the rule but the rule itself .
This October local elections will be held .
What will be the powers , competencies , and resources of the mayors to be elected ?
Whatever rules are improvised by UNMIK , they will lack the legitimacy which a Kosovar constitution would enjoy .
No matter how well intentioned , UNMIK rule cannot be democratic .
Intervention in Kosovo will succeed only when a true body politic is established .
UNMIK can act more boldly to create economic and political structures than so far .
Yet , due to Resolution1244 , it cannot write a constitution for Kosovo .
Russia , China , and others on the Security Council would likely prevent this .
Can the Kosovars write a constitution on their own ?
Maybe .
Given today 's legal ambiguity , there appear to be few obstacle to moves by the Kosovars to establish their own governing institutions .
To suggest this is not to say that it will occur .
The degree of devotion to democracy among local parties is unknown .
Political violence has rampaged since the war – not only against Serbs but against political moderates .
In the war 's aftermath , the Kosovo Liberation Army unilaterally took de-facto power in many cities .
The UN accommodated these self-appointed authorities .
Will the KLA willingly relinquish office if a democratic vote goes against them ?
The answer is unclear .
Success in resolving these issues has repercussions beyond Kosovo .
It could offer an example of successful international intervention to prevent a human catastrophe .
Failure would cast a shadow over similar efforts in future .
Ardian Arifaj , managing editor of Koha Ditore , Kosovo 's most alert newspaper , comments that " it is in a way a good thing that ' the internationals ' don 't have a vision for Kosovo .
It leaves room for us to develop a vision . "
Mrs. Nekibe Kelmendi , whose son and husband were murdered at the war 's outset , and who is now Co-head of the Department of Justice for Kosovo , agrees . " We do not need to ask the security council in order to become a state .
There are other paths .
In part , it will depend on other states around us , who can recognize us .
In the last analysis , self-government cannot be derived from international documents ; it is in the people .
It is ours . "
