Mr. Hu Goes to Washington
LONDON – President Hu Jintao will travel to the United States for his third official visit as China ’ s leader on January 19 .
It may be his last before he hands over power to his apparently designated successor , Vice President Xi Jinping , in 2012 – coincidentally the same year that President Barack Obama will be campaigning for a second term in the White House .
According to Forbes Magazine , Hu is the most powerful man in the world .
Leaving aside the fact that power at the top is much more bureaucratically institutionalized in China than it was in Mao Zedong ’ s day ( a good thing ) , certainly this visit is hugely important .
Indeed , the US-China relationship will be the most significant bilateral engagement in shaping the course of the twenty-first century .
At the heart of globalization has been the emergence of fast-growing economies , most notably Brazil , India , and , above all , China .
The US , of course , remains the world ’ s only superpower – militarily , economically , politically , and culturally .
While the world ’ s democracies are not slow to criticize American leadership , they know that they rely on the US in tackling most serious global problems .
Without America , nothing much gets done .
But China now has enough commercial clout , backed by more than $ 2 trillion in foreign-exchange reserves , to play a decisive role in advancing or impeding global problem-solving , from the G-20 agenda to efforts to rein in North Korea ’ s nuclear ambitions .
China is far too big to be taken for granted , and it wants to be shown the respect that it associates with being an ancient civilization that has contributed so much to human progress .
For the rest of us , the key question is whether America and China will be increasingly acrimonious competitors or cooperative partners , albeit with very different political systems .
Will they fight to dominate the century , or to make it more peaceful and prosperous ?
China has become surprisingly maladroit in handling the US and its Asian neighbors in recent months .
Its leaders seem to have interpreted Obama ’ s attempts to engage with them , down-playing bilateral aggravations , as a sign of American weakness in the wake of Wall Street ’ s crash and military reverses in Iraq and Afghanistan .
Arrogance has replaced sophisticated modesty .
What else can explain the treatment of Obama on his first trip to China and during the disastrous 2009 climate-change conference in Copenhagen , where a relatively minor Chinese official wagged his finger in the face of the US president ?
China ’ s official behavior following the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to Liu Xiaobo turned an embarrassment into a public-diplomacy disaster , and China ’ s neighbors have been disturbed by Chinese efforts to throw its weight around .
Japan , Vietnam , and even Singapore have reacted with consternation , highlighting the need for America to remain the principal guarantor of stability in Asia .
It is surprising that this has happened under Hu , a cautious and intelligent man .
Maybe this behavior is attributable to the imminent leadership change , with an aggressive faction in the Communist Party Politburo and Central Committee needing to be mollified .
There must be some explanation for China choosing this moment even for an unnecessary and ham-fisted row with the Vatican .
So the stakes in Washington are high for President Hu .
He will hear for himself the strength of American arguments about trade and the renminbi ’ s exchange rate .
He will be able to point out , at least in private , that if you look at the real effective exchange rate – taking account of the impact on export prices of rising labor costs – the renminbi-dollar gap is a lot less important than China ’ s critics suggest .
But he must also provide some real evidence that China is opening its markets as domestic consumption grows , and that it recognizes that a sustainable global recovery requires adjustments in China as well as America to redress international imbalances .
On the security front , China should show that it shares the nervousness in America , Europe , and the Middle East about the nuclear ambitions of North Korea and Iran .
It is not enough to hope for the best .
No one doubts that North Korea is responsible for its own delinquent behavior .
But China ’ s public failure to distance itself from the North ’ s military provocations has undermined its credibility in efforts to defuse the crisis .
More important , China must make clear that it will support tougher sanctions on Iran – and help to implement them – if the Iranian regime continues to lie about its nuclear program .
Iran ’ s oil and gas should not blind China to the dangers to its neighborhood and the entire world if the Islamic Republic develops a nuclear weapon .
China deserves to be treated seriously as a major player in global governance .
But , in order to secure the status that it desires , it must demonstrate that it understands that partnership is a two-way street .
