Japan ’ s Sensitive Military Normalization
NEW YORK – Soon after the Islamic State 's brutal murder in January of the Japanese hostages Haruna Yukawa and Kenji Goto , Prime Minister Shinzo Abe called for the country 's “ biggest reform " of its military posture since the end of World War II .
Abe wants Japan to become a “ normal " country again , with the capacity to defend its interests and citizens wherever they are threatened .
But how should his government go about it ?
Even for a Japanese public that still generally supports their country 's post-war pacifism , the hostage crisis was unsettling , not least because it highlighted Japan 's military impotence .
Unlike Jordan , which was able to consider a rescue mission for its own hostage and launch a powerful military response after he was killed , Japan 's constitution left it no options for rescue or retaliation .
Article 9 of Japan 's constitution , which was adopted in 1947 under US occupation , prohibits the country from maintaining armed forces or using force to settle international conflicts .
Though interpretations of Article 9 have liberalized over the years , and Japan now maintains a very capable self-defense force , constitutional constraints continue to impair Japan 's military capabilities and posture considerably .
To be sure , Japan 's treaty alliance with the United States provides for its security .
But the risks that Japan faces – including an increasingly assertive China , a nuclear North Korea , and an Islamic State that has threatened to murder Japanese citizens abroad – have raised legitimate questions about whether the country needs greater latitude to defend itself .
This could be achieved in several ways .
For example , Japan could simply continue to increase the defense budget , reinterpret the existing constitution , and strengthen collective security ; the capacity of Japanese special forces could be expanded ; or Article 9 could be repealed altogether by a vote in both houses of the Diet , followed by a national referendum .
Regardless of the specific route taken , Japan deserves to be able to protect its territory and population , just like any other country .
But any boost in its military capabilities will meet strong opposition , particularly from China and the Koreas , which continue to insist that Japan 's alliance with the US provides it with all the security it needs .
Moreover , they argue that Japan has yet to come fully to terms with its colonial and wartime record .
Japan has indeed benefited enormously from US protection .
But there can be no guarantee that the US will continue to defend Japan 's interests indefinitely , particularly in any clash with China .
Questions , justified or not , about America 's ability to retain its dominant position in Asia 's security architecture in the medium to long term – together with the rise of isolationist sentiment within the US – have spurred its regional allies and partners , including stalwart friends like Australia , to hedge their strategic bets .
It is only logical that Japan would share such concerns .
Likewise , though Japan 's behavior before and during WWII was undeniably atrocious , its record since 1945 – including championing the United Nations and other multilateral institutions and providing guidance and assistance to developing countries – has been exemplary .
It strains credulity to argue , as China and North Korea have , that a normalized Japan would threaten regional stability any more than China 's massive military buildup and territorial aggression , or North Korea 's bellicosity and nuclear weapons , already do .
In fact , it is far more likely that a normalized Japan would enhance regional security by playing an important role in the balance-of-power system that China is steadily advancing with its unilateral behavior .
Nonetheless , if Japan chooses to move toward military normalization , it must demonstrate more convincingly that it has come to terms with its history – or risk seeing that effort undermined unnecessarily .
Though Japan has made significant efforts to atone for its past – by issuing repeated apologies , for example , and providing development assistance – revisionism and insensitivity by some of its leaders lately have revived historical tensions with its neighbors .
That should stop .
For starters , Japan 's leaders should either forswear visits to Tokyo 's controversial Yasukuni shrine , or find a creative way to have the souls of the 14 Class A war criminals that it honors moved elsewhere .
Likewise , instead of refuting claims about the extent of sexual slavery during the war , Japan 's government should build a monument in central Tokyo – possibly even on the Imperial Palace grounds – commemorating the “ comfort women " from Korea and elsewhere who were forced to provide sexual services to the Japanese Imperial Army .
The authorities could even establish an annual conference to bring together world leaders to find ways to help protect women in conflict zones .
Finally , rather than protesting the way Japan 's WWII activities are described in US textbooks or squabbling over the number of people murdered during the Nanjing massacre , Japan should seek to help its own citizens understand and process their country 's wartime record .
Other countries , particularly China , may have strong domestic political motives for their anti-Japanese propaganda , but Japan 's more sensitive treatment of its history could at least stop adding fuel to the fire .
Japan 's achievements since the end of WWII – including its enormous contribution to global peace and security – count for a lot .
But , unless Japan makes more sensitive treatment of its history a cornerstone of its effort to change its military posture , the past could well become an impediment to a more secure future .
