Obama and Asia ’ s Two Futures
TOKYO – Despite the relentless shift of global economic might to Asia , and China ’ s rise as a great power – the central historical events of our time , which will drive world affairs for the foreseeable future – America ’ s focus has been elsewhere .
The terrorist attacks of 2001 , followed by the Afghanistan and Iraq wars , the Great Contraction of 2008 , the Arab Spring , and Europe ’ s sovereign debt crisis , all diverted the United States from helping to create a lasting structure of peace to accommodate today ’ s resurgent Asia .
In November , US President Barack Obama can begin to redress this imbalance when he hosts the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in his native state of Hawaii .
The meeting ’ s timing is fortunate , because a number of critical Asian issues are coming to a boil .
The South China Sea , for example , is now churning with competing claims to its islands , atolls , and sea bed , including China ’ s bold assertion that all of it is Chinese sovereign territory .
At this year ’ s ASEAN summit in Bali , it was agreed that these territorial disputes be settled through bilateral negotiations .
But the scope of Chinese claims doomed that agreement from the start ; indeed , China now insists that the sea constitutes a core national interest , on a level with Taiwan and Tibet , for which it is prepared to fight .
China ’ s willingness to throw its weight around amplifies the grave imbalance in size , and leverage , between it and the other countries bordering the South China Sea .
This has made bilateral negotiations to settle these disputes unviable .
Vietnam and the Philippines have been bullied in this way recently , with both pushing back rather than submit to Chinese imposed terms .
The presidential elections scheduled for next year in two of Asia ’ s strongest democracies – South Korea and Taiwan – are also likely to cause diplomatic temperatures to rise in the months ahead .
The risk stems not from the conduct of the South Koreans or the Taiwanese , but from the democratic choices that they make , which may offend two of Asia ’ s last dictatorships .
In South Korea , the remarkable Park Guen-hye ’ s bid to become her country ’ s first woman president may provide an excuse – as if any were needed – for North Korean mischief-making .
The regime in Pyongyang is seeking to ensure that power passes to a third generation of Kims , represented by the pudgy and well-fed “ Dear Young General , ” Kim Jong-un , and appears to believe that provocations such as its bombardment of a South Korean island earlier this year are the way to secure the succession .
Taiwan , too , may elect a woman president , Tsai Ing-wen , the leader of the opposition Democratic Peoples ’ Party , next year .
That outcome would stoke Chinese ire , not because of Tsai ’ s gender , but owing to her politics .
The DPP has long been the Taiwanese party keenest on securing independence for the country .
A third Asian issue with combustible potential is Burma , where another unique woman , the Nobel Peace Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi , is at the heart of events .
The elections earlier this year , which many at first assumed were a sham , now appear to have produced changes to which Asia ’ s countries will need to collectively and individually respond .
The government not only freed Suu Kyi after two decades of house arrest , but has even begun a dialogue with her – talks for which the meticulous opposition leader has expressed real hope .
Indeed , President Thein Sein ’ s government has begun to release thousands of political prisoners , including the monk who led the massive street protests of 2007 .
Sein ’ s government has also listened to Burmese public disquiet at China ’ s massive influence in the country , and has canceled a huge $ 3.6 billion dam that Chinese firms were building .
China , it is plain to see , is at the root of most of the disputes troubling Asia .
Two main issues must be managed – one philosophical , the other structural – in seeking to ameliorate the problems caused by China ’ s unconstrained rise .
Only by resolving the structural issue will Asia succeed in overcoming the philosophical problem .
The philosophical problem concerns China ’ s renewed conception of itself as the “ Middle Kingdom , ” a state with no sovereign equal .
Throughout its history , China has sought to treat its neighbors as vassals – a mindset currently reflected in the way that it has approached negotiations with Vietnam and the Philippines over the South China Sea .
China ’ s free-floating rise , unanchored in any regional structure or settlement , makes this mindset particularly worrying .
At the Hawaii summit , Obama must orchestrate the first steps toward constructing an effective multilateral framework within which the complications posed by China ’ s rise can be addressed .
The absence of such a structure of peace has been obscured , to some extent , by America ’ s dominant role in Asia since the Pacific War .
But China ’ s rise and America ’ s other global and domestic concerns have left many Asians wondering just how enduring those commitments will be in the future .
Nevertheless , China ’ s recent strategic assertiveness has led many Asian democracies to seek to deepen their ties with the US , as South Korea has done with a bilateral free-trade agreement .
The US is reciprocating by pledging not to cut Asia-related defense spending , despite the big reduction in overall US defense spending that lies ahead .
What Asia most needs today is a well-conceived regional system , embedded in binding multilateral institutions .
A “ Trans-Pacific Partnership ” between Australia , Brunei , Chile , Malaysia , New Zealand , Peru , Singapore , the US , and Vietnam to govern supply-chain management , intellectual-property protection , investment , rules on state-owned firms , and other trade issues – likely to be announced in Hawaii – is a good start in the economic sphere .
But much more is needed .
Ultimately , the best way for peace to prevail in the region is for the US and China to share responsibility for a regional order with Asia ’ s other powers , particularly India , Indonesia , Japan , and South Korea .
Asia ’ s choice is clear : either the region embraces a multilateral structure of peace , or it will find itself constrained by a system of strategic military alliances .
In Hawaii , Obama and the other assembled Asian leaders – particularly the Chinese – must begin to choose between these two Asian futures .
