Housing versus Habitat
CAMBRIDGE – Peter Drucker , the influential management guru , famously said , “ What does not get measured , does not get done . ”
He might have added that what gets measured poorly gets done poorly .
Consider low-income housing .
Most developing countries , and many rich ones , define their housing deficit according to the number of families living in units deemed socially unacceptable .
But what is meant by unacceptable varies greatly from country to country .
Piped water , sewerage , and electricity are seen as essential in the Americas , but not in India .
The problem is that people do not demand houses ; they demand habitats .
A house is an object ; a habitat is a node in a multiplicity of overlapping networks – physical ( power , water and sanitation , roads ) , economic ( urban transport , labor markets , distribution and retail , entertainment ) and social ( education , health , security , family , friends ) .
The ability to connect to all of these networks makes a habitat valuable .
Cities , for example , can be highly productive spaces , because they allow people to combine their different skills to make things that none of them could make individually .
People can exchange their knowhow , learn from each other , and trade .
Jane Jacobs ’ s insights on this , published more that 40 years ago , have been confirmed by more recent studies summarized in books by Edward Glaeser and Enrico Moretti .
So , if the deficit being measured is one of houses rather than one of habitats , the solutions often do not solve the real problem .
A housing minister who is told to build a certain number of houses will likely fail to build an equivalent number of well-connected habitat nodes .
After all , much of what makes a house a habitat lies outside of his department ’ s purview .
Moreover , if the housing deficit is diagnosed as a dearth of adequate housing , then the solution is to build more houses for those who lack it – that is , the poor .
But this is like assuming that new cars should be built for those without them – that is , for people who could buy second-hand cars from those seeking to upgrade .
It confuses the construction industry , which builds new homes , with the much larger housing market , which includes all homes .
It gets worse .
Because the poor cannot buy adequate housing on their own , public resources must be used .
In order to target these subsidies to low-income households , governments typically treat families of different income levels differently : the rich must fend for themselves , middle-class families are provided with assistance to secure mortgage loans , and the poor are offered public housing .
To maximize the number of units built , housing ministries make sure that projects meet minimum specifications below a certain per-unit cost threshold .
As a result , developers look for the cheapest land , which is obviously the least connected to the networks that would make it more valuable .
This approach has ended up exacerbating the segregation of the poor .
It artificially creates – as in France – socially homogenous poor neighborhoods where the unskilled live among themselves , disconnected from others , making it harder for them to benefit from the agglomeration economies that would boost their productivity .
Indeed , because many of these developments are so remote , residents often face a long , uncomfortable , and costly daily commute to reach good jobs .
No wonder so many prefer to stay home and work on their own , which may explain why so many developing countries are becoming more urbanized but not more productive .
Confusing the construction of new homes with the housing market is most absurd when dealing with displaced families .
For example , the Venezuelan and Colombian governments were confronted with the need to relocate tens of thousands of families displaced by floods in 2010 .
Although the two governments are far apart politically , both promised the displaced families new houses in new urban developments .
In the meantime , people were left for years waiting in shelters .
And , once again , these new urban developments have few of the networks that would make them a habitat .
The burden of creating integrated communities has been placed on a randomly assembled group comprising some of the least connected members of society .
Instead , displaced families should quickly be given vouchers so that they can obtain an appropriate home without delay .
They are bound to choose older homes in established neighborhoods that have already been connected to the many networks that make them a habitat .
Large new housing developments should naturally attract those who already have ample social connections , making it easier to kick-start more integrated communities .
In order to separate the problem of the overall housing deficit from the problem of families with inadequate housing , policymakers need to address both supply and demand .
On the supply side , urban land – with all its physical and social infrastructure – must expand quickly enough .
On the demand side , subsidies should focus on helping families choose from the entire housing market .
This approach would promote socially diverse and productive neighborhoods , rather than segregation and pockets of economic stagnation .
But this goal cannot be achieved unless the construction industry is prevented from dictating low-income-housing policy .
