Last Exit from Kabul ?
NEW DELHI – America ’ s war in Afghanistan is approaching a tipping point , with doubts about President Barack Obama ’ s strategy growing .
Yet , after dispatching 21,000 additional troops to Afghanistan , Obama is considering sending another 14,000 .
Let ’ s be clear : America ’ s Afghan war is not winnable , even though Obama has redefined American goals from defeating the Taliban to preventing Al Qaeda from using Afghanistan as a base to launch attacks on the United States .
But Al Qaeda is no longer a serious factor in the Afghan war , where the principal combatants are now the American military and the Taliban , with its associated militias and private armies .
Rather than seeking to defeat the Taliban , the US has encouraged the Pakistani , Afghan , and Saudi intelligence services to hold proxy negotiations with the Taliban ’ s top leadership , holed up in the Pakistani city of Quetta .
The US is fighting the wrong war .
After America ’ s invasion drove Al Qaeda ’ s leaders from Afghanistan , Pakistan emerged as the main base and sanctuary for transnational terrorists .
Support and sustenance for the Taliban and many other Afghan militants also comes from inside Pakistan .
Despite this , Obama is pursuing a military surge in Afghanistan but an aid surge to Pakistan , which is now the single largest recipient of US assistance in the world .
To defeat Al Qaeda , the US doesn ’ t need a troop buildup – certainly not in Afghanistan .
Without a large ground force in Afghanistan or even major ground operations , the US can hold Al Qaeda ’ s remnants at bay in their havens in the mountainous tribal regions of Pakistan through covert operations , Predator drones , and cruise-missile attacks .
And isn ’ t that what the CIA is doing already ?
Indeed , US intelligence experts believe that Al Qaeda already is badly fragmented and in no position to openly challenge American interests .
According to the latest Annual Threat Assessment of the Intelligence Community released last February , “ Because of the pressure we and our allies have put on Al Qaeda ’ s core leadership in Pakistan … Al Qaeda today is less capable and effective than it was a year ago . ”
Had Obama ’ s goal been to rout the Taliban , a further military surge may have made sense , because a resurgent Taliban can be defeated only through major ground operations , not by airstrikes and covert action alone .
But if the US administration ’ s principal war target is not the Taliban but Al Qaeda remnants , why use a troop-intensive strategy based on protecting population centers to win grassroots support ?
In reality , what the Obama administration calls a “ clear , hold , build ” strategy is actually a “ surge , bribe , run ” strategy – except that the muddled nature of the mission and deepening US involvement undermine the “ run ” component .
Before Afghanistan becomes a Vietnam-style quagmire , Obama must rethink his plan for another troop surge .
Gradually drawing down US troop levels makes more sense , because what unites the disparate elements of the Taliban syndicate is a common opposition to foreign military presence .
An American military exit from Afghanistan would not be a shot in the arm for the forces of global jihad , as many in the US seem to fear .
On the contrary , it would remove the Taliban ’ s unifying element and unleash developments – a vicious power struggle in Afghanistan along sectarian and ethnic lines – whose significance would be largely internal or regional .
The Taliban , with the active support of the Pakistani military , would certainly make a run for Kabul to replay the 1996 power grab .
But it wouldn ’ t be easy , owing in part to the Taliban ’ s fragmentation , with the tail ( private armies and militias ) wagging the dog .
Moreover , the non-Taliban and non-Pashtun forces are now stronger , more organized , and better prepared than in 1996 to resist any advance on Kabul , having been empowered by provincial autonomy or by the offices they still hold in the Afghan federal government .
And , by retaining Afghan bases to carry out covert operations , Predator missions , and other airstrikes , the US would be able to unleash punitive power to prevent a Taliban takeover .
After all , it was American air power , combined with the Northern Alliance ’ s ground operations , which ousted the Taliban in 2001 .
In fact , the most likely outcome of any Afghan power struggle triggered by an American withdrawal would be to formalize the present de facto partition of Afghanistan along ethnic lines – the direction in which Iraq , too , is headed .
In this scenario , the Tajiks , Uzbeks , Hazaras , and other ethnic minorities would be able to ensure self-governance in the Afghan areas that they dominate , leaving the Pashtun lands on both sides of the British-drawn Durand Line in ferment .
Thanks to ethnic polarization , the Durand Line , or the Afghanistan-Pakistan border , exists today only on maps .
On the ground , it has little political and economic relevance , and it would be militarily impracticable to re-impose the line .
As in Iraq , an American withdrawal would potentially unleash forces of Balkanization .
That may sound disturbing , but it is probably an unstoppable consequence of the initial US invasion .
An American pullout actually would aid the fight against international terrorism .
Instead of remaining bogged down in Afghanistan and seeking to cajole and bribe the Pakistani military into ending their support for Islamic militants , the US would become free to pursue a broader , more balanced counterterrorism strategy .
For example , the US would better appreciate the dangers to international security posed by Pakistani terror groups like Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed .
The threat of an Islamist takeover of Pakistan comes not from the Taliban , but from groups that have long drawn support from the Pakistani army as part of a long-standing military-mullah alliance .
That is where the focus of the fight should be .
