Revoking America ’ s Exorbitant Privilege
NEW YORK – The ongoing political stalemate in the United States holds two major implications for the international monetary system .
The better-known consequence has been deepening uncertainty about the US dollar , the main global reserve currency , and US Treasury securities , supposedly the world ’ s “ safest ” financial asset .
Not surprisingly , the major investors in US Treasuries , China and Japan , have expressed alarm .
Simply put , the global economy has at its center a dysfunctional political regime that generates recurrent threats of default on the world ’ s major reserve asset .
The second implication is further postponement of the International Monetary Fund ’ s 2010 quota and governance reforms , which would double member countries ’ contributions and modestly increase major emerging economies ’ voting power .
Prior to its approval by the IMF Board in December 2010 , the reform , agreed at the G-20 Seoul Summit , had been hailed as a “ historic ” breakthrough .
But history has stalled without approval by the US , which has an effective veto over major IMF decisions .
The threat of a US default may well end in a political agreement to raise the US government ’ s debt ceiling , as occurred in 2011 .
But , whatever the outcome , the latest episode makes it abundantly clear that our globalized world deserves a better international monetary system than the current “ non-system ” that evolved in an ad hoc manner after the collapse in the early 1970 ’ s of the initial Bretton Woods arrangements .
The need to overhaul the international monetary and financial system was one of the basic lessons of the global financial crisis .
While there have been major , albeit incomplete , reforms of international finance , efforts in 2009 and 2010 to reform the international monetary system – including the proposed changes at the IMF – have led to no significant action .
The reform proposals came from diverse quarters : the governor of the People ’ s Bank of China ; a commission convened by the United Nations General Assembly on reform of the international monetary and financial system , headed by the Nobel laureate Joseph E. Stiglitz ; and the French Palais Royal Initiative , led by former IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus .
There have been myriad academic contributions to the debate as well .
The first element of reform should be to give a greater role to the only true international money that the world now has : the IMF ’ s Special Drawing Rights , created in 1969 as the result of another dollar crisis .
The establishment of SDRs was accompanied by a commitment , included in the IMF Articles of Agreement , to “ making the special drawing right the principal reserve asset in the international monetary system ” ( Article VIII , Section 7 and Article XXII ) .
But this commitment has remained a dead letter , except for periodic emissions of SDRs during crises , including the equivalent of $ 250 billion in 2009 .
The IMF Articles of Agreement should be amended to allow more flexible use of SDRs , replicating the way central banks operate .
That is , SDRs could be created during global recessions and withdrawn during booms .
They should be the major source of IMF financing as well , replacing quota subscriptions or lending to the Fund by member countries ( potentially making the IMF a purely SDR-based institution , as proposed decades ago by the late IMF economist Jacques Polak ) .
The simplest approach would be for countries to “ deposit ” the SDRs that they receive at the IMF , which could then lend them to countries and invest the remainder in sovereign bonds .
This should be combined with a more active role for the IMF – rather than the G-20 – as the true instrument of global macroeconomic policy coordination .
One essential ( and generally agreed ) goal of such coordination should be to reduce global imbalances like those caused in recent years by the European Union ’ s rising external surplus , which has forced many emerging economies to run growing deficits .
Because other global currencies – the dollar , the euro , and increasingly the renminbi – would continue to coexist with the SDRs as global reserve assets , another essential element of global macroeconomic cooperation should be defining the particular obligations of countries ( or regions ) issuing reserve currencies .
Still another element of international monetary reform is better management of the global exchange-rate system ( or , again , “ non-system ” ) , which should aim at avoiding currency “ manipulation ” – but only after defining precisely what that means .
It should also reduce the high levels of exchange-rate volatility – “ a tax on international specialization , ” as the economist Charles Kindleberger once put it – that we have seen in recent years , including among major currencies .
Long-term global-finance discussions have also made clear that , under certain conditions , regulation of capital flows ( “ capital-flow management measures , ” in current IMF terminology ) are warranted on “ macroprudential ” grounds – an understanding accepted by the G-20 at its 2011 Cannes meeting and by the IMF last year .
Last but not least , the international monetary system requires governance reform , which includes giving a stronger voice to emerging and developing countries .
Aside from the final adoption of the 2010 reforms and the forthcoming 2014 quota debates , the changes should include those recommended by the Stiglitz Commission , the Palais Royal Initiative , and the 2009 Committee on IMF Governance Reform headed by Trevor Manuel , among others .
One central element of these proposals is to eliminate , once and for all , the veto power of any individual country .
With the world waiting anxiously for some of America ’ s political leaders to behave like adults , the cost of maintaining the current non-system has become all too obvious .
