Internet or Intifada ?
TEL AVIV – According to Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu , the ongoing wave of knife attacks on Jews by young Palestinian “ lone wolves ” can be blamed entirely on incitement by Palestinian Authority and Islamist websites .
Netanyahu evidently expects Israelis , and the world , to believe that if these sites were posting cat videos , the Palestinians would cease their agitation and submit quietly to occupation .
Palestinians are indeed being provoked , but by Israeli actions – beginning with the perpetual encroachment on their rights that occupation entails .
Beyond facing daily humiliation at checkpoints , Palestinians have seen Israeli settlers destroy their crops and olive groves , and even torch a West Bank home , burning three family members and killing a toddler .
Add the Israeli military ’ s frequent late-night house raids in search of “ terror suspects ” and the relentless expansion of Israeli settlements , and it becomes pretty clear that Palestinians don ’ t need to scour the Internet for reasons to be angry .
It is ironic that Netanyahu , of all people , is accusing anyone of incitement .
Was it not incitement when , just days before Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was assassinated in 1995 for his efforts to achieve peace with the Palestinians , Netanyahu addressed a rally where posters depicted Rabin in a Nazi SS uniform ?
Was it not incitement when he attempted to mobilize Jewish voters earlier this year by warning of “ Arabs voting in droves , bussed in by the left . ”
Just this month , one of Netanyahu ’ s shamelessly incendiary statements – the claim that Haj Amin al-Husseini , the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem , gave Adolf Hitler the idea of annihilating Europe ’ s Jews during World War II – sparked a media firestorm .
When it comes to anti-Jewish zeal , Husseini ’ s record hardly needs false footnotes – unless , apparently , one has an interest in presenting the Palestinians as co-perpetrators of the Holocaust .
In this case , it seems that Netanyahu may have gone too far ; after more than a week of condemnation , including from Israeli historians , he was forced to retract the statement .
But he is unlikely to be chastened .
For Netanyahu , incitement is a powerful political tool .
He fuels Israeli fears and disillusionment , in order to preserve a status quo that , at least in the case of Palestine , benefits Israel .
As Netanyahu put it last month in a closed meeting of the Knesset ’ s Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee , Israel must continue “ controlling all the territory , ” adding that the country “ will forever live by the sword . ”
Of course , this approach is not always successful ; for example , Netanyahu was unable to block the international nuclear deal with Iran , despite his best efforts .
But , rather than rethink his approach , he has simply redirected it , in order to restore the Palestinians to their position as the principal existential threat to Israel .
Today ’ s emerging intifada demonstrates the profound danger implied by this approach .
Fueling Israelis ’ fear and resentment of Palestinians does not only undermine the chances of a political solution ; it also exacerbates Palestinians ’ frustration and anger with Israelis .
And that anger is already intense , especially among young Palestinians living under Israeli occupation .
Consider what life is like in East Jerusalem , the epicenter of the decentralized rebellion , where some 77 % of Palestinians live below the poverty line .
Not only are municipal services poor or non-existent ;
Palestinians also face persistent pressure from Jewish religious groups bent on asserting Israeli control .
Young Palestinians – the third generation to live under occupation – have run out of patience .
Despite being a largely secular generation , they are using the narrative of jihad ( the knife is a conspicuous Islamic State symbol ) to defy their parents ’ docility , challenge an incompetent Palestinian leadership , and , most of all , to resist the Israeli occupiers .
That is why they have made Islam ’ s holy shrines on Jerusalem ’ s Temple Mount ( Haram al-Sharif to Muslims ) into icons of their rebellion .
If iron-fisted authoritarian governments in countries like Egypt and Tunisia could not stop their populations from overthrowing them in the Arab Spring , how can one expect the crippled Palestinian Authority to stop this rebellion ?
Indeed , at this point , Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas is more worried about avoiding the fate of Egypt ’ s Hosni Mubarak or Tunisia ’ s Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali than he is about stopping the violence .
To preempt young Palestinians ’ wrath , he has refused to condemn their terror campaign and indirectly fueled anger over Israel ’ s supposed violation of the status quo on the Temple Mount .
This approach will have far-reaching consequences , for a similarly dangerous vehemence regarding the Temple Mount , the holiest site in Judaism , has lately been gaining traction among Israelis .
Though Jewish law explicitly forbids Jews from ascending the Temple Mount , lest they profane this most sanctified of Jewish shrines before the coming of the Messiah , a growing number of Israelis – from religious fanatics to members of Israel ’ s ruling coalition – now support defying that prohibition .
They claim that Jews must frequent the holy site , and even build a temple , to strengthen Israel ’ s sovereignty there .
The focus on the Temple Mount has given the current confrontation an apocalyptic quality .
It is time for both sides – and especially the Israelis – to recognize just how dangerous the situation is .
By blurring the borders between Israel and the Palestinian territories , Israel has created the conditions for permanent civil war .
The two-state solution might not be particularly attractive to either party anymore ; but a binational solution , at least as it is unfolding these days , would be a living nightmare .
