No Escape from Empire ’ s Graveyard
NEW DELHI – With the stage set for secret talks in Qatar between the United States and the Taliban , US President Barack Obama ’ s strategy for a phased exit from war-ravaged Afghanistan is now being couched in nice-sounding terms that hide more than they reveal .
In seeking a Faustian bargain with the Taliban , Obama & # 160 ; risks repeating US policy mistakes that now haunt regional and international security .
Since coming to office , Obamahas pursued an Afghan strategy that can be summed up in three words : surge , bribe , and run .
The military mission has now entered the “ run ” part , or what euphemistically is being called the “ transition to 2014 . ”
The central objective is to cut a deal with the Taliban so that the US and its NATO partners exit the “ graveyard of empires ” without losing face .
This approach – aimed more at withdrawing forces as soon as possible than at ensuring enduring peace and regional stability – is being dressed up as “ reconciliation , ” with Qatar , Germany , and the United Kingdom getting lead roles in facilitating a settlement .
Yet what stands out is how little the US has learned from the past .
In critical respects , it is beginning to repeat its own mistakes , whether by creating or funding new local militias in Afghanistan , or by striving to come to terms with the Taliban .
As with the covert war that the US waged in the 1980 ’ s in Afghanistan against Soviet military intervention , so , too , have short-term interests driven US policy in the current overt war .
To be sure , any leader must work to extricate his country from a protracted war , so Obama is right to seek an end to this one .
But he was not right in laying out his cards in public and emboldening the enemy .
Within weeks of assuming office , Obama publicly declared his intention to withdraw US forces from Afghanistan , before he even asked his team to work out a strategy .
A troop surge that lasted up to 2010 was designed not to rout the Taliban militarily , but to strike a political deal with the enemy from a position of strength .
Yet , even before the surge began , its purpose was undercut by the exit plan , followed by a publicly announced troop drawdown , stretching from 2011 to 2014 .
A withdrawing power that first announces a phased exit and then pursues deal-making with the enemy undermines its regional leverage .
It speaks for itself that the sharp deterioration in US ties with the Pakistani military has occurred since the drawdown timetable was unveiled .
The phased exit encouraged Pakistani generals to play hardball .
Worse , there is still no clear US strategy on how to ensure that the endgame does not undermine Western interests or further destabilize the region .
The US envoy to the region , Marc Grossman , has already held a series of secret meetings with the Taliban .
Qatar has been chosen as the seat of fresh US-Taliban negotiations in order to keep the still-skeptical Afghan government at arm ’ s length ( despite the pretense of “ Afghan-led ” talks ) , and to insulate the Taliban negotiators from Pakistani and Saudi pressure .
Meanwhile , even as a civil-military showdown in Pakistan compounds Washington ’ s regional challenges , the new US push to contain Iran threatens to fuel greater turbulence in neighboring Afghanistan .
In truth , US policy on the Taliban , at whose birth the CIA played midwife , is coming full circle for the second time in little more than 15 years .
The Clinton administration acquiesced in the Taliban ’ s ascension to power in 1996 and turned a blind eye as that thuggish militia , in league with Pakistan ’ s Inter-Services Intelligence , fostered narcotics trafficking and swelled the ranks of Afghan war alumni waging transnational terrorism .
With the terror attacks of September 11 , 2001 , however , the chickens came home to roost .
In declaring war on the Taliban , US policy came full circle .
Now , US policy , with its frantic search for a deal with the Taliban , is about to complete another orbit .
Indeed , the Qatar-based negotiations highlight why the US political leadership has deliberately refrained from decapitating the Taliban .
The US military has had ample opportunities ( and still has ) to eliminate the Taliban ’ s Rahbari Shura , or leadership council , often called the Quetta Shura because it relocated to that Pakistani city .
Yet , tellingly , the US has not carried out a single drone , air , or ground strike in or around Quetta .
All of the US strikes have occurred farther north , in Pakistan ’ s tribal Waziristan region , although the leadership of the Afghan Taliban and of its allied groups , like the Haqqani network and the Hekmatyar band , is not holed up there .
Like the US occupation of Iraq , the NATO war in Afghanistan will leave behind an ethnically fractured country .
Just as Iraq today is , for all intents and purposes , ethnically partitioned , it will be difficult to establish a post-2014 government in Kabul whose writ runs across Afghanistan .
And , just as the 1973 US-North Vietnam agreements were negotiated after the South Vietnamese regime was shut out of the talks , the US today is shutting out the Afghan government , even as it compels President Hamid Karzai to lend support and appears ready to meet a Taliban demand to transfer five incarcerated Taliban leaders from Guantánamo Bay .
These negotiations , in which the US is seeking the creation of ceasefire zones to facilitate its forces ’ withdrawal , can only undercut the legitimacy of the Karzai government and bring the Quetta Shura back to center stage .
But Afghanistan is not Vietnam .
An end to NATO combat operations will not mean the end of the war , because the enemy will target Western interests wherever they may be .
America ’ s fond hope to contain terrorism regionally promises instead to ensure that Afghanistan and Pakistan remain a festering threat to regional and global security .
