Osama bin Laden , Bard of Terror
PRINCETON – In Riyadh last March , King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia decorated American Vice President Dick Cheney with the Kingdom ’ s Order of Merit .
This gesture elicited hundreds of Internet postings from Arabs condemning the award as treachery and lamenting the pitiful state of leadership in the Arab world .
To cite only one comment , addressed to the King : “ Shame on you for claiming to be Custodian of the Two Holy Sanctuaries ” in Mecca and Medina .
At the same time , Osama bin Laden released two audio statements condemning Western and Israeli attacks on Muslims and reiterating the need for violent warfare to liberate occupied Muslim territories from the infidels .
In terms of media strategy , the contrast between the leaders of the Arab countries and bin Laden could not be starker .
On the one hand , Arab kings and presidents lack charisma , seem politically impotent and are rarely , if ever , on message with respect to the “ big issue ” concerns of the peoples of the Middle East .
Bin Laden , however , is mesmerizing , framing the perceived frustrations of many Arabs in his use of classical Arabic , including the recitation of medieval-style poetry .
He deliberately projects an image of himself as a leader who speaks truthfully , conveying a muscular ideology that articulates the sense of humiliation that Muslims feel today and offers a plan of action to remedy the situation .
Arab culture places a high value on poetic expression , so it is no coincidence that it appears repeatedly in Al Qaeda ’ s propaganda .
Bin Laden often recites poetry to underscore a point and to associate himself with chivalrous and learned warriors who were willing to become martyrs for Islam ’ s honor and glory .
Here are a few lines of the kind of poetry that Al Qaeda uses :
I do not sell our honor like a pimp
that I should lower my eyes , or surrender .
I see the army of the Cross in our land ,
invading Iraq and rubbing our face in the dirt .
You who ask me to give up our jihad ,
and to live a life of comfort and happiness ,
Don ’ t waste your breath .
I will not give up the jihad while our community
is gored with a poisoned knife ;
No indeed , I will not give up the jihad
while their Crosses attack in the dark of night ,
Pollute Sacred Arabia , and proclaim
the establishment of “ security ” while chaining my wrists .
It is difficult to know what to make of this literary material , and at times to understand it because of its archaic style , allusions and metaphors .
But Al Qaeda ’ s poetry deserves closer attention , because it is a medium of communication between members of the movement .
Indeed , through poetry , Al Qaeda defines what it means to be a member of the movement and commemorates the big episodes in the group ’ s history by glorifying the exploits of “ martyrs . ”
Although much of this poetry is not necessarily of high quality , it nonetheless underscores the image that Al Qaeda ’ s leadership wishes to project , namely that Al Qaeda ’ s message is authentic and reflects “ real Islam . ”
Moreover , Al Qaeda uses poetry to address the challenges that it faces .
Contrasting its fighters ’ bravery and commitment with the “ comfort ” of Muslim bystanders , Al Qaeda tries to rally more fighters to its cause in Iraq .
Its dilemma is stark .
The Shia of the Mahdi Army defeated Iraq ’ s Sunnis in the last bout of fighting , and thousands of Iraqi Sunnis , under the so-called Awakening Movement , have rallied to the side of the United States forces and have fought against Al Qaeda .
In addition , many Sunni scholars have argued that Al Qaeda ’ s ideology and tactics are illegitimate , and that Muslims should refrain from jihad and remain obedient to their rulers .
The term for those who have not joined Al Qaeda ’ s jihad is the “ sitters ” or the “ immobile ones ” ( qaaidun ) .
Bin Laden wants these people to feel like sinners .
Poetically , he attacks Muslim men ’ s masculinity and sense of honor for not defending Islam .
This is the core of bin Laden ’ s appeal : the ability to articulate the profound sense of injustice and humiliation that many Arabs and Muslims feel today .
For all the violence perpetrated by Al Qaeda , bin Laden also relies on “ soft ” power , using arguments about injustice that resonate with his audience .
A path between the extremes of jihad and blind obedience to the Middle East ’ s authoritarian rulers must be found before Al Qaeda ’ s message begins to lose some of its luster .
