Putin of all the Russias
VIENNA & # 45 ; & # 45 ; For those who still wondered who Vladimir Putin is , the mystery is over .
His actions this week show that he is Russia ’ s new autocrat .
He is a Czar pure and simple .
The seven years since Putin assumed power in the Kremlin have been a time of conflicting signals .
On one hand , he appears to be an educated and dynamic leader committed to modernizing Russia .
On the other hand , with the help of the military-industrial KGB complex – the “ siloviki ” – he has systematically weakened or destroyed every check on his personal power , while strengthening the state ’ s ability to violate citizens ’ constitutional rights .
This week , Putin told the United Russia party that he will place his name at the top of its ballot for the parliamentary election scheduled for December 2 , which could enable him to become Russia ’ s new prime minister after the presidential election due in March 2008 .
Of course , as he put it , Russia will have to elect as president a “ decent , competent , effective , modern person with whom it would be possible to work in tandem . ”
But what that really means is that Russia will have to choose a man Putin has hand-picked to do his bidding .
If this scenario comes true , it will be a sad day for Russia , but not because Putin will be retaining power – something everyone in Russia knew that he would .
True , Putin has concentrated in his own hands more decision-making authority than at any time in Russia ’ s post-Soviet history .
But most Russians think he is a great leader , crediting him with taking the country from the bankruptcy and despair of the Yeltsin era to wealth and prosperity in just seven years .
Poll after poll puts his approval ratings at more than 70 % .
Putin , quite genuinely , holds contradictory views .
He simultaneously advocates multiparty democracy and centralized power .
He favors a free economy , but wants the state to control how wealth is allocated and who benefits from it .
Like their president , most Russians see no contradiction between improving their personal lives and the country ’ s international status since the 1990 ’ s and the erosion of democratic institutions .
Of course , Russia ’ s formal institutions of democracy remain in place ; but , in the absence of a free press , an independent judiciary and free elections in the regions – where Kremlin cronies , like Ramzan Kadyrov in Chechnya , now hold sway – they have been hollowed out .
Russians would rather have a “ father of the nation , ” no matter the title – czar , general secretary , president , or prime minister – than follow laws and rules .
Putin ’ s political genius is to have recognized this .
Even if Putin has found a way to retain power without amending the constitution – a possibility that was endlessly speculated about by Russia ’ s dwindling band of democrats – the undemocratic nature of his strategy is glaringly obvious .
Moving from one high office in the Kremlin to another in the White House ( the seat of the Russian Parliament ) is merely a technicality .
Putin will be czar no matter what office is formally his own .
What will make this work is that , like any good KGB man , Putin is a master of facades .
It has been said that presidential democracy only strengthens Russian political culture ’ s tendency to favor rulers with a “ strong hand , ” whereas a parliamentary system would allow for a more “ horizontal ” distribution of power .
So any future Prime Minister Putin will be able to say — hey , I rule under the ultra-democratic Italian parliamentary model .
What could be more democratic ?
But if Putin , who has spent seven years “ verticalizing ” power in order to restore the stability and pride lost during Yeltsin ’ s “ democratization ” of Russia , really wanted to secure the good of his country , he would follow in Yeltsin ’ s footsteps and exit the scene .
For the lesson of the years of communist misrule is this : no one man or party can know enough to manage a modern economy .
Only democratic systems and free markets provide the essential signals that a government needs in order to act efficiently .
After all , the good of democratic structures is their predictability .
Only the Russians , with their devotion to the rule of a strongman , still insist on the importance of the role of personality in history .
By contrast , successful democracies believe that nobody is irreplaceable .
After September 11 , 2001 , many New Yorkers wanted the city ’ s then Mayor Rudy Giuliani to remain in office .
But democracy required an election , and many now argue that the current mayor , Michael Bloomberg , has performed even better than Giuliani might have done in reviving the city .
So , if Putin is concerned about Russia , he should abandon his czarist notions of power and leave high office , if not politics altogether .
Like other democratic leaders , he might consider working in the private-sector , like Gerhard Schröder , or , better yet , write books and help Tsunami victims , like Bill Clinton or become an environmentalist , like Mikhail Gorbachev .
But this seems to be too much to ask of ex-KGB man Putin , for whom there can be no distinction between losing power and leaving it gracefully .
