Israel ’ s Neglected Peace Dividend
TEL AVIV – Twenty years after the Oslo Accords , the prospects for a comprehensive Israeli-Palestinian peace deal are dimmer than ever .
Indeed , roughly a half-million Israeli settlers in the occupied territories ( including East Jerusalem ) make the creation of a contiguous Palestinian state an almost impossible mission .
So , is the renewed vigor of US President Barack Obama ’ s administration in the quest for peace too little , too late ?
Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu claims that his government has no preconditions for resuming negotiations with the Palestinians .
Meanwhile , his housing minister , Uri Ariel ( himself a settler and a member of the annexationist Jewish Home party ) , unleashes a new wave of settlement expansion that threatens to link the 1967 border with the Jordan Valley , thus bisecting Palestinian territory .
Netanyahu ’ s own insistence on “ ironclad ” security arrangements is a euphemism for an Israeli presence in the Jordan Valley – and no return to the “ Auschwitz borders ” of 1967 .
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas is too weak and too burdened by his rivalry with the hard-line Islamist Hamas – which rules in Gaza – to allow himself the political luxury of departing from the core demands of Palestinian nationalism .
Nor does Netanyahu , an ideologue who is visibly uncomfortable with his forced support of the two-state idea , truly have a governing coalition for peace .
Thus , US Secretary of State John Kerry will require great deal of creativity to reconcile Netanyahu ’ s position and the Palestinian precondition , recently reiterated by Abbas ’ s close associate Nabil Shaath , that Israel must agree to negotiate on the basis of the 1967 borders .
Mahmoud Al-Habbash , the Palestinian minister of religious affairs , even went so far as to demand “ assurances that the talks won ’ t fail , ” because if they do , a new intifada would surely erupt .
Moreover , Kerry ’ s peace drive is taking place in a regional environment that is not amenable to a negotiated resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
The Arab Spring has turned bloody and unpredictably turbulent , further diminishing the odds for peace in Palestine .
Nor does the election of Hassan Rowhani , a relative moderate , to Iran ’ s presidency improve Kerry ’ s chances .
Rowhani ’ s victory is certainly good news for Iranians , and it may lead to a more civilized dialogue between the Islamic Republic and the international community .
But Rowhani ’ s presidency can hardly be expected to change Iran ’ s strategic objectives .
Iran will continue its nuclear program , fight for the survival of Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime in Syria , seek to maintain its vital alliance with key regional proxies such as Hezbollah , and defend Palestine and al-Quds ( Jerusalem ) .
If Assad defeats his opponents with the help of Hezbollah and Iran , his survival is bound to be perceived as a victory for the regional “ axis of resistance ” to Israel .
And a permanent Iranian presence in Syria would make a war between Israel and Iran practically unavoidable .
Palestine would then be relegated to an obscure corner of the international agenda .
Complicating matters further , America ’ s wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have limited its regional clout .
The US now faces an unpredictable Middle East that is writing its own history as well – or as badly – as it can .
Syria ’ s internal conflict has now become a Sunni-Shia sectarian war that is spreading across the region .
The Sunni clerics who have just declared a jihad against “ the Iranian regime , Hezbollah , and its sectarian allies ” are the voice of millions across the Muslim world .
Furthermore , waves of Syrian refugees are threatening the sustainability of the Jordanian monarchy , already roiled by profound internal cleavages .
Hezbollah has drawn Lebanon into the Syrian conflict , setting up a showdown between Shia and Sunni at home .
A similar scenario is already unfolding in Iraq .
Turkey , a responsible regional power , has so far resisted being drawn into the Syrian quagmire , but its effects can be seen in the rising tensions between the country ’ s Sunni majority and the Shia Alevi sect .
Inertia is not an adequate response in an era of revolutionary change .
Unfortunately , Israel is missing a coherent regional strategy .
Netanyahu , always on the defensive , does not view Middle East turmoil as a trigger for a proactive strategy that would use a solution to the Palestinian problem as leverage for broader positive change in the region .
America , burdened by the cost of its Middle East troubles , eager to refocus on Asia , and no longer in need of Arab oil , can allow itself to leave the region to its destiny .
Israel is part of the region and has a strong interest in helping to shape its future .
Israel has traditionally strived to forge alliances with the region ’ s minorities – Kurds , Persians , Maronites , and others .
Now is the time for a major shift to an alliance with the region ’ s overwhelming Sunni majority .
Israel should follow Obama , whose recent decision to arm the Syrian rebels , though belated and still ill-defined , is a choice for the Sunni alliance .
Israel should play an active role in the fall of Assad as a way to undermine the region ’ s “ Shia crescent ” and isolate its leader , Iran .
Assad ’ s defeat would break the “ axis of resistance , ” choke off Hezbollah ’ s arms supplies , and drive a permanent wedge between Turkey and Iran .
A solution to the Palestinian problem would serve such a strategy .
It would strengthen Israel ’ s relations with Egypt , help to stabilize Jordan ( a vital and friendly buffer state ) , and remove a major source of tension with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan ’ s Islamist government .
Most important , it would undermine Iran ’ s efforts to make inroads into the Arab world under the pretext of defending Palestine and Holy Jerusalem .
