Putin Is An Island
No man is an island , the poet John Donne said .
If he is well briefed for his summit in Moscow and Saint Petersburg , President Bush should discount Donne 's wisdom .
For within Russia , President Putin does appear to be an isolated island , at least among the Russian elite who have singularly failed to embrace his decision to anchor Russia firmly to the West .
The elite 's gripes about Putin 's foreign policy are many , but they center mostly on the notion that America is running roughshod over Russian interests .
American troops , they complain , are on the ground in the former Soviet republics of Georgia , Kyrgizstan , Tadjikistan , and Uzbelistan .
The next wave of NATO expansion promises to lap onto Russia 's border and indeed surpass the old Soviet borders by taking in the Baltic states .
Foreign investment has scarcely increased .
Putin , they allege , has surrendered Russia ' traditional notions of security and received nothing from the West in return .
The crimes they attribute to Putin sound like the indictment for a treason trial .
After making his bold moves towards the West after September 11 th , Putin undoubtedly expected to receive praise and favors in return .
Of course , the West 's ingratitude has been marked : America withdrew from the 1972 ABM Treaty and has now rammed a vague disarmament agreement - to be signed during the summit and which will allow the US not to destroy surplus missiles and warheads but rather to put them in cold storage - down Putin 's throat .
Even Putin 's Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov , a former KGB colleague and a man often considered to be Putin 's closest advisor within his government , does not fully agree with him on the terms of collaboration with America .
If the Russian-Western alliance fails to bring tangible benefits to Russia soon , there is a growing fear that the loss of confidence in Putin may weaken him fatally .
There is an eerie sense of déja vu in all this .
Khrushchev , Gorbachev and Yeltsin all saw their hold on power undermined when they sought to please or placate the West only to receive nothing in return .
Weakened by the perception of allowing the West to mistreat Russia , their influence among Russia 's ruling elite disintegrated .
But there is a critical difference between the Russia of today and even Yeltsin 's early postcommunist Russia .
Under Khrushchev and Gorbachev ( and also Yeltsin ) , Russia was an autocratic society in which control of the elite was the key to power .
Civil society didn 't exist .
Only the power bureaucracy mattered .
The faceless mass was just that : faceless and powerless .
Public opinion didn 't matter ; it didn 't even exist .
That elite , the old politburo nomenclature , was united by homogenized opinions .
You kept power by sticking together in thought and word and deed .
Change was anathema , risk to be avoided at all costs .
Better to stick to a tried and failed policy than to upset the apple cart , even if the apples were rotten .
Today 's Russia is no longer a two-tier society .
It is a society with a diversity of opinions , options , opportunities and interest groups .
Democracy , every Westerner will tell you , is not founded on what the élite think ; it 's what the people think that matters - or at least what a contending rabble of rival interests think .
But the most important thing is that people are free to think , which Russia 's people undoubtedly are now free to do .
What they think is that Vladimir Putin is looking after Russian interests , which now include being an unconditional part of the West .
Public opinion matters , and Russia 's elite knows it .
Yes , Putin cares that the elite are keeping their distance from his foreign policy .
But he knows something that they don 't seem to recognize : Russia 's people endorse his policies and do not want them overturned .
Of course , the elite works behind the scenes to retard Putin 's efforts , which is one reason why his ideas for military reform have gone almost nowhere under Sergei Ivanov 's direction .
But obstructing is far from overthrowing .
Putin may well be as isolated as my grandfather Nikita Khrushchev was in 1964 , when Leonid Brezhnev organized his palace coup against him .
Yet he is nowhere near as vulnerable , thanks to his widespread grassroots support among ordinary Russians .
Indeed , in the old days , Russia relied on its strength , mostly military , to determine its self-image .
Russia 's elite still embraces this vision .
But after the disasters of the last two decades , including the military debacle in Afghanistan and the ruinous barbarity of the Chechen war which has blown back its violence into Russia 's cities , ordinary Russians are less enamored of military might .
They still revere their country , of course , and want the world to respect it .
But it is respect for Russia 's culture that matters most to them , and such does not come at the barrel of a gun .
The obsession with power and prestige that galvanizes Russia 's elite hardly matters at all .
Russian society today is diversified and democratic , and its support for Putin is stronger than the grudges Russia 's élite hold against him .
So perhaps John Donne was partly right : if Putin is an island , he is one in a sea of millions of islands .
The bell of a coup will not toll for him .
