Mario Draghi ’ s Guns of August
WASHINGTON , DC – August has been a dangerous month in European history , but this year it could be the turning point for the eurozone – and perhaps for the world economy .
On July 26 , Mario Draghi , President of the European Central Bank , declared that his institution would do “ whatever it takes ” to preserve the euro , and added : “ Believe me , it will be enough . ”
Draghi ’ s strong – indeed , unprecedented – statement was widely interpreted as signaling that the ECB would soon revive its bond-purchase program , focusing on Spanish debt in particular .
Stock markets around the world soared .
Jens Weidemann of the Bundesbank immediately expressed reservations , but the next day German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President François Hollande issued a joint statement expressing their determination “ to do everything in order to protect the eurozone . ”
I recently argued that the ECB , working with the nascent European Stability Mechanism ( ESM ) , was the only institution that could save the eurozone .
It could do so by buying Italian and Spanish bonds in the secondary market with the pre-announced intention of keeping their sovereign interest rates below a certain threshold for a certain time .
It is likely that Draghi ’ s statement will indeed be followed by ECB purchases of Spanish ( and Italian ) sovereign bonds .
A man like Draghi would not have issued such a statement without believing that he could follow through on it .
But , if this is to become a decisive turning point in the eurozone crisis , three things must happen .
First , the ECB ’ s renewed bond purchases must express the clear intention of reducing sovereign interest rates to sustainable levels , which are at least 200 basis points below their July averages .
A high-level German diplomat reportedly dismissed Spain ’ s 6.5-7 % interest rates recently , on the grounds that Spain borrowed at nearly the same rates in the 1990 ’ s .
But that statement , amazingly , ignored Spain ’ s higher pre-euro inflation – thus confusing real and nominal rates – and more rapid GDP growth .
For countries that are following agreed reform programs , the ECB should commit itself to bringing down interest rates to levels compatible with projected inflation and growth rates , and announce how long ( say , nine months ) this will continue .
A sporadic program without such announced objectives is unlikely to work , and could even be counterproductive , as private investors might well demand even higher returns because the growing ECB share of the debt would be considered senior , augmenting their risk .
That would not happen if the ECB announced – and demonstrated – its determination to bring down interest rates , whatever it takes , for a significant period of time .
Doing so would allow the eurozone to establish the institutional and legal means to achieve greater cooperation and integration , as agreed at the European Council ’ s meeting in June .
The second thing that must happen is that eurozone leaders and parliaments , with the cooperation of the courts , must be seen to push ahead with institutional reforms to establish not only the ESM , but also a banking union and partial debt mutualization .
But , while greater merging of economic sovereignty is the only long-term solution to the eurozone ’ s woes , such reforms cannot happen very quickly , which is why the ECB ’ s role is so crucial .
The eurozone can no longer sustain continued uncertainty and high real interest rates in the peripheral countries , so the ECB must provide a solid and credible bridge to the future .
Finally , the adjustment programs themselves must be carefully re-calibrated .
It should be clear by now that excessive , front-loaded austerity measures tend to be self-defeating , because they trigger a downward spiral of output , employment , and tax revenues .
Indeed , the International Monetary Fund ’ s most recent report on the eurozone says as much ( if cautiously ) .
The pace of deficit reduction must be slowed , particularly in Spain , because output is determined in the short run by demand , and private demand cannot replace public demand until a degree of faith in the future is restored .
This move toward support of effective demand must be combined with the kind of structural reforms that will allow more rapid , supply-side growth in the longer term .
If these three steps – an ECB bond-buying program to hold down sovereign interest rates , concrete progress on establishing a real economic union , and realistic revision of current adjustment programs – could be achieved as a package , the resources that the ECB would need to use for its bond purchases would drop , because credibility would be restored .
Even if there is further bad news for Europe – from Greece , for example , or from a sharper-than-expected slowdown in China – the eurozone could begin to move out of crisis mode this month .
But that is possible only if , this time , the “ big bazooka ” really is put in place .
Otherwise , the eurozone ’ s position – financially , politically , and socially – will soon become undefendable .
