Re-thinking Foreign Aid
CAMBRIDGE : Rich countries of the world give a considerable amount of foreign assistance to poorer countries every year , around $ 60 billion in net assistance .
While this is not a particularly generous proportion of rich-country income ( roughly one-fourth of one percent of their combined gross national products ) , it is a lot of money just the same .
We might expect to get more results for this money , but in fact , most aid recipients are doing poorly in economic performance , and several studies have shown only weak links between foreign aid and improvements in living standards in the recipient countries .
The World Bank has recently offered one reason for this weak linkage : many aid recipients have poor economic policies , such as excessive state intervention in the economy , high levels of corruption , macroeconomic instability , and the like . The Bank rightly stresses that aid cannot work in an otherwise inappropriate economic environment .
The Bank 's solution is therefore clear : aid should be better targeted to those countries undertaking economic reforms and aid should be cut off when governments are mis-using aid or are otherwise highly corrupt .
This advice is fine , and to be supported , but it does not really go very far .
There are at least two additional reasons why the assistance process is failing .
The first is that most aid recipients are drowning in foreign indebtedness , with the money often owed to the very same governments and international agencies providing the " aid . "
Much aid , in fact , is simply the delivery of dollars for recycling to repay debts owed to the IMF and World Bank and rich-country governments .
The " donors " do not cut off aid flows because they know that their past loans would fall into default if new money is not delivered to the countries to repay the old debts !
The second reason is that the aid delivery is itself highly flawed and poorly designed .
For example , a considerable amount of aid is simply payments to domestic firms in the rich countries to sell unneeded products to the poorer countries .
Thus " aid " is often a marketing device for low-priority goods from the rich-countries .
And since a lot of the aid is in the form of loans rather than grants , the poor countries get even deeper into debt as they are encouraged to purchase supplies , products , and technical assistance from the rich countries .
At the same time , some of the forms of aid that are desperately needed by the poor countries are almost not forthcoming at all .
Recent studies at the Harvard Institute for International Development ( which can be found on http : / / www.hiid.harvard.edu ) have shown that much of the problem of global poverty can be traced to severe geographical problems of the poorer countries , such as endemic diseases that are prevalent in the tropics , such as malaria , schistosomiasis , and hookworm .
These diseases often lack effective preventative or curative vaccines or medicines , or the treatments that are available are too costly for the impoverished populations .
And yet foreign assistance is barely available to meet such challenges .
These medical challenges are scientific and technological , and thus cannot be solved by IMF-World Bank " structural adjustment loans , " which focus on policy reforms rather than scientific and technological innovations .
In the case of malaria , for example , a recent study by the Wellcome Trust in the United Kingdom estimated that total malaria research worldwide runs at about $ 80 million per year .
Since malaria kills between 1 and 2 million people per year , this amounts to around $ 40 - $ 80 of research spending per malaria death per year .
This level of spending ( per death ) is a tiny fraction of the research spending on " rich-country " diseases , such as asthma .
We could make the same point concerning agricultural productivity .
Poor countries often have extremely low agricultural productivity , not mainly because of poor policies , but because of poor soils and difficult climatic conditions .
Again , the amount of scientific research to study tropical agricultural is a tiny fraction of the research expenditures to study " rich-country " agriculture in the temperate climate .
One estimate has shown that the combined agriculture research spending by state governments in California , New York , and Florida exceeds the total of the worldwide system of international agricultural research centers for tropical countries .
We need a complete re-thinking of the global assistance strategy . $ 60 billion of foreign aid per year could stimulate a lot of new medicines , vaccines , hybrid seeds , and the like .
Without such aid , these scientific advances will not be forthcoming , since the needed scientific resources are almost all concentrated in the advanced economies , and normal market forces will not lead to their mobilization .
In summary , a future aid strategy will need at least three components .
For aid delivered to particular countries , better targeting along the lines suggested by the World Bank .
For the poorest countries in the world , a bold cancellation of debts , so that new aid is not simply recycled for debt repayments .
And for all of the developing world , a re-orientation of the aid effort to mobilize the scientific and technological knowledge needed to conquer unsolved problems of tropical health , agriculture , environment , energy use , and other areas that will not be overcome by economic reforms alone .
