Responsibility While Protecting
NEW YORK – Ten months ago , the United Nations Security Council , with no dissent , authorized the use of “ all necessary measures ” to protect civilians at imminent risk of massacre in Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi ’ s Libya .
Those lives were saved – and , if the Security Council had acted equally decisively and robustly in the 1990 ’ s , so might those of 8,000 others in Srebrenica and 800,000 in Rwanda .
I and many others hailed the agreement to intervene in Libya as the coming of age of the responsibility to protect ( “ R2P ” ) principle , unanimously embraced by the world ’ s governments in 2005 . Its core idea – countering centuries of treating sovereignty almost as a license to kill – is that states must protect their own people from genocide and other mass atrocity crimes .
If they manifestly fail to do so , the international community has the responsibility to act – by persuasion , if possible , and by coercion , if necessary .
Now , ten months later , the Security Council is paralyzed over Syria , unable to agree not only on the extreme step of military force , but even on lesser coercive measures like targeted sanctions , an arms embargo , or referral to the International Criminal Court .
That inaction comes despite a death toll of well over 5,000 and an outlook even worse than in Libya early last year .
The hesitation partly reflects the very different geopolitics of the Syrian crisis : potentially explosive regional sectarian divisions , no Arab League unanimity in favor of tough action , a long Russian commitment to the Assad regime , and a strong Syrian army , which would make any conceivable military intervention difficult and bloody .
But there is more to it than that .
Security Council consensus about when and how to apply R2P , so evident in February and March 2011 , has evaporated in a welter of recrimination about how the NATO-led implementation of the Council ’ s Libya mandate “ to protect civilians and civilian populated areas under threat of attack ” was carried out .
Leading the critical charge have been the “ BRICS ” ( Brazil , Russia , India , China , and South Africa ) .
Their complaints are not about the initial military response – destroying the Libyan air force ’ s infrastructure , and air attacks on ground forces advancing on Benghazi .
Rather , they object to what came after , when it rapidly became apparent that the three permanent Security Council ’ s members driving the intervention ( the United States , the United Kingdom , and France ) would settle for nothing less than regime change , and do whatever it took to achieve it .
In particular , concerns have been raised that the interveners rejected ceasefire offers that may have been serious , struck fleeing personnel who posed no immediate risk to civilians , and attacked locations that had no obvious military significance ( like the compound in which Qaddafi ’ s relatives were killed ) .
More generally , the Western powers , along with Arab states like Qatar , comprehensively supported the rebel side in what rapidly became a civil war , ignoring an explicit arms embargo in the process .
The US , the UK , and France are quick with some answers .
Protecting civilians in areas like Tripoli that were under Qaddafi ’ s direct control , they argue , required overturning his regime .
If one side was supported in a civil war , it was because a regime ’ s one-sided killing sometimes leads civilians ( as in Syria ) to take up arms to fight back ( and to recruit army defectors ) .
Moreover , military operations cannot be micromanaged with a “ 1,000-mile screwdriver . ”
And a more limited “ monitor and swoop ” concept of operations would have led to a longer and messier conflict in Libya , which would have been politically impossible to sustain in the US and Europe , and likely would have produced many more civilian casualties .
These arguments all have force , but the US , the UK , and France resisted debating them in the Security Council , and other Council members were never given sufficient information to enable them to be evaluated .
Maybe not all of the BRICS are to be believed when they say that more common ground could have been achieved had a better process been followed .
But the Western powers ’ dismissiveness during the Libyan campaign did bruise them – and those bruises will have to heal before any consensus can be expected on tough responses to such situations in the future .
The better news is that a way forward has opened up .
In November , Brazil circulated a paper arguing that the R2P concept , as it has evolved so far , needs to be supplemented by a new set of principles and procedures on the theme of “ responsibility while protecting ” ( already being labeled “ RWP ” ) .
Its two key proposals are a set of criteria ( including last resort , proportionality , and balance of consequences ) to be taken into account before the Security Council mandates any use of military force , and a monitoring-and-review mechanism to ensure that such mandates ’ implementation is seriously debated .
Initial reaction among the US , the UK , and France was almost contemptuous : one could almost hear their leaders sneering , “ These countries would want all of those delaying and spoiling options , wouldn ’ t they . ”
But that attitude has begun to soften – as it must .
Brazil , for its part , has indicated willingness to refine its proposals to make them more workable and broadly acceptable .
Renewed consensus on how to implement R2P in hard cases may come too late to help in Syria .
But everyone understands that the alternative to Security Council cooperation is a return to the bad old days of Rwanda , Srebrenica , and Kosovo : either total inaction in the face of mass atrocity crimes , or action outlawed by the UN Charter .
After all that has been achieved in the last decade , such an outcome would be heartbreaking .
