Protectionist Myths
NEW YORK – At a debate in New York last year entitled “ Buy American / Hire American Policies Will Backfire , ” with hundreds of people in attendance , my team of three free-trade proponents took on a trio of protectionists who are often in the public eye .
We expected that we would lose the final audience vote by 55 % to 45 % .
As it happened , we wiped the floor with them , winning by an unprecedented margin of 80 % to 20 % .
The feedback from several voters was that we had won handily because we had the “ arguments and the evidence , ” whereas our opponents had “ assertions and invective . ”
Evidently , the pessimism and despair that often overwhelms free traders today is unwarranted .
The arguments of protectionists , new and old , are just so many myths that can be successfully challenged .
Consider some of the most egregious examples .
Myth 1 : “ The cost of protection and its flipside , gains from trade , are negligible . ”
This means , of course , that if protectionism is politically convenient , you need not shed tears over harming the country by surrendering to it , an attitude that many Democrats in the United States find convenient to adopt .
Ironically , this myth was a product of inappropriate methodology and resulted from the research of my eminent Cambridge teacher Harry Johnson ; and it has inexplicably been a favorite thesis since 1990 of my celebrated MIT student Paul Krugman .
But , while this theme continues to play well in Washington , no serious scholar buys into it , owing to the compelling refutations published in 1992 by Robert Feenstra , the most accomplished trade policy empiricist today , and in 1994 by Stanford ’ s Paul Romer .
Myth 2 : “ Free trade may increase economic prosperity , but it is bad for the working class . ”
This claim has great credibility with labor unions that believe that trade with poor countries produces paupers in rich countries .
They therefore argue for leveling the playing field – i.e. , that the costs for their rivals in poor countries must be raised by imposing the same labor standards that exist in rich countries .
Orwellian use of terms like “ fair trade ” masks the fact that this is nothing but an insidious form of protectionism that seeks to reduce import competition .
Many economists have concluded , however , that continual and deep labor-saving technological change , not trade with poor countries , is a principal culprit in the stagnation seen in rich-country wages nowadays .
Moreover , workers profit from lower prices for imported goods like clothing and electronics .
Myth 3 : “ Free trade requires that other countries also open their markets . ”
This is a refrain that recurs each time a new US administration takes office .
But the facts are often fiction , and the logic is not compelling .
US automakers were convinced during the years of Japan-bashing in the 1980 ’ s that Japan was closed and the US was open .
But it was the US that had a quota of 2.2 million units for Japanese cars , while the Japanese market was open but difficult to penetrate .
The refrain is recurring with China today .
Even if other economies are closed , open economies still profit from their own free trade .
There was skepticism about this long-standing wisdom when it was argued that , if Japan was closed and the US was open , Japanese firms would have two markets and American firms would have one .
The former , it was claimed , would have lower unit costs than the latter .
But the problem here , as always , is with the assumption that Japanese firms would continue to be as efficient as American firms , despite protectionism .
Myth 4 : “ Paul Samuelson abandoned free trade , and he was the greatest economist of his time . ”
The latter is indeed true ; but the former , asserted by many protectionists , is not .
Even Hillary Clinton , in her campaign for the US presidency , mistakenly embraced this fallacy .
All that Samuelson showed was that any exogenous change could harm a trading economy ; he did not argue that an appropriate response to that unfortunate situation was to abandon free trade .
Consider an analogy .
If Florida is devastated by a hurricane , its governor would only make matters worse if he responded by abandoning trade with other states .
Myth 5 : “ Offshoring of jobs will devastate rich countries . ”
This scare arose during Senator John Kerry ’ s failed presidential campaign in 2004 , when digitized x-rays were sent from Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston to be read in India .
But no radiologists have lost jobs in the US since then , nor have their earnings fallen .
Indeed , it is clear that the increased tradability of services has not unleashed an economic tsunami on rich countries .
Often , jobs that would have disappeared anyway , owing to high costs in the US and other rich countries , have resurfaced where costs are lower , thus providing services that would have been lost otherwise .
So noted offshoring worriers like the economist Alan Blinder have now shifted to arguing merely that increased tradability of services means that we should extend long-standing Adjustment Assistance Programs for trade-distressed activities to include services .
To which the free trader responds : no problem there !
