Vladimir Putin ’ s Soviet Dream
MADRID – The recent nuclear deal concluded by six major world powers and Iran represented a triumph of multilateralism .
If those same powers – the five permanent UN Security Council members and Germany – showed the same will to work together to resolve other disputes , the world might enter a new era of cooperation and stability .
Unfortunately , such a scenario seems farfetched .
From China ’ s activities in the South China Sea to the Islamic State ’ s continued advance in the Middle East , competition and conflict are threatening long-standing regional orders .
But perhaps the most critical conflict – the one whose resolution has implications for all the rest – is in Ukraine , a country that has become central to Russian President Vladimir Putin ’ s expansionist ambitions .
Russia ’ s unilateral annexation of Crimea and support for separatists in eastern Ukraine have ruptured its relations with the West , and Putin has intentionally recreated a Cold War atmosphere by touting Russia ’ s “ conservative values ” as an ideological counterweight to the American-led liberal world order .
Nonetheless , key issues – the carnage in Syria , the fight against the Islamic State , nuclear non-proliferation , and conflicting interests and competing claims in the Arctic – cannot be resolved without Russia ’ s involvement .
That is why , as hard as it may be for Western powers , some efforts to appease Russia are unavoidable .
The United States should be less dismissive of Russia ’ s sensibilities as an important power and a major civilization , and Russia ’ s legitimate security interests concerning its borders with NATO countries must be addressed , not least to keep Ukraine out of a rival military alliance .
The Ukrainian parliament ’ s endorsement , despite strong international opposition , of autonomy for the pro-Russia separatist regions – a solution initially proposed by Putin – is exactly the kind of concession that is needed to restore peace .
Ultimately , however , it is up to Russia to change its ways .
Propaganda-driven nostalgia for the Soviet Union ’ s Cold War-era “ great power ” status is obscuring the lessons of that time .
The Soviet Union was an unsustainable empire ; if it could not survive at a time when isolation and bipolarity were the order of the day , it certainly could not be recreated within today ’ s interconnected multipolar global system .
Russia already is in no position to confront the West : Its economy is withering , and it lacks solid alliances capable of countering US power .
Putin is hoping that Russia and its BRICS partners ( Brazil , India , China , and South Africa ) will become “ the future leaders of the world and the global economy , ” as he put it in July , at the conclusion of the BRICS and Shanghai Cooperation Organization summits
But the plain truth is that neither the BRICS nor the SCO is remotely close to being a cohesive bloc capable of insulating Russia from the consequences of its behavior in Ukraine .
The differences in values and strategic interests within the groupings are no less acute than the disagreements that their various members have with the West .
Russia ’ s bilateral relationship with China is no different .
It is a relationship founded largely on Chinese dependence on Russian energy supplies , mutual support for “ spheres of influence ” as the conceptual foundation of an alternative world order , and joint naval exercises in the Black Sea .
But the two countries have conflicting interests in Central Asia , where China is pursuing major investments to expand its influence in countries that Russia views as its “ near abroad . ”
When Putin questioned Kazakhstan ’ s independence last year , China was quick to support the country ’ s sovereignty .
China ’ s potential encroachment on Russia ’ s unpopulated Far East borders – which , in China ’ s view , were stolen , much like Hong Kong and Taiwan , during its “ century of humiliation ” – is another source of anxiety in the Kremlin .
More important , China ’ s economy depends on continued access to Western – and especially US – markets .
At a time when a slowing economy is creating greater uncertainty for China , it cannot afford to provoke tensions with the US over anything that is not in its direct interests , such as its territorial claims in the South China Sea .
Despite Russia ’ s weak alliances , Putin seems undeterred .
Beyond his boastful talk about Russia ’ s nuclear arsenal , his government has recently announced a new naval doctrine – one that amounts to an alarming echo of Germany ’ s naval challenge to Britain prior to World War I. If no diplomatic détente is brokered , Putin may well continue on this path , bringing his country ever closer to a full-blown conflict with NATO .
Even if no such conflict erupts , Putin ’ s attempts to restore Russian influence across Eurasia ( by whatever means necessary , if his actions in Ukraine are any indication ) will be highly damaging .
It should be no surprise that Kazakhstan and Belarus are as wary of Russian expansionism as Ukraine .
Putin has discarded former President Dmitri Medvedev ’ s concept of a “ partnership for modernization ” with the West .
But a Eurasian customs union among post-Soviet and other countries is not the road to modernization for Russia ; nor is an effort to make the defense industry the engine of industrialization .
That , in a nutshell , was the Soviet model , which failed once and would fail again .
If Putin is serious about diversifying and strengthening Russia ’ s commodities-based economy , thereby improving the lives of his country ’ s people , he must attract advanced technologies and foreign investment , especially from the West .
For that , he must pursue democratic reforms , institutional regeneration , and renewed diplomatic ties with the West .
Russia is in no position to create an alternative international system ; but , if Putin continues to pursue an outdated and antagonistic foreign policy , it can undermine the existing one .
At a time when the world is facing so many destabilizing challenges , this would not be good for anyone .
The West should seek to mollify Russia on core strategic questions like NATO expansion .
But that will not help Putin to overcome the source of Russia ’ s weakness , which lies in his inability or unwillingness to see the Soviet Union for the failure that it was .
