Keeping Cool in the Nuclear Heat
CANBERRA – Perhaps it is going too far to say , as someone did after the Gulf of Mexico oil spill two years ago , that most Americans want a president who is cool , calm , and collected in a crisis – except when there is a crisis .
But of all the charges thrown at President Barack Obama by his domestic political opponents , the hardest for most outsiders to accept is that he is too emotionally disengaged : all brain cells and no red-blood cells .
Certainly in defense and foreign policy , a cool and measured response to the extreme provocations that often come with that territory is what the world wants , and needs , from the leader of its reigning superpower .
Nowhere is that need greater than in the cases of North Korea and Iran , owing to the destructive potential of the weapons that they have or may be developing .
With North Korea , the provocations continue to come thick and fast .
Understandings are reached , only to be immediately broken , as with the North ’ s agreement in February , in return for US food aid , to accept International Atomic Energy Agency inspectors , suspend uranium enrichment , and halt missile and weapons tests .
Within little more than a month , a “ satellite rocket ” is launched , albeit spectacularly misfiring , and all bets are off .
With the North ’ s new leader Kim Jong-un feeling the heat of that technical humiliation , there is now every reason to be concerned that another nuclear-weapon test , or some other chest-beating military antic , is imminent .
China seems unable or unwilling to moderate its neighbor ’ s behavior .
Nerves in South Korea , and especially Japan , are raw .
The Obama administration has been right not to appear too spooked by all of this .
The tone of the American response has been firm , giving appropriate reassurance to its allies and making clear that gamesmanship will not be tolerated , but not raising the temperature further .
Its three-pronged approach of containment , deterrence , and openness to negotiation is exactly the right course to pursue .
Denuclearization of the Korean peninsula – with the price being guaranteed regime survival and major economic support for the North – may be a fading dream .
But it is still not impossible .
We came much closer to getting there than is now remembered in the Agreed Framework deal of the mid-1990 ’ s , in which I participated as Australia ’ s Foreign Minister .
The underlying dynamics have not changed fundamentally since then .
For all of their infuriating brinkmanship , it is reasonable to assume that North Korea ’ s leaders are not bent on national suicide , as any attempted use of their still very modest nuclear arsenal would certainly entail .
With Iran , the stakes are , and always have been , higher .
Should Iran acquire nuclear weapons , the prospect of a regional arms race ( starting with Saudi Arabia ) – and thus heightened risk of nuclear war by accident , design , or miscalculation – is very much greater than is the risk of further proliferation in Northeast Asia .
And just one or two nuclear weapons could effectively destroy a country of Israel ’ s size .
Accordingly , the pressure on Obama to be seen to be doing something to stop Iran in its tracks is very much greater than in the case of North Korea , and will become almost unbearable during this election year .
But Obama ’ s response so far has been , again , exactly right – cool and measured ; avoiding any military adventurism of his own and discouraging Israel from it ; and applying the same three-pronged strategy of containment , deterrence , and openness to negotiations .
It remains to be seen whether the talks now under way between Iran and the 5 + 1 Group ( the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council plus Germany ) will bear fruit .
But , with the escalating financial sanctions of the past year now clearly biting hard , the signs are more encouraging than they have been for some time .
What makes things politically difficult for Obama is the widespread perception that Iran is hell-bent on actually acquiring a physical nuclear arsenal ; that all else is dissimulation ; and that negotiations can at best buy time .
But it is still possible to achieve a negotiated outcome that recognizes Iran ’ s “ right to enrich ” uranium , while giving the international community complete confidence that the red line of weaponization would not be crossed .
That has long been my view , based on a decade of engagement with the issue as President of the International Crisis Group , and I know many US and other international policymakers share it .
Iran ’ s calculations , as I have heard them , reflect five key factors .
One is its concern to avoid preemptive strikes by Israel , and a war that it does not believe that it could win .
Another is its belief that any Shia bomb would soon be matched by a Sunni one , making any regional hegemony short-lived .
Third , Iran is anxious that weaponization could exhaust any remaining tolerance from Russia and China .
Fourth , it wants to avoid the further economic pain that universally applied sanctions would cause .
Finally , and interestingly ( if unpersuasive to many ) , all of Iran ’ s leaders continue to insist that weapons of mass destruction are incompatible with the basic tenets of Islam .
Full-throated bellicosity often has more popular appeal than the thoughtful and patient exploration of opportunities for peace .
The world should be profoundly grateful that , on nuclear proliferation as on other issues , we have in the current US president someone for whom reason instinctively trumps emotion .
