My Plan to Drop the Bomb
NEW YORK – The destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 marked an end and a beginning . The close of the Second World War ushered in a Cold War , with a precarious peace based on the threat of mutually assured destruction .
Today the world is at another turning point . The assumption that nuclear weapons are indispensable to keeping the peace is crumbling . Disarmament is back on the global agenda – and not a moment too soon .
A groundswell of new international initiatives will soon emerge to move this agenda forward .
The Cold War ’ s end , twenty years ago this autumn , was supposed to provide a peace dividend . Instead , we find ourselves still facing serious nuclear threats . Some stem from the persistence of more than 20,000 nuclear weapons and the contagious doctrine of nuclear deterrence . Others relate to nuclear tests — more than a dozen in the post-Cold War era , aggravated by the constant testing of long-range missiles .
Still others arise from concerns that more countries or even terrorists might be seeking the bomb .
For decades , we believed that the terrible effects of nuclear weapons would be sufficient to prevent their use . The superpowers were likened to a pair of scorpions in a bottle , each knowing a first strike would be suicidal . Today ’ s expanding nest of scorpions , however , means that no one is safe . The Presidents of the Russian Federation and the United States — holders of the largest nuclear arsenals — recognize this . They have endorsed the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons , most recently at their Moscow summit , and are seeking new reductions .
Many efforts are underway worldwide to achieve this goal . Earlier this year , the 65-member Conference on Disarmament — the forum that produces multilateral disarmament treaties — broke a deadlock and agreed to negotiations on a fissile material treaty . Other issues it will discuss include nuclear disarmament and security assurances for non-nuclear-weapon states .
In addition , Australia and Japan have launched a major international commission on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament . My own multimedia “ WMD — WeMustDisarm ! ” campaign , which will culminate on the International Day of Peace ( 21 September ) , will reinforce growing calls for disarmament by former statesmen and grassroots campaigns , such as “ Global Zero . ”
These calls will get a further boost in September when civil society groups gather in Mexico City for a UN-sponsored conference on disarmament and development .
Though the UN has been working on disarmament since 1946 , two treaties negotiated under UN auspices are now commanding the world ’ s attention .
Also in September , countries that have signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test Ban Treaty ( CTBT ) will meet at the UN to consider ways to promote its early entry into force . North Korea ’ s nuclear tests , its missile launches and its threats of further provocation lend new urgency to this cause .
Next May , the UN will also host a major five-year review conference involving the parties to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) , which will examine the state of the treaty ’ s “ grand bargain ” of disarmament , non-proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy . If the CTBT can enter into force , and if the NPT review conference makes progress , the world would be off to a good start on its journey to a world free of nuclear weapons .
My own five-point plan to achieve this goal begins with a call for the NPT Parties to pursue negotiations in good faith — as required by the treaty — on nuclear disarmament , either through a new convention or through a series of mutually reinforcing instruments backed by a credible system of verification .
Second , I urged the Security Council to consider other ways to strengthen security in the disarmament process , and to assure non-nuclear-weapon states against nuclear weapons threats . I proposed to the Council that it convene a summit on nuclear disarmament , and I urged non-NPT states to freeze their own weapon capabilities and make their own disarmament commitments .
My third proposal relates to the rule of law . Universal membership in multilateral treaties is key , as are regional nuclear-weapon-free zones and a new treaty on fissile materials . President Barack Obama ’ s support for US ratification of the CTBT is welcome — the treaty only needs a few more ratifications to enter into force .
My fourth point addresses accountability and transparency . Countries with nuclear weapons should publish more information about what they are doing to fulfill their disarmament commitments . While most of these countries have revealed some details about their weapons programs , we still do not know how many nuclear weapons exist worldwide . The UN Secretariat could serve as a repository for such data .
Finally , I am urging progress in eliminating other weapons of mass destruction and limiting missiles , space weapons and conventional arms — all of which are needed for a nuclear-weapon-free world .
This , then , is my plan to drop the bomb . Global security challenges are serious enough without the risks from nuclear weapons or their acquisition by additional states or non-state actors . Of course , strategic stability , trust among nations , and the settlement of regional conflicts would all help to advance the process of disarmament . Yet disarmament has its own contributions to make in serving these goals and should not be postponed .
It will restore hope for a more peaceful , secure and prosperous future . It deserves everybody ’ s support .
