Is Employee Ownership Coming Back ?
FLORENCE : Faced with an embarrassing strike by Air France pilots during the World Cup , the French government purchased labor peace by , among other things , offering striking pilots a big ownership stake in their company .
Such employee ownership , uncritically lumped together with socialist nostrums over the years , was once widely dismissed as a nutty , ideological illusion .
Recently , it has attracted fresh and widespread interest not only as a means to secure more tranquil labor relations , but as a practical means of business organization .
In the West , this interest derives in part from declining faith in traditional trade unionism ; in the postcommunist East it was stimulated by the speedy collapse of state socialism .
Today , reformers on the left hope that employee ownership will succeed where unionism and government ownership failed in equalizing power and wealth , and in decreasing worker alienation and exploitation .
Reformers on the right hope that employee ownership will improve productivity and increase worker identification with the interests of capital .
In many countries , these hopes are stimulating public policy .
In the United States employee ownership has been promoted by large tax subsidies and by exceptional provisions in pension laws .
In Russia , employees have been awarded majority stakes in newly privatized state enterprise .
And in Germany , mandatory worker representation on the board of directors , together with substantial job security , effectively gives employees many of the attributes of owners .
Employee-owned firms have , in fact , always been common .
The partnerships of professionals that have long dominated services such as law , accounting , and -- until recently -- investment banking are familiar examples .
Nor are they trivial : the largest U.S. accounting firms do business on an international scale and have long had thousands of partners .
Transportation is another field where employee ownership is common : around the world , trucking companies , bus companies , and taxi companies are often organized as cooperatives owned by their drivers .
There are also important examples in other industries , including plywood manufacturing in America , appliance manufacturing in Spain , and construction in Italy .
Owing in part to encouragement from public policy , employee ownership has been spreading in recent years .
A conspicuous example is United Air Lines -- the world ’ s largest airline -- in which more than 50,000 employees collectively acquired a controlling share in 1994 .
So , does employee ownership have a bright future in the organization of industry ?
It clearly has attractions .
Employee ownership improves incentives for employee productivity , and reduces incentives for a firm to exploit its workers by , for example , imposing poor wages or working conditions on employees who , though highly productive , find that for personal or professional reasons their opportunities for alternative employment have decreased over time .
It also largely removes incentives for both management and workers to engage in the kind of costly strategic behavior -- such as strikes and lockouts -- that sometimes characterizes labor relations in investor-owned firms .
Undoubtedly these virtues are significant .
If they were the most important factor governing the success or failure of employee ownership , however , we would expect employee ownership to be most common in those industries in which workers are unusually difficult to monitor , are relatively immobile , or are extensively unionized .
Yet just the reverse is true , at least where employee ownership is not mandated by law .
Evidently there are countervailing costs to employee ownership that often outweigh these potential benefits .
Among these costs are the difficulty of raising capital and excessive risk for employees .
Yet , while these are important problems , they are not decisive .
Employee ownership has long been successful even in industries -- such as plywood manufacturing and investment banking -- that are both volatile and relatively capital intensive .
Rather , the Achilles ’ heel of employee ownership seems to lie in problems of governance .
To be sure , employees frequently have better incentives and ability to oversee a firm 's managers than do investors of capital , who are often remote from the firm .
But investors hold an important advantage that employees generally lack : substantial unanimity of interest .
Employees with diverse roles within a firm are often affected differently by firm policies .
The resulting conflicts of interest can make employee governance costly , both by complicating the process of decision-making and by producing decisions skewed toward the interests of dominant employee groups .
These governance costs appear critical .
True employee ownership , with effective employee participation in governance , has generally met long-term success only where there is substantial homogeneity of interest among the employees involved : the employees who participate in ownership commonly do similar work within the firm , have similar kinds and levels of skill , and exercise little hierarchical authority over each other .
Partners in a law firm and driver-owners in a transportation firm are typical examples here .
Moreover , to reduce even further the potential for conflict , employee-owned firms often adopt costly strategies , such as the rigid seniority-based profit-sharing schemes found in many law firms or the firm-wide job rotation that typifies US plywood cooperatives .
Experience with employee ownership offers a mixed picture .
True employee ownership , in which employees participate meaningfully both in earnings and control , appears effective in a surprisingly broad range of circumstances so long as ownership can be placed in the hands of a class of employees who have highly homogeneous interests .
But where , as is common , this requirement cannot be met , investor ownership has the advantage .
As a consequence , the boldest new experiments in employee ownership - United Airlines , privatized Russian firms , even Air France - seem likely to serve only as temporary expedients in industrial restructuring .
