Joking about Science
ITHACA , NEW YORK – An apocryphal story sometimes heard among physicists concerns a toast , proposed by his Cambridge University colleagues , to J. J. Thomson ’ s discovery of the electron in 1897 : “ To the electron : may it never be of use to anyone ! ”
Pure mathematicians supposedly tell a similar joke about their profession .
Why should it be considered witty to celebrate the uselessness of knowledge ?
I witnessed a similar attitude from a cosmologist when I participated in a radio show a few years ago : the host remarked to him that his research “ has virtually no practical applicability , ” to which he quickly replied , “ I ’ m proud of that , yes . ”
These jokes all seem to rely on the same assumption : everyone thinks that knowledge , especially scientific knowledge , should be useful .
So it ’ s funny to boast that one ’ s own brand of knowledge , whether experimental physics , mathematics , or cosmology , is useless .
But the joke wouldn ’ t work if there were not at the same time another widely shared assumption that scientific knowledge has a value independent of any practical use .
After all , it would not be funny if a charity dedicated to famine relief celebrated its own ineffectiveness ; practical value in that case would be paramount , because it would be the only real reason for the charity to exist .
So , even though potential usefulness is the reason why governments devote so much money to scientific research , people really expect more from science than that .
On this view , science also has a quite different , higher aim : understanding the natural world . & # 160 ;
Einstein may have drawn US President Franklin Roosevelt ’ s attention to the possibility of making nuclear weapons , but he is chiefly remembered for his profound ideas about the nature of the universe .
More recent scientific gurus , such as Carl Sagan and Stephen Hawking , have presented a similar image to the public .
Science from this perspective is about natural philosophy , an enterprise that seeks to acquire deep understanding of the world regardless of whether that knowledge can be put to use .
Jokes also betray a certain uneasiness about the apparent contradictions that they reveal . & # 160 ;
In this case , the uneasiness derives from a fundamental uncertainty about which of the two faces of science , natural philosophy or instrumentality , represents its true character . & # 160 ;
Is science really about understanding the world , with instrumentality being a matter of fortuitous spin-offs ?
Or is it really about putting the natural world to human uses , with natural philosophy being little more than a language to account for why certain techniques work ?
The nineteenth century invented the familiar terms “ pure ” and “ applied ” science as a way of reconciling these alternative understandings .
Pure science , as the name suggests , is presented as the “ real thing , ” untainted by practical considerations and rooted in properly conducted empirical and theoretical investigation of nature .
Applied science takes the knowledge provided by pure science and puts it to work .
But that straightforward picture bears little resemblance to the complexities of real scientific activity : if applied science involved nothing more than the application of the results of pure science , there would be no need for “ research and development ” departments in manufacturing corporations , or research laboratories at chemical or electronics companies .
The instrumental achievements of science would depend solely on the scraps falling from the pure scientist ’ s table .
In fact , the two faces of science are much more intimately interwoven – less like faces than like two ingredients of a thoroughly stirred mixture .
“ Truth and utility , ” wrote Francis Bacon , the early seventeenth-century English philosopher and statesman , “ are the very same things . ”
In other words , the truth of beliefs about the world is guaranteed only by the capacity of those beliefs to be turned into actions that produce the practical outcomes that human beings desire .
What we understand as the instrumentality of science was , for Bacon , nothing but the other side of the scientific coin .
Where the poet John Keats wrote “ Beauty is truth , truth beauty , ” Bacon might have said , “ Utility is truth , truth utility ” — as long as we take “ utility ” in a very broad sense .
But we don ’ t believe Bacon , either .
Like Bacon , we value utility because it seems to lend credibility to the claims that science makes about the nature of the world – science is true because it works .
But , at the same time , we won ’ t allow science to be reduced to practical utility , because that would destroy its intellectual status , as well as the intellectual status of scientists themselves , and would prevent science from giving explanations .
So science must retain its claim to being natural philosophy , too .
Sometimes we believe that science is natural philosophy , and sometimes we believe that science is instrumentality .
But in fact it ’ s both simultaneously , neither “ pure ” nor “ applied . ”
If we could acknowledge that , we wouldn ’ t be joking about it .
