A New Asian Security Constellation
NEW DELHI – Leading members of the governments of India and South Korea recently met to begin a new “ strategic partnership . ”
They are not alone in doing so , for across Asia , a new security architecture is being constructed , seemingly piecemeal .
How Asia ’ s geopolitical landscape will evolve over the coming decades is not easy to foresee .
But it is apparent that an increasingly assertive China is unwittingly reinforcing America ’ s role in Asia , restoring US primacy as the implicit guarantor of security and stability in the region .
There are at least four possible Asian security scenarios for the years and decades ahead . The first is the rise of a Sino-centric Asia .
China seeks a multipolar world but a unipolar Asia .
By contrast , the US desires a unipolar world but a multipolar Asia .
A second scenario is that the US remains Asia ’ s principal security anchor , with or without a third possibility : the emergence of a constellation of Asian states with common interests working together to ensure that Asia is not unipolar .
Finally , Asia could come to be characterized by several resurgent powers , including Japan , India , Vietnam , Indonesia , and a reunified Korea .
Of the four scenarios , the first has caused the greatest unease .
China ’ s neighbors are increasingly anxious about its growing power and assertiveness .
While China ’ s rulers aspire to shape a Sino-centric Asia , their efforts to intimidate smaller neighbors hardly make China a credible candidate for Asian leadership .
After all , genuine leadership cannot come from raw power , but only from other states ’ consent or tacit acceptance .
If leadership could be built on brute force , schoolyard bullies would be class presidents .
In any event , China ’ s power may be vast and rapidly growing , but it lacks the ability to compel .
In other words , China does not have the capability to rout any rival militarily , let alone enforce its will on Asia .
That fact has , however , done little to allay fears in the region .
With its defense spending having grown almost twice as fast as its GDP , China is now beginning to take the gloves off , confident that it has acquired the necessary muscle .
For example , China now includes the South China Sea in its “ core ” national interests , on a par with Taiwan and Tibet , in order to stake a virtually exclusive claim to military operations there .
China also has increasingly questioned India ’ s sovereignty over Arunachal Pradesh , the northeastern Indian state that China ’ s rulers call “ Southern Tibet ” and claim largely as their own .
Indian defense officials have reported a rising number of Chinese military incursions across the 4,057-kilometer Himalayan border .
As China seeks to translate its economic clout into major geopolitical advantages in Asia , a country that once boasted of “ having friends everywhere ” finds that its growing power may be inspiring awe , but that its actions are spurring new concerns and fears .
Which states will accept China as Asia ’ s leader ?
Six decades of ruthless repression has failed to win China acceptance even in Tibet and Xinjiang , as the Tibetan and Uighur revolts of 2008 and 2009 attested .
Leadership entails more than the possession of enormous economic and military power .
It demands the power of ideas that can galvanize others .
Such power also serves as the moral veneer to the assertiveness often involved in the pursuit of any particular cause or interest .
The US and its allies won the Cold War , for example , not so much by military means as by spreading the ideas of political freedom and market capitalism to other regions .
In the words of the strategic analyst Stanley A. Weiss , this “ helped suck the lifeblood out of communism ’ s global appeal , ” making it incapable of meeting the widespread yearning for a better and more open life .
China has shown itself adept at assertively promoting its national interests and playing classical balance-of-power geopolitics .
But , in order to displace the US and assume the mantle of leadership in Asia , China must do more than pursue its own interests or contain potential rivals .
Most fundamentally , what does China represent in terms of values and ideas ?
In the absence of an answer to that question , China ’ s overly assertive policies have proven a diplomatic boon for the US in strengthening and expanding American security arrangements in Asia .
South Korea has tightened its military alliance with the US , Japan has backed away from a move to get the US to move its Marine airbase out of Okinawa , and India , Vietnam , Indonesia , and the Philippines , among others , have drawn closer to the US .
In terms of power-projection force capabilities or the range of military bases and security allies in Asia , no power or combination of powers is likely to match the US in the next quarter-century .
But , while America ’ s continued central role in Asia is safe , the long-term viability of its security arrangements boils down to the credibility of its security assurances to allies and partners .
America ’ s readiness to stand by them when the game gets rough will determine the strength and size of its security-alliance system in Asia in the years ahead .
The third and fourth scenarios can unfold even if the US remains the principal security anchor for Asia .
A number of Asian countries have already started building mutually beneficial security cooperation on a bilateral basis , thereby laying the groundwork for a potential web of interlocking strategic partnerships .
A constellation of Asian states linked by strategic cooperation , in fact , has become critical to help institute power stability in the region .
