Obama Joins the Greek Chorus
PRINCETON – US President Barack Obama ’ s & nbsp ; recent call to ease the austerity imposed on Greece is remarkable – and not only for his endorsement of the newly elected Greek government ’ s negotiating position in the face of its official creditors .
Obama ’ s comments represent a break with the long-standing tradition of official American silence on European monetary affairs .
While scholars in the United States have frequently denounced the policies of Europe ’ s monetary union , their government has looked the other way .
Those who criticize the euro or how it is managed have long run the risk of being dismissed as Anglo-Saxons or , worse , anti-Europeans .
British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher accurately foresaw the folly of a European monetary union .
Gordon Brown , as British Chancellor of the Exchequer , followed in Thatcher ’ s footsteps .
When his staff presented carefully researched reasons for not joining the euro , many Europeans sneered .
And that is why Obama ’ s statement was such a breath of fresh air .
It came a day after German Chancellor Angela Merkel said that Greece should not expect more debt relief and must maintain austerity .
Meanwhile , after days of not-so-veiled threats , the European Central Bank is on the verge of cutting funding to Greek banks .
The guardians of financial stability are amplifying a destabilizing bank run .
Obama ’ s breach of Europe ’ s intellectual insularity is all the more remarkable because even the International Monetary Fund has acquiesced in German-imposed orthodoxy .
As IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde told the Irish Times : “ A debt is a debt , and it is a contract .
Defaulting , restructuring , changing the terms has consequences . ”
The Fund stood by in the 1990s , when the eurozone misadventure was concocted .
In 2002 , the director of the IMF ’ s European Department described the fiscal rules that institutionalized the culture of persistent austerity as a “ sound framework . ”
And , in May 2010 , the IMF endorsed the European authorities ’ decision not to impose losses on Greece ’ s private creditors – a move that was reversed only after unprecedented fiscal belt-tightening sent the Greek economy into a tailspin .
The delays and errors in managing the Greek crisis started early .
In July 2010 , Lagarde , who was France ’ s finance minister at the time , recognized the damage incurred by those initial delays , “ If we had been able to address [ Greece ’ s debt ] right from the start , say in February , I think we would have been able to prevent it from snowballing the way that it did . ”
Even the IMF acknowledged that it had been a mistake not to impose losses on private creditors preemptively ; it finally did so only in June 2013 , when the damage had already been done .
There is plenty of blame to go around .
Former US Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner championed a hardline stance against debt restructuring during a crisis .
As a result , despite warnings by several IMF Directors in May 2010 that restructuring was inevitable , the US supported the European position that private creditors needed to be paid in full . & nbsp ;
Lee Buchheit , a leading sovereign-debt attorney and the man who managed the eventual Greek debt restructuring in 2012 , was harshly critical of the authorities ’ failure to face up to reality .
As he put it , “ I find it hard to imagine they will now man up to the proposition that they delayed – at appalling cost to Greece , its creditors , and its official-sector sponsors – an essential debt restructuring . ”
Obama may have arrived late to the right conclusion , but he expressed what should be an obvious truth : “ You cannot keep on squeezing countries that are in the midst of depression . ”
If Obama ’ s words are to count , he must continue to push for the kind of deal Greece needs – one that errs on the side of too much debt forgiveness , rather than too little .
Recent analysis shows that forgiveness of Greece ’ s official debt is unambiguously desirable , as another bogus deal will keep the Greek economy depressed , ensuring that the problem soon recurs .
If European sensitivities must be assuaged , Greece ’ s debt repayment could be drawn out over 100 years .
At the end of the day , debt forgiveness benefits creditors as much as it helps debtors .
Creditors have known this since at least the sixteenth century , when Spain ’ s King Philip II became the world ’ s first known serial sovereign defaulter .
As Jesus put it , “ It is more blessed to give than to receive . ”
European authorities must come to understand that the next act of the Greek tragedy will not be confined to Greece .
If relief fails to materialize , political discontent will spread , extremist forces will gain strength , and the survival of the European Union itself could be endangered .
