A New Deal for the New World
As former members of our countries ' congresses we believe that it is time to create a North American Parliamentary Union ( NAPU ) to address the growing number of big issues that North America 's national governments have pushed to the sidelines .
Both past and present have been burdened by the ad hoc nature of relations among the United States , Mexico , and Canada .
A fairer , more prosperous future for all three countries demands that we take a bold step forward .
Despite US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld 's snide reference to " Old Europe , " North Americans can learn much from the European Union and European Parliament .
In the 1950 's , most of Europe considered the idea of a Union with a single Parliament a pipe dream .
Today the EU elects its Parliament , shares a single currency , and controls a budget that emphasizes raising living standards within the less developed member countries .
Within the near future , the EU is likely to be 450 million people strong .
The combined population of the US , Mexico , and Canada is about 410 million people .
Yet North America has failed to match Europe in building the political structures necessary to focus the hemisphere on the problems of immigration , cross border security , labor rights , and environmental degradation ; or in facilitating a more united approach to strong economic competition from Europe and Asia .
On the contrary , in the aftermath of the Iraq War , relations between the US and its neighbors , Canada and Mexico , are at their lowest level in years .
Clearly , efforts to deepen North American political and economic integration will be an uphill battle .
In the near future , the US government will be focused on homeland security , Iraq , the slumping domestic economy , and the run-up to the 2004 presidential election . Canada 's government has been more willing to approach North American issues on a bilateral basis than in a tri-national context ; furthermore , Canadians are preoccupied with the consequences and aftermath of SARS and mad cow disease , as well as anticipating a new government next year .
Mexico 's President Vincente Fox will govern through 2006 . But his vision of a North American Free Trade Association ( NAFTA ) encompassing elements of social and political fusion with his North American counterparts was sidetracked by the terrorist attacks of September 11 , 2001 , and by his political rivals ' recent successes at the polls .
Notwithstanding this , most Canadians and Mexicans believe that cooperation in North America will proceed regardless of who is in office in Ottawa , Washington , or Mexico City .
Not only are Canada and Mexico the US 's first and second largest trading partners , but the three countries maintain a myriad of relationships--in business , tourism , and culture--that do not pass through their embassies or governments .
Good feelings abound .
US citizens register high approval ratings in Canada and Mexico : 90 % and 70 % , respectively .
In proposing the creation of NAPU , we envision a specific plan to create a larger market by fostering an alliance between the three economies .
In just a single decade , the EU managed to bring poorer , peripheral member states--Greece , Portugal , Spain , and Ireland--from 50 % to 90 % of the EU average in per capita income , creating a bigger market for companies from wealthier northern countries , and stemming migration from poorer southern economies .
The EU invested upwards of $ 35 billion a year to assure the success of their Common Market integration .
North America has largely ignored the significance of " common , " preferring to focus on " market . "
This blinded all three countries to the centrality of community .
We have failed to understand that a North American Free Trade Area ( NAFTA ) that achieves its full potential cannot be accomplished on the cheap .
A regional political structure will maintain the focus on vital but difficult issues such as immigration .
NAFTA was conceived under the assumption that expanded trade would trickle down benefits to all in the three countries .
Regretfully , this corporate-driven NAFTA exacerbated the disparities and asymmetries between Mexico and its two richer northern neighbors .
Moreover , throughout NAFTA 's lifetime income and wealth have been further concentrated within the elite sectors of US and Canadian society .
Immigration illustrates the cost of integration without convergence .
Demand for low-cost Mexican labor by US employers and the 10-1 wage gap between the two countries pushes 350,000 Mexicans to risk their lives every year for better paid jobs north of the border .
Without Mexican manpower , much of the work in the US simply would not get done .
The issue must be addressed , not ignored and criminalized .
NAPU would be the ideal forum in which to address this concern .
Everywhere nowadays , key decisions are made by a self-selected group of elites , often in non-transparent circumstances .
NAPU would allow for wider , more consistent participation in the consideration of issues now ignored in all three countries .
Inter-American issues can no longer be left subject to the whims and convenience of individual leaders .
The people of the US , Canada , and Mexico deserve better .
