Reform and Renewal at the IMF
CAMBRIDGE – Every time the International Monetary Fund awaits a new managing director , critics complain that it is past time for the appointee to come from an emerging-market country .
But whining won ’ t change the unjust 60-year-old tradition by which a European heads the IMF and an American leads the World Bank .
Only if emerging-market countries unite behind a single candidate will they have a shot at securing the post .
Unfortunately , that is unlikely this time around , too , so the job will probably go to a European yet again .
After all , the oft-repeated principle that the IMF ’ s managing director should be chosen on the basis of merit rather than nationality need not mean a departure from past practice .
French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde ( Europe ’ s choice ) is impressive and capable .
But the proposition that the ongoing sovereign-debt crisis on Europe ’ s periphery is a reason to appoint a European is wrong .
( Lagarde herself seems to acknowledge this . )
Europe has lost its implicit claim to be the best source of serious people with the experience needed to run the international monetary system .
At one time , there may have been a kernel of truth to this .
In the 1980 ’ s , for example , the IMF was run by highly capable managing directors from France , during a period when huge budget deficits and even hyperinflation ran wild in the developing world .
But that time is past .
There are three respects in which Europe can no longer claim to be a special seat of wisdom and responsibility .
First , many large emerging-market countries have done a better job than Europe at managing their economies over the last decade .
These countries do not have the excessive budget deficits that many European countries ran up during the last expansion – and that are culminating in today ’ s mismanaged sovereign-debt crisis .
Second , the Europeans have now chosen three managing directors in a row who resigned before the end of their term .
True , neither of Dominique Strauss-Kahn ’ s two predecessors left amidst scandal as he did .
Then again , both of those resignations suggested that the men in question had not taken the job seriously enough .
Finally , many of the best candidates this time around are from emerging economies .
So the merit criterion happens to coincide well with the much-recognized but never-honored need to give emerging-market countries more weight in the IMF ’ s governance , in line with their new weight in the global economy .
Indeed , the number of excellent emerging-market candidates is remarkable .
Of course , not everyone being put forward by his or her government is a good candidate .
When Turkey ’ s leaders say they have at least ten good candidates , they show that politicians often don ’ t know what the job requires .
( No country has ten good candidates . )
I count nine emerging-market candidates who are unusually well qualified to lead the IMF .
Six seem to be live candidates , and they come from all parts of the world :
· Agustín Carstens , the governor of Mexico ’ s central bank , has been described as the leading prospect among the group .
But even Latin America is not unifying behind him ( Brazil has not been supportive ) , let alone other developing countries ;
· Arminio Fraga , the former governor of Brazil ’ s central bank , is another good candidate with extensive experience .
But it is not clear that Latin America ’ s other governments are prepared to unify behind someone from the region ’ s largest country .
Indeed , it seems that any candidate linked to a large regional power is more likely to provoke jealousy than solidarity from others ;
· Tharman Shanmugaratnam , who has excelled as Singapore ’ s finance minister and was just promoted to Deputy Prime Minister , is my favorite .
( Full disclosure : he was my student at Harvard in 1988-1989 . )
In March , he was chosen to head the International Monetary and Financial Committee , the panel of ministers that advises the IMF on strategy twice a year .
He has strong political skills , and , coming from a non-threatening country , might be the sort of candidate behind whom emerging markets could unite ;
· Sri Mulyani Indrawati is another highly qualified candidate from Southeast Asia .
She became one of the World Bank ’ s three managing directors last year , after apparently being forced out as Indonesia ’ s finance minister for doing too good a job .
Incidentally , she is young and could be an excellent candidate next time around too ( as could the first three ) ;
· Leszek Balcerowicz , Poland ’ s former finance minister and central bank governor , is also a credible candidate .
Poland would be a compromise with respect to nationality , because it is both a European Union member and an emerging-market country ;
· Trevor Manuel was a great success as South Africa ’ s finance minister .
It would be good to make better use of him than the current government is doing .
I can think of at least three other candidates who would perform well , but are apparently not actively in contention :
· Kemal Dervis , Turkey ’ s former minister of economic affairs , would have been excellent , but he took himself out of the running early .
· Stanley Fischer , whom I thought should have been picked in 2000 ( he was Deputy Managing Director at the time ) .
Doing so would have been a first step toward accommodating developing countries ’ legitimate desire to break the monopoly of European and US officials on the top jobs in the IMF and World Bank ( Fischer was born in Zambia ) .
· Montek Ahluwalia is Deputy Chairman of India ’ s Planning Commission , a position far more important than it sounds .
But there is a presumption that the candidate cannot be over 65 , which would exclude him ( and Fischer ) .
June 10 is the deadline for nominations .
Any of the nine would do a good job .
Personally , I would urge emerging-market countries to support Shanmugaratnam .
But it is far more likely that they will remain divided .
In that case , it will go to Lagarde .
