Madonna and Child
In October , hundreds of millions of people all over the world learned about a one-year-old boy from Malawi called David .
A month before , it seems safe to assume , many of these people had never heard of his native land , a landlocked African nation of about 13 million people bordering Mozambique , Zambia , and Tanzania .
Suddenly , David became the world ’ s best-known Malawian because it was his good fortune to be adopted by Madonna , the pop star who is to TV cameras what honey is to bears .
But was it really good fortune ?
David ’ s father , Yohane Banda , suddenly in the media spotlight , said he had not understood that his son no longer belonged to him and might never return to Malawi .
Madonna says that that is not what Banda said earlier , although she does not speak his language .
Was it good for the boy , people asked , to be separated from his father ?
Human rights advocates began court action to demand his return .
David ’ s mother is dead .
After her death , his father , a villager who grows vegetables and gets other work when he can , was unable to care for him , and placed him in an orphanage .
There , until Madonna came into contact with him , he was living with about 500 other children .
Largely due to Malawi ’ s HIV / AIDS epidemic , the country has a million such orphans .
Resources at the orphanages are limited , and many of the children there do not live to their fifth birthday .
Madonna said that when she met David , he had severe pneumonia and was breathing with difficulty .
Malawi is one of the world ’ s least developed countries , with an infant mortality rate of 94 per thousand and a life expectancy at birth of 41 years .
Of the adult population , about one in seven have HIV / AIDS .
Left in the orphanage , there is no reason to think that David would have done better than the average Malawian .
Most likely , he would have done worse .
In an interview , David ’ s father did not deny that his son would be better off with Madonna , and he refused to support the human rights activists seeking David ’ s return .
That seems a wise decision .
Admittedly , David will be cut off from his cultural roots .
Although Madonna has said that she will bring him back to Malawi to see his father again , he will scarcely be able to feel at home there .
His mother tongue will be English ; if he ever learns to speak his father ’ s language , it will be as a foreigner .
Nor will he be entirely at home in London , especially in the circles in which Madonna moves .
A black child in a largely white world , he will always be “ the orphan Madonna adopted . ”
The difficulties of living in such circumstances , however , are surely less daunting than the hazards David would have faced had he stayed in the orphanage – assuming that he would have survived at all .
But there is a broader issue at stake in David ’ s case .
In adopting a child from a poor country , Madonna is following an example set by other celebrities like Mia Farrow , Ewan McGregor , and Angelina Jolie .
Do such adoptions achieve anything more than helping the individual children adopted ?
Adopting children from developing countries does not address the causes of poverty .
Despite the high rate of HIV / AIDS infections , Malawi ’ s population , like that of many developing nations , is growing rapidly .
It is projected to surpass 19 million by 2025 .
That will put more pressure on the country ’ s already limited stock of agricultural land .
Educating young Malawians , especially girls , and making contraceptives widely available , would do much more to slow population growth than a few inter-country adoptions .
To her credit , Madonna is doing more than adopting David .
Her project , “ Raising Malawi ” ( www.raisingmalawi.com ) , will help other orphans .
More importantly , with other partners , Raising Malawi collects funds for agricultural assistance , medical care , and education for villagers as well .
Along with Angelina Jolie , Bono , George Soros , and many others , Raising Malawi is assisting Millennium Promise ( www.millenniumpromise.org ) , an organization founded by the prominent Columbia University economist Jeffrey Sachs .
The promises of the United Nations Millennium Summit , signed by all the world ’ s leaders , included halving extreme poverty , halting the spread of HIV / AIDS , and providing primary education for all children by 2015 .
Although good progress in meeting these goals has been made in Asia , in Africa there are now 140 million more people living in extreme poverty than there were in 1990 .
Skeptics doubt that foreign aid really helps .
Millennium Promise seeks to respond to that skepticism one village at a time .
By selecting particular villages and providing basic health care , bed nets to stop malaria , primary education , better seeds , and other agricultural assistance , the organization aims to show that well-designed , comprehensive aid plans can , at relatively modest cost , raise people out of poverty .
One can only regret that the media seem less interested in this exciting and momentous story , which has the potential to help millions of children , than in Madonna ’ s adoption of a single Malawian infant .
