Japan and the Politics of Guilt
CANBERRA – Japan is again alienating its neighbors and driving its friends to despair over the issue of accepting responsibility for its wartime aggression and atrocities .
With the election of the new government , the voices of denial are heard again at the highest levels , and are resonating with the public , including the young , in ways that would be unthinkable , by contrast , in modern Germany .
All of this is fueling nationalist sentiment in China and South Korea , and making even more dangerous the already volatile territorial disputes in the East China Sea and the Sea of Japan .
It may be , as some Japanese colleagues tell me , that newly elected Prime Minister Shinzo Abe , despite his deeply conservative nationalist background and instincts , is ultimately a realist who will do what it takes – no doubt with the help of pressure from the United States – to defuse these tensions .
But there are three specific talismanic issues on which he and his colleagues have taken worrying positions , jangling regional nerves .
The first is the long-running saga of an appropriate apology for Japan ’ s initiation and conduct of aggressive war the years before and during World War II .
For many years , the affected countries sought a comprehensive and unequivocal apology ; as Australia ’ s foreign minister from the late 1980 ’ s , I pushed hard for it in Tokyo , as a form of closure that was morally right and in Japan ’ s own interests .
Eventually , on the 50th anniversary of Japan ’ s defeat in 1995 , Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama responded with personal language of both “ deep remorse ” and “ heartfelt apology . ”
Most subsequent leaders have repeated these sentiments in various degrees – albeit never to the complete satisfaction of China or South Korea .
But , after his landslide election victory last month , Abe told the newspaper Sankei that he would seek to replace the landmark 1995 statement – “ issued by a Socialist prime minister ” – with a “ forward-looking ” statement , the content of which he did not describe .
The second issue is that of a specific apology to the “ comfort women ” – from many countries , including my own , but especially South Korea – who were sexually enslaved in army brothels .
Then-Chief Cabinet Secretary Yohei Kono broke the ice in 1993 , expressing “ sincere apologies and remorse ” to all those who had “ suffered immeasurable pain . ”
But Abe and several of his colleagues have gone on the record over the years – including during Abe ’ s first term as Prime Minister in 2006-2007 – denying that coercion was involved .
In 2007 , his national security adviser told a colleague of mine , “ All of this is the work of Korean leftists : there ’ s nothing to it . ”
Now , in January 2013 , Abe ’ s chief cabinet secretary , Yoshihide Suga , has said that experts would be invited to study the basis of Kono ’ s statement .
Finally , there is the issue of the Yasukuni Shrine to Japanese war dead , which records in its “ Book of Souls ” 14 A-class war criminals , and contains a museum that glorifies Japan ’ s conquests as “ just wars fought for survival and self-defense ” or for the “ liberation of Asia . ”
Abe has been a regular visitor to Yasukuni .
He visited it again last October , after being elected LDP leader , and expressed “ bitter grief ” during the election campaign that he had not done so during his previous term as Prime Minister .
It has been reliably reported that he wants to visit the shrine while in office this time .
Fourteen of his 19 cabinet members are reported to belong to a group promoting pilgrimage tours to the site .
Compounding these concerns is evidence that Japanese public opinion is sympathetic toward the positions that Abe has taken or seems to favor .
In a Jiji Press opinion poll conducted in January , 56.7 % of those surveyed believed that Abe should visit Yasukuni now – up significantly from 2006 , when 43 % took a similar position .
There are , of course , always two sides to these stories .
It is possible to argue – as many Japanese do – that much of the negative reaction by Japan ’ s neighbors has been driven by cynical nationalist considerations .
Campaigners for South Korean comfort women , for example , have often failed to acknowledge the number and intensity of the statements that have been made on this issue over the last two decades , and the amount of compensation on offer .
Likewise , China may have set the bar too high concerning the language that it has demanded in any general apology .
But , even before Abe ’ s latest wavering , there is much more that Japan could have done long ago – and which it should still do – to put its position beyond reasonable criticism .
The benchmark 1995 Murayama apology remains a personal one , because the Japanese Diet , then and since , would not agree to anything as strong : a “ deep feeling of remorse ” was as much as they could muster , and even then 241 members abstained .
Moreover , Murayama ’ s statement referred vaguely to “ a certain period in the not-too-distant past , ” rather than to specific war years , and others have since resisted phrases – for example , “ war of aggression ” or “ colonial rule ” – that Japan ’ s neighbors have not unreasonably sought .
The more fundamental problem is that Japan seems unable , as a nation , to manage the kind of collective psychological shift that has transformed Germany , with which it is inevitably compared .
Apologizing sincerely for the sins and omissions of earlier generations is never easy .
Australia had a long national debate before we could say that we were sorry for the horrible past mistreatment of our Aboriginal people , particularly the “ stolen generations ” of Aboriginal children who were regularly taken from their parents by governments until the 1970 ’ s .
But statesmen , if they are to deserve the name , sometimes must take the politically uncomfortable high ground – and then bring their publics along .
Leadership of that quality has been a long time coming in Japan .
