Money Can \ u0027t Buy Reform
MOSCOW : A big squeeze is on in Moscow , as President Putin seeks to drill the country 's wayward regions into line with Kremlin policies .
Soon a squeeze of a different type will be put on the West , as the Kremlin bids for new international loans .
With the IMF and Russia engaged in talks over such loans , and as the summit of the Group of Eight ( G8 ) big industrial countries approaches , the time is ripe to assess a decade of economic cooperation between Russia and the West .
The verdict may determine the success of Vladimir Putin 's presidency .
Until recently , flashy aid packages for Russia were fashionable .
For seven years the G8 and the IMF shipped billions of dollars to Russia and Western banks surged into Moscow .
All of them made every mistake imaginable , then wrote off or reduced the debts owed to them .
Russian and foreign investors alike were duped by the Kremlin 's debt pyramid schemes .
The only concrete things to result from the vast inflow of money are to be found in Russian-owned villas on the French Riviera , a money-laundering scandal at the Bank of New York , and the secret Swiss accounts of Kremlin officials .
Ten years and $ 20 billion dollars of official debt later , indeed , Russia 's economy remains a shambles .
Faith in the ruble is negligible : 70 % of business transactions are conducted in dollars .
Indeed , Russia 's dollar money supply is much larger in value than its ruble money supply .
It is as if Russia is a rogue subsidiary of America 's monetary system .
For a credible banking system remains the stuff of dreams ; external debt and corruption are as high as ever , and capital flight continues unabated .
And I have not even mentioned such minor things as tax reform , pension reform , and privatizing land ownership .
Despite all this , it is boasted that Russia 's economy is rebounding .
But no economics diploma is needed to understand that today 's upturn results mostly from a fourfold devaluation of the ruble and big increases in prices for commodities such as oil .
Sadly , history suggests that when oil prices rise everybody starts lending Russia money again , bringing reform to a standstill .
Nobody in Russia - aside from a few corrupt officials - is grateful for this aid .
Antipathy toward the West , especially among young people , deepened as corruption spread .
Everyone notices that the capital which fled Russia ended up in Western banks ; no one hears of money being hidden in North Korea .
A new president , however , means a new beginning , the right time to sort out the rot .
I am not sure that President Putin will assemble a talented government .
His early appointments are no worse , and little different , indeed , than Yeltsin 's final cabinet .
Putin 's administration may lack informed economic leadership and the resolve needed to get Russia on track .
Still , President Putin has a unique chance to reform because of his reputation for competence and his support in the Duma and among regional governors .
Change , however , cannot be made in Moscow alone .
Over the years , Western aid came with a double standard .
Early on , Western and IMF officials overlooked fundamental economic axioms they would never neglect at home . They turned a blind eye when corrupt loans-for-shares deals or rigged privatizations appeared .
Such continuous and willful blindness helped corruption to thrive and a tiny group of oligarchs gain control of the economy .
Corruption will abate , and the rule of law take hold , only when the West holds Russia to global standards .
This is why the attitudes of the IMF and the G8 matter .
What they must do is simple :
- make Russia play by the rules .
Don 't make exceptions for political reasons .
Propose only policies Western governments would follow themselves .
No double standards .
Let there be less diplomatic doublespeak and more hardheaded finance ministry number crunching in Western policy toward Russia ;
- concentrate on the private sector .
Most financial and other assistance to the Kremlin failed abysmally .
A few billion dollars here or there is no big deal for G8 countries , but it matters to Russia because the corruptive influence is enormous .
Dealing with Russia 's infant private sector may be risky , but it is a matter of assessing the professionalism of credit officers rather than testing the honesty of politicians ;
- concentrate on people .
Imagine if , after 1993 , $ 20 billion of Western aid had been spent sending 150,000 Russian students abroad to university .
They would have transformed Russia more than all the aid programs put together .
Some would even have been grateful .
In July , President Putin goes to the G8 summit in Okinawa to " make his ones " in the world of summit diplomacy .
The new German boss of the IMF is , so far , making the right noises in negotiations with the Kremlin .
The time seems right to leave behind the scandals and stupidities of the past .
For the West cannot buy economic reform , and Russia cannot import reformers . Russians must do the dirty work themselves .
Russia must demand that it not be mocked by patronizing Western applause for its parody of reform .
It should not be given new loans and debt reductions if it fails to implement sensible programs .
Psychologists call such a stance tough love .
Only when the West adopts a similar posture will Russia stop being a special case , baffling both experts as well as itself .
The Beatles used to sing that " Money can 't buy love . "
It can 't buy effective reform , either .
