Nigeria : Debt or Democracy ?
CAMBRIDGE : When poor , heavily indebted countries are struggling to make their way from dictatorship to democracy , the actions of rich countries can be decisive .
If rich countries insist on debt repayments and austerity measures , they are likely to destroy the social stability needed for a new democracy to take root .
Greed , short-sightedness , and general unconcern among rich countries , however , should never be underestimated .
In recent weeks , European countries – and apparently the IMF – have been rejecting the pleas of Nigeria 's new democracy to grant it debt reduction .
Instead , they say , Nigeria should increase its debt servicing this year , and should abandon its call for debt reduction .
The French Government , as organizer of the creditor committee of governments ( the so-called Paris Club ) bears most responsibility for this egregious policy , but many other governments and international agencies share the blame .
You would think that France , the United Kingdom , the United States , and the IMF would be more aware of recent history .
Seven years ago , Nigeria was on a rocky and treacherous course to democratization .
A caretaker government was charged with overseeing the transition to national elections in early 1994 .
Yet in late 1993 , the IMF and World Bank pressured Nigeria to eliminate subsidies on domestic petroleum products as part of austerity moves insisted on by its creditors .
The timing could not have been worse .
Elimination of fuel subsidies caused riots and widespread strikes against the transition government , which gave an excuse for Nigeria 's generals to re-assert military control .
It would take six long years under rapacious military rule before Nigeria received another chance at democracy .
Last year , Nigeria celebrated a remarkable escape from dictatorship .
After the brutal and hyper-corrupt military ruler General Sani Abacha – who suddenly dropped dead – the military sullenly agreed to another national election .
The election brought to power the remarkable Olusegun Obasanjo , a nationally unifying figure of impeccable democratic credentials , and an internationally respected Nigerian .
It was President Obasanjo , who as head of the military in the late 1970s , successfully led an earlier transition to democracy .
But the challenges facing the new state are awesome .
The country remains impoverished , ethnically divided , and with collapsed social services after years of military-led corruption and plunder .
A spiralling AIDS epidemic could swamp the whole society .
Already , life expectancy has declined from around 58 years to 54 years as a result of AIDS .
Western nations cynically claim that Nigeria is a rich country and should therefore be held to its debt service payments .
If they believe this , they are simply foolish .
Even though Nigeria is a considerable oil producer , of around 2 million barrels per day , because there is a vast population of 120 million people , income per Nigerian from this oil is only around $ 100 / $ 150 per year .
And because oil constitutes more than 90 % of the country 's exports , oil income is all that Nigerians have to live on in the world economy .
The result is an average income per person ( counting the oil plus the non-oil economy ) of around $ 300 per person per year , making Nigeria one of the poorest countries in the world .
Social conditions are abysmal , in line with such poverty .
There is massive disease , low life expectancy , high malnutrition , and low school attendance .
History could now repeat itself .
Reportedly , Nigeria is being pushed to increase debt service payments .
So far , creditors reject Nigeria 's calls for debt reduction , and instead offer Nigeria the phony solution of " debt rescheduling . "
This means that Nigeria would be able to postpone some payments , but will be charged full market interest rates on the postponement , and is expected to eventually pay off the debts in full .
Nigeria is supposed to agree to these terms to win a small new loan from the IMF , which itself will be on commercial terms .
With behavior like this , it 's hard to believe much of the words coming out of Washington , London , Paris , and Berlin about their new commitment to Africa and the new commitment to poverty reduction in the poorest countries .
Either there is a total disconnect between the political leaders voicing these words and their treasuries and finance ministries , or it 's all a cynical game for rich countries to enjoy the bounty of booming wealth and prosperity while doing precious little for the rest of the world .
My own guess is that conservative finance ministries in rich countries , and the IMF staff as well , are blind to the political ramifications of their actions .
