The Age of Oskar
ZURICH : Europe 's new master and man of the future , Oskar Lafontaine , is man of the past .
He is not of the comfortable center left that many of us have become used to , he is of the unreconstructed left , 1960s-style .
Lafontaine is bright , a schemer , and winner in Germany 's struggle for domestic political mastery .
If he gets his way Lafontaine will shape the future of Europe , and not for the better .
Skirmishes with the centre-left are nothing new for Europe : Jacques Delors championed a Christian-Democrat view ; Lionel Jospin comes from even further left than that .
They both wound up in the middle , compromising with capital markets .
True , across Europe , even in corporate boardrooms , there remains an unwillingness to go to the US extreme of " perform or perish " Politicians of all stripes are committed to the cradle to grave welfare state , no mater its expense and debilitating effects on the economy .
Lafontaine 's agenda is a move backwards , as if the Continent 's tentative moves on the road to a competitive market economy , beyond the welfare state , have reached a cul de sac for Europe .
Let there be no doubt : Lafontaine runs Germany , not Chancellor Schroeder .
Schroeder is a provincial politician who was used by the Social Democrats used as the safe face for their new / old approach .
Lacking convictions , he could be everything to everybody from new left to center with any socialist taint concealed by the industrialist-advisors who lent Schroeder a Blairite and Clintonian veneer .
With the elections over , Schroeder disappeared and the Social Democrat party leader and parliamentary leader , Lafontaine , took over .
Soon Schroeder will be kissing babies while Lafontaine sets the agenda and changes the world .
From the perspective of the deregulation , restructuring and modernization which Germany and Europe need , you couldn 't ask for a worse outcome .
Yet , the outcome was predictable .
Only a broad coalition could defeat Kohl and it was essential that it should not spell out any detail or any concrete steps .
Once elected , however , the coalition needed a program and since Schroeder had failed to seek a mandate or stand for anything , he was pushed aside by people with a program : Lafontaine with his left-activism and crude Keynesianism on the one hand , and the Greens with their ( often nutty ) pet projects on the other .
There is little doubt that Lafontaine understands that he can strengthen his hand even more by reaching for European support .
This can be done by allying himself with the activists -- say the new ex-communist government of Massimo D 'Alema in Italy -- sidelined over the past few years by the rigors of setting up EMU .
The ambition must be to turn Brussels into a machine for sheltering labor from the market economy .
Until the world financial crisis revived skepticism about the benefits of unrestrained capitalism , this would have been difficult .
Now it is easy to give speeches about the need to control markets , the need to create demand , the merits of using the State to achieve better economic outcomes .
What can Lafontaine accomplish ?
First and foremost , deregulation of labor markets and social benefits is going to go into reverse or , at least , into the slow lane .
Second , the Continent 's recent budget discipline will come under attack in a very crude spend and create demand way .
Third , war will be declared on the European Central Bank since cheap money is the easiest way to create jobs and take credit for it .
All of this will be counterproductive : stock prices might rise under the pressure of demand , but that won t last .
Long term interest rates will rise as savers perceive that discipline is lost , wage increases will be encouraged by pro-labor governments and that means inflation .
In sum , an agenda thought dead has come back .
Whatever Lafontaine may think , the fixed exchange rates he has called for won 't be part of the world economy .
Britain will not sign up to a Europe going off the deep end and the US will not link and fix its currency to the euro unless things get so bad in America that a protectionist like Richard Gephardt becomes president .
Deep skepticism of European macroeconomics will make the US want independence from a " European plot " to overthrow the market economy .
Lafontaine now has claimed center stage and the first act of his drama may well be impressive simply because Europe is dying to have some growth .
His fiscal pushes and demands for lower interest rates will get that , for a time , but such growth won 't last .
In this global economy it is simply too late to believe that big government , printing money and borrowing from one 's children are the ways to get ahead .
