The Decline and Fall of Political Europe
PARIS – A series of decisions taken over the last few years in Europe have alarmed me .
The first imposed the rule of unanimity within the European Union for any decision regarding foreign policy or the use of armed force for other than humanitarian purposes .
Because everyone must agree , nothing is agreed .
As a result , Europe cannot develop a common foreign policy .
The second alarming decision limited the Union ’ s budget to a mere 1 % of EU GDP , thus preventing any new common policy initiative for much of the past decade .
The third decision concerns the British vetoes of the candidacies of Jean Luc Dehaene and Jean Claude Juncker for President of the European Commission .
When this last British “ no ” came down , I sadly declared the death of the political Europe , a charge that brought me harsh criticism , even from friends .
These decisions have become more alarming over time as the need for “ more Europe ” has become progressively more obvious .
Only a united and strong Europe can tackle the global fight against climate change , encourage the adoption of new financial rules in order to avoid the excesses that led to the crisis of 2008-2009 , and handle a rising China that will soon account for 20 % of world trade .
The great banking , financial , and economic crises , which every country in the world still confronts , has made things worse .
Ireland , by far the biggest beneficiary of EU membership has demonstrated a powerful anti-European reflex , despite being hit early and hard by the crisis .
Meanwhile , Germany , long the proud holder of the European torch , has increasingly turned its back on that legacy , particularly after the markets reminded Germans that their country was much more Europeanized than they seemed to believe or realize .
Germany rallied to Europe when the crisis was at its global nadir last year .
But , now that fear of a global Armageddon has receded , Germany has turned inward .
The timing of this is particularly odd , as this new insularity comes almost immediately after Germany , France , and Great Britain cynically agreed to endow the EU with both a president of the EU Council and a foreign affairs minister .
But the nominees for those offices betrayed the intentions of all three EU powers : honorable and competent though President Herman Van Rompuy and Baroness Catherine Ashton may be , they are perfectly unknown and thus pose no threat to the powers that be in Berlin , Paris , and London .
Of course , there is still the euro , Europe ’ s only great political success over the last two decades .
But now even that is coming into question , thanks to Germany .
Everyone admires Germany ’ s rigorous management and capacity to reform .
We also admire its monetary seriousness , attachment to fiscal rigor , and quest for exports , despite its lack of consideration for the harm done to those enduring the deficits corresponding to Germany ’ s surpluses .
But the crisis has changed everything .
It impaired a number of European countries less robust than Germany .
The three Baltic states , Hungary , and non-EU Iceland are bankrupt .
Of course , they don ’ t belong to the eurozone , but Greece , Spain , Portugal , and Ireland do , and their problems are nearly as desperate .
Yet Germany insists on imposing its own rigor on the eurozone as a whole , a strategy the above-mentioned states can pursue only at the risk of social chaos .
These countries may exit the crisis – their crisis – only if monetary policy allows them room to grow .
But Germany refuses this option , thus seriously endangering Europe ’ s common currency .
In opposition to almost every eurozone foreign minister or president , the chairman of Ecofin , and the European Central Bank ’ s president , Germany insisted that the International Monetary Fund be brought to the rescue of Greece , a brute denial of the principle of solidarity behind the euro .
And , thanks to Germany , the interest rates that Greece will pay for loan packages put together by other eurozone countries will be very high , which means that its economy will be unable to recover for some time , and that its financial drama will weigh heavily on the euro ’ s collective destiny .
Moreover , German Chancellor Angela Merkel took the liberty of pondering whether imperiled states should be excluded from the eurozone .
In doing so , she offered a solution that is totally excluded by the euro ’ s founding treaties , but served notice that Germany may be prepared to destabilize the zone and common currency to meet its own policy ends .
While Merkel seems to believe that all eurozone countries should play by the same rules , she does not seem to realize that today it is Germany that is going it alone in pursuit of its own narrow national interests .
Why is Merkel acting this way ?
One reason is that she leads a coalition government that is facing elections , and that finds itself in a very tricky situation with its own parliament .
But if short-sightedness and domestic policy pressures lead every EU member to do anything and everything they want in their own interests , Europe will soon drift from an economic crisis to a political one .
If “ political Europe ” had more power , the Greek crisis would have been dealt with through a brutal conversation at the top .
But there is no political Europe – and not much energy left in the economic Europe .
Given the state of global finance , the euro ’ s demise would be a phenomenal catastrophe .
It can still be avoided , but only if all Europeans remember their solidarity and act with unusual courage and tenacity .
