The Heart of The Matter
KIEV : Recently I visited two cities -- Chernobyl and Yalta -- that have moved beyond notations on a map to become symbols of our century .
Chernobyl is a ghost town -- a contaminated , deserted place where time stands still .
Its name is a warning , informing humanity that the great inventions produced by rational minds also expose us to unprecedented dangers .
For when we touch the heart of matter , we also touch the hidden order of Being beyond scientific understanding .
We must honour this order if we do not want to fall prey to the arrogant belief that discovering fragments of truth may enable us to master the universe .
Until recently , people in the Europe savagely controlled by totalitarian regimes also lived in a tainted and oppressed environment .
A warning against the arrogance of rationality is at the same time a warning against the arrogance of social engineers -- those who believe that a freer and happier life for mankind can be secured solely by devising scientific plans for it from above .
We who experienced communism know well the outcomes of such beliefs : dead , artificial cities ; gigantic waterworks that fail only after destroying diverse ecosystems ; vast , largely anonymous and thus irresponsible states deciding where and how we shall dwell , work , relax or amuse ourselves .
Such beliefs engineer a dull and gray life , devoid of anything unique , because individuality is deemed irrational , non-systemic , unnecessary .
Chemobyl holds out another message : a radioactivity that ignores national boundaries reminds us that we live -- for the first time in history -- in one interconnected civilization wrapping the planet .
Whatever happens in one place can , for better or worse , affect us all .
The word Yalta , too , has assumed a life of its own , serving for years as a symbol of a division of the world by the great powers : of the large and powerful deciding the fate of the small and powerless without asking their advice , of inadmissibly pragmatic concessions or compromises by democratic governments vis- ? -vis the overpowering strength of a totalitarian regime .
For decades our world existed under a shell of bipolarity , with two power blocs opposing each other on values , ideas and political convictions .
Both systems held relatively firmly together , though the glue that bound them was different , and both attempted to strengthen their positions throughout the world .
Under that shell , however , there was change .
The world today is completely different from what it was when the Iron Curtain was hung .
With the tottering tower of communist totalitarianism collapsed , the Iron Curtain 's fall revealed the actual contours of the world as well as the depth of its challenge .
Difficult as it was for the forces of freedom and democracy to prevail over totalitarianism , it will be even more difficult to win the peace , to develop and enforce optimal patterns for a new life together of states and nations on this planet that addresses the world 's present condition .
One of the many principles that I believe should govern this great undertaking is to develop in the international community the maximum degree of respect for the democratically and freely expressed will of individual nations or states .
Each should have the unreserved right to decide their futures , their international associations , and where they belong or want to belong .
The more the international community respects this will -- provided that this does not interfere with the legitimate will of other nations -- the more stable the world will be .
The last few decades , as well as previous history , offer ample evidence that an imposed order will inevitably collapse .
The collapse of an artificial order often takes a toll , indeed , may be as exacting as the price first paid for the imposition of that order .
In other words : there should be no more symbolic Yaltas .
Never again should others decide the future of peoples and countries ; at the very least , nobody should undertake such decisionmaking without knowing and respecting the legitimate and freely expressed ambitions of the nations concerned .
No state must be denied the right to freely decide to which regional groupings -- political , security , economic -- it wants to belong .
Decisions about admission should not be determined by the geopolitical interests of others , but solely by the measure of a state ’ s readiness , tested by objective criteria , to adopt the standards of these groupings and respect their underlying principles .
As we confront the warnings of Chemobyl and Yalta , it is time to seek that which transcends the horizon of mere rational or scientific thought and the limits of the illusory pretensions of Chernobyl 's social engineers and Yalta 's geopolitical strategists .
As individuals and as a community , we must delve into our history , our souls , and all our experience to try to dig out our vanishing respect for the universe 's mysterious order , for the unique human being , for cultural and community identities -- and restore humble acceptance of the fact that we are all but component parts of the universe , and not its masters .
