Should China be “ Contained ” ?
CAMBRIDGE – This month marks the 40th anniversary of Henry Kissinger ’ s secret trip to Beijing , which launched the process of mending a 20-year breach in diplomatic relations between the United States and China .
That trip , and President Richard Nixon ’ s subsequent visit , represented a major Cold War realignment .
The US and China put aside their intense hostility in a joint and successful effort to contain an expansionist Soviet Union .
Today , the Soviet Union has vanished , and Chinese power is growing .
Some Americans argue that China ’ s rise cannot be peaceful , and that the US , therefore , should now adopt a policy of containing the People ’ s Republic .
Indeed , many Chinese officials perceive that to be the current American strategy .
They are wrong .
After all , Cold War containment of the USSR meant virtually no trade and little social contact .
Today , by contrast , the US not only has massive trade with China , but also extensive social contact , including 125,000 Chinese students attending American universities .
With the end of the Cold War , the containment of the Soviet Union ushered in by Kissinger ’ s visit could no longer serve as the basis for US-China relations .
Moreover , relations with China cooled after the Tiananmen Square shootings in 1989 , and the Clinton administration had to devise a new approach .
When I was supervising the Pentagon ’ s East Asia Strategy Review in 1994 , we rejected the idea of containment of China for two reasons .
If we treated China as an enemy , we were guaranteeing an enemy in the future .
If we treated China as a friend , we could not guarantee friendship , but we could at least keep open the possibility of more benign outcomes .
In addition , it would have been difficult to persuade other countries to join a coalition to contain China unless China resorted to bullying tactics , as the Soviets did after World War II .
Only China , by its behavior , could organize the containment of China by others .
Instead of containment , the strategy that the Clinton administration devised could be termed “ integrate but hedge ” – something like Ronald Reagan ’ s “ trust but verify ” approach to strategic agreements with the Soviets .
On one hand , the US supported China ’ s membership in the World Trade Organization and accepted Chinese goods and visitors .
On the other hand , the Clinton-Hashimoto Declaration of April 1996 affirmed that the US-Japan security treaty , rather than being a Cold War relic , would provide the basis for a stable and prosperous East Asia .
Clinton also began to improve relations with India , a strategy that has enjoyed bipartisan support in the US .
The Bush administration continued to improve bilateral relations , while deepening and formalizing the economic dialogue with China .
Then Deputy Secretary of State Robert Zoellick made clear that the US would accept the rise of China as a “ responsible stakeholder . ”
That policy continues to guide the Obama administration , which has broadened the annual economic consultations with China to include security issues .
As I argue in my new book The Future of Power , one of the major power shifts of the twenty-first century is Asia revival .
In 1800 , Asia represented half the world ’ s population and half the world ’ s economy .
By 1900 , the industrial revolution in Europe and North America drove down Asia ’ s share of global output to 20 % .
By the middle of this century , Asia should again represent half the world ’ s population and GDP .
This is a natural and welcome evolution , as it enables hundreds of millions of people to escape from poverty .
At the same time , however , it has given rise to fears that China will become a threat to the US .
Such fears appear exaggerated , particularly when one considers that Asia is not one entity .
It has its own internal balance of power .
Japan , India , Vietnam , and other countries do not want to be dominated by China , and thus welcome a US presence in the region .
Unless China develops its “ soft power , ” the rise in its military and economic power is likely to frighten its neighbors into seeking coalitions to balance its rise .
It is as if Mexico and Canada sought an alliance with China to balance US power in North America .
After the 2008-2009 financial crisis , as China recovered rapidly and resumed 10 % annual economic growth , some Chinese officials and commentators urged a more assertive foreign policy to reflect China ’ s new strength .
Many mistakenly believed that the US was in decline , and that the crisis presented new strategic opportunities for China .
For example , China began pressing territorial claims in the South China Sea , as well as escalating a longstanding border dispute with India .
The net result is that over the past two years , China has worsened its relations with Japan , India , South Korea , Vietnam , and others – quite a remarkable record that confirms the US strategic premise that “ only China can contain China . ”
But it would be a mistake to focus only on the hedging part of American strategy .
The US and China ( as well as other countries ) have much to gain from collaborating on transnational issues .
One cannot devise and implement solutions to global financial stability , climate change , cyber terrorism , or pandemics without such cooperation .
If power is the ability to obtain the outcomes one wants , it is important to remember that sometimes our power is greater when we act with others rather than merely over others .
This important dimension of a “ smart power ” strategy for the twenty-first century is not captured by the concept of containment .
When Kissinger landed in Beijing four decades ago , he ushered in not only a Cold War transformation , but also a new era of US-Chinese engagement .
