Russia ’ s Illiberal “ Liberal Empire ”
Across the West , many people are questioning whether Russia will continue using natural gas as a means of putting economic and political pressure on Ukraine , Georgia , and other countries in what the Kremlin regards as its “ near abroad . ”
Using the “ energy weapon , ” however , is not just a tactic : it is at the heart of the prevailing doctrine guiding Russian foreign policy .
Russia ’ s policy toward the post-Soviet countries is based on the doctrine of a “ liberal empire , ” according to which Russia ’ s major government-owned and private companies should assume control of key economic entities across the territories of the former Soviet republics by acquiring their assets .
In this context , the word “ liberal ” should be understood to suggest that the empire of the “ new Russian dream ” should be built by purely economic means , excluding all forcible action against other nations .
Naturally , the key role in this model is given to the supply of energy to the post-Soviet countries .
In particular , the Russian utility giant Gazprom uses increases in gas prices as a means to punish “ disobedient ” neighbors .
Ukraine was punished in this way for its eagerness to integrate with the West following the Orange Revolution .
However , after the return of the pro-Russian Victor Yanukovych to the position of Ukrainian prime minister , the country ’ s pro-Western orientation has been significantly weakened .
So it should be no surprise that Ukraine under Yanukovych has faced no further problems with the supply of Russian gas .
But Georgia remains a major Kremlin-Gazprom target .
Russia ’ s attempt to drag Georgia into its imperial net started in the summer of 2003 , when the Russian power monopoly United Energy System took control of 75 % of Georgia ’ s electricity network .
After the Rose Revolution of November 2003 , Russian companies turned out to be the most avid purchasers of Georgian enterprises and their assets .
The first significant obstacle in the way of Russia ’ s designs on Georgia was intervention by the US , which demanded that the Georgian government drop negotiations with Gazprom and banned Georgia from selling the gas pipeline that connects Russia and Armenia through Georgian territory .
Russia punished Georgia almost immediately , banning the import of Georgian wines and mineral waters – both of which are key export goods .
As Georgia ’ s prospects of joining NATO seemed to increase , Russian actions became more illiberal .
Ethnic Georgians living in Russia , including those who are Russian citizens , became targets of persecution .
Russia ’ s actions are aimed at fomenting an anti-government backlash in Georgia , thereby paving the way for pro-Russian political forces to come to power .
But the illiberalism inherent in Russian imperialism is not limited to recent behavior , and , more disturbingly , it extends to the question of Georgia ’ s territorial integrity , as Russian troops continue to prop up secessionist regions .
By provoking ethnic conflicts in the territories of former Soviet republics , Moscow hopes to keep them under its control and influence .
Ironically , the Russian troops deployed in the renegade Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia have been accorded the status of “ peacekeepers . ”
But they are really illegal occupiers , as Russia ’ s decision to give Russian passports to these regions ’ residents attests .
Now Russia is threatening to recognize the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia if the West recognizes the Serbian province of Kosovo as an independent nation .
To the extent that most of the residents of Abkhazia and South Ossetia have already been given Russian citizenship , the recognition of those two regions ’ sovereignty would be entirely fictitious and , in fact , an interim measure on the way to their full annexation by Russia .
To strengthen Russia ’ s political influence over Georgia ’ s separatist regions , Gazprom , without taking the trouble to ask for permission from Georgia ’ s democratically elected leaders , has begun constructing a gas pipeline connecting Russia and South Ossetia directly .
Although there was no interruption of gas supply from Tbilisi to South Ossetia , this step is necessary for the Kremlin to ensure even greater integration of this Georgian region into Russia ’ s economic system .
With Gazprom having already doubled gas tariffs for Georgia , the energy noose is tightening .
But , thanks to gas supplies from neighboring Azerbaijan , Georgia has not yet been strangled .
A revived Russian empire , whether it is constructed by force or through economic coercion , is not in anyone ’ s interests .
Reigning in Russia ’ s illiberal “ liberal empire ” is the central question of European security today .
