Saving World Trade
CAMBRIDGE : The Asian financial crisis barely over , the world economy faces another major eruption , one with even greater significance to the health of the global economic system .
The cause this time is not panicked bankers rushing out of emerging markets , but a crisis of legitimacy that threatens the world 's trading regime .
As the riots surrounding the failed World Trade Organization conference in Seattle demonstrated , a coalition of labor , environmental , and human rights advocates is intent on sabotaging the WTO , the institutional embodiment of global trade .
The WTO is also in trouble with developing countries , which feel estranged from rules they feel do not benefit them .
The chasm separating these groups from the agenda pursued by American and EU policymakers is growing , destabilizing the world economy .
All sides agree that the stability of the international economy is predicated on a system of global rules .
What is contested is the nature of these rules .
Opponents of trade liberalization decry the secretiveness and " non-democratic " nature of the WTO , and the influence of corporate interests in rule-making .
They see a trading system that privileges business over labor , the environment , and consumer safety .
Developing countries complain about restrictive rules applied to their exports ( garments , agricultural products , labor services ) , and fear that new demands they face over labor and the environment are designed to undermine their competitiveness .
Finding a way out of this crisis requires clear principles for trade rules .
Here are five principles on which all ought to agree , and which would allow us to move forward .
Trade is a means to an end , not an end in itself .
Advocates of globalization lecture incessantly about the adjustments countries must undertake in their policies and institutions in order to expand their international trade and become more attractive to investors .
This way of thinking about trade confuses means for ends .
Trade serves at best as an instrument for achieving goals societies seek : prosperity , stability , freedom , an improving quality of life .
Nothing enrages WTO bashers more than suspicions that , when push comes to shove , the WTO allows trade to trump the environment or human rights .
Developing countries should resist a system that evaluates their needs from the perspective of expanding world trade instead of alleviating poverty .
Reversing our priorities has a powerful implication .
Instead of asking what kind of multilateral trading system maximizes foreign trade and investment opportunities , we would ask what kind of multilateral system best enables nations to pursue their own values and developmental objectives .
Trade rules must allow for diversity in national institutions and standards .
No single recipe exists for economic advancement .
Different countries have varying preferences over regulations that should govern new technologies ( such as genetically modified organisms ) , restrictiveness of environmental regulations , intrusiveness of government policies , extensiveness of social safety nets , or the tradeoff between efficiency and equity .
Rich and poor nations have different needs in the areas of labor standards or patent protection .
Moreover , poor countries need the space to follow developmental policies that richer countries no longer require .
When countries use trade to impose their institutional preferences on others , the result is erosion of trade 's legitimacy .
Trade rules should seek peaceful co-existence among national practices , not harmonization .
Non-democratic countries cannot count on the same trade privileges as democratic ones .
National standards that deviate from those in trade partners and thereby provide trade advantages are legitimate only to the extent that they are grounded in free choices made by citizens .
Take the case of labor and environmental standards .
Poor countries argue that they cannot afford the same stringent standards as advanced countries .
Tough emission standards or regulations against child labor can backfire if they lead to fewer jobs and greater poverty .
A democratic country such as India can argue , legitimately , that its practices are consistent with the wishes of its population .
Non-democratic countries , such as China , do not pass the same prima facie test .
Assertions that labor rights and the environment are trampled for the benefit of the few cannot be easily dismissed in those countries .
Consequently , exports of non-democratic countries deserve greater international scrutiny , particularly when they entail costly dislocations in other countries .
Countries have the right to protect their own social arrangements and institutions .
Opponents of globalization argue that trade sets off a " race to the bottom , " with nations converging towards the lowest levels of environmental , labor , and consumer protections .
Others counter that there is little evidence that trade erodes national standards .
One way to cut through this morass is to accept that countries can uphold national standards in these areas , by withholding market access if necessary , when trade undermines domestic practices enjoying broad support .
Example : countries might seek temporary protection against imports from countries with weak enforcement of labor rights when such imports worsen working conditions at home .
The WTO already has a safeguard system to protect firms from import surges .
Extending this principle to protect environmental , labor , or consumer-safety standards with appropriate restraints against abuse might make the world trading system more resistant to ad-hoc protectionism .
You do not have the right to impose institutional preferences on others .
Using trade restrictions to uphold particular values must be distinguished from using them to impose values .
Trade rules should not force Americans to eat shrimp caught in ways Americans find unacceptable ; neither should they allow the U.S. to use trade sanctions to alter the ways that foreign nations fish .
Citizens of rich countries concerned about the environment or of workers in the developing world can be more effective working through channels other than trade diplomacy or foreign aid .
Trade sanctions should be used only against non-democratic countries .
These are simple guidelines , easy to communicate to electorates confused by intricate trade regulations .
Sticking to them would enhance the legitimacy of trade and put the world economy on a sounder footing .
