Let Russia Be Russia
TEL AVIV – In his famous “ X ” article , published in 1947 , George F. Kennan argued that the Soviet Union ’ s hostility toward the United States was virtually inexorable , given that it was rooted not in a classic conflict of interest between great powers , but in a deep-seated nationalism and insecurity .
The same could be said of the current conflict between Vladimir Putin ’ s Russia and the West : It is , at root , a collision between the West ’ s supposedly universal values and Russia ’ s quest for a distinct identity .
A country ’ s struggle for identity can shape its strategic behavior .
The missionary ethos of American civilization helps to explain its conduct as a global power .
The resurgence of Islamism is essentially a quest for a fulfilling identity by an ancient civilization overwhelmed by the challenges of modernity .
And Israel ’ s emphasis on its Jewish identity has become a formidable obstacle to peace with the Palestinians .
Putin ’ s defiant foreign policy is a response – mediated by an authoritarian political tradition , the reactionary tenets of Orthodox Christianity , and pride in Russia ’ s vast geography and natural wealth – to the humiliating loss of an empire .
Seeing in Russia ’ s Cold War defeat the need to extol the non-Western roots of Russian history and tradition , Putin has fallen back on the same conservative values that emerged in response to the Napoleonic invasion of 1812 , frustrating Peter the Great ’ s modernization efforts .
When the deputy head of the presidential administration , Vyacheslav Volodin , said during a recent Valdai Discussion Club meeting in Sochi that “ Putin is Russia and Russia is Putin , ” he was expressing a profound Russian reality .
In no other country has the ruler ’ s persona – from Catherine the Great and Ivan the Terrible to Lenin and Stalin – made such a deep mark on national history .
But Putinism cannot be reduced to sheer lust for power .
Putin knows that Russia ’ s reemergence on the global stage must be underpinned by a counterpoint to American exceptionalism , a national identity based on a distinct conception of history and distinct ideals .
As Putin declared last year , the Soviet Union ’ s collapse dealt a “ devastating blow ” to Russia ’ s “ cultural and spiritual codes , ” and subsequent “ attempts to civilize Russia from abroad ” amounted to “ primitive borrowing . ”
Instead of expecting a new national ideology to emerge on its own , Russia must pursue and develop its unique identity – with Putin leading the way .
Securing a place for Russia in a new world order is integral to establishing such an identity .
To this end , Putin has maximized the foreign-policy value of Russia ’ s vast oil and gas reserves , enabling the Kremlin to build partnerships with rising Asian powers , especially China .
If , as some Russian officials have proposed , Russia begins an identity-defining large-scale project to develop its immense territory east of the Ural Mountains , including Siberia and the Far East , it would have a unique opportunity to deepen these connections further .
More broadly , Putin ’ s defiance of US hegemony could attract support from countries and peoples worldwide that resent American-imposed values and norms .
Indeed , for many international actors , Western notions of tolerance and political correctness – for example , acceptance of “ non-traditional lifestyles , ” such as homosexuality – are , in Putin ’ s words , an affront to the world ’ s “ God-given diversity . ”
But Putin is not merely preaching values .
The annexation of Crimea and continuing destabilization of Ukraine advance his broader ambition of resurrecting Russia ’ s cultural and political dominance in Eurasia and much of the former Soviet space .
In Putin ’ s view , the 1945 Yalta Agreement , which divided Europe into Soviet and Western spheres of influence , did not die ; its borders simply moved eastward .
Tellingly , following a discussion of numerous global challenges at the recent Valdai meeting , Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov identified a demonstration by ethnic Russians in Chișinău ( Kishinev ) , Moldova ’ s capital , as the “ most important question ” to be addressed .
Putin ’ s Russia is anything but shy when it comes to ethnic unity .
Of course , the West – particularly the US – bears its share of responsibility for the failure to find a diplomatic solution to the current showdown with Russia .
Before a lasting peace can be achieved , the US will need to reflect on the mistakes that characterized its post-Cold War period of hegemony , when its unilateral military adventures and neo-imperial ambitions left it overstretched , highly indebted , and locked in perpetual war .
Without such introspection , the US and its European allies will probably continue to depend on economic sanctions to deter Russian aggression .
But , though this approach could weaken Putin ’ s legitimacy by limiting his ability to deliver economic prosperity , it could also result in an anti-Western nationalist backlash .
Moreover , as Deputy Prime Minister Igor Shuvalov has shown , sanctions can be presented as a blessing , forcing the Kremlin to diversify Russia ’ s commodities-based economy .
National identities cannot be negotiated away ; but diplomacy can dilute their aggressive manifestations .
It is time for Russian and Western leaders to devise a grand bargain for peace in eastern Ukraine , one that goes beyond the Minsk Protocol to address the questions of global security and arms control that have impeded cooperation on issues like Syria ’ s civil war and Iran ’ s nuclear program .
Russia does not need to upend the existing global order ; it simply needs to find its place .
And the US must let it .
