The Euro : At the Crossroads So Soon ?
ROME : Six weeks into the Euro 's life , Europe 's economic policies are out of whack .
Europe has high public debts , taxes near 50 % of national product , and years of high unemployment and mediocre growth .
So what 's the response ?
A tilt toward monetary rigidity and an expansive fiscal policy through a creeping abandonment of the EU Stability Pact .
In addition , proposed employment strategies will do little to reduce labor market rigidity .
Europe craves the opposite mix : more monetary flexibility , fiscal policies that reduce taxation and national debt , and a labor policy that makes Europe 's labor markets more akin to America 's .
These three cardinal policies are related .
Monetary Policy .
The European Central Bank ( ECB ) pursues price stability defined as annual inflation of around 1 % .
At this delicate moment in the world economy the ECB is seeking to establish its anti-inflation credibility at the very moment when the spectre of deflation is appearing for the first time in half-a-century .
Debtors worldwide face a risk of bankruptcy which , if widespread , could lead to a dangerous recession .
The ECB 's choice , strangely , focuses more on its own anti-inflation posture than deflation .
Compare European monetary policy with American actions .
America 's Fed follows a rule of monetary policy whereby the prime objective of controlling inflation permits , according to precise parameters , a reaction to changes in the rate of growth .
This policy works , leading to a long period of stable , uninterrupted growth .
The ECB should follow a similar course .
So , what should be the objective regarding inflation ?
Price growth of , say , 3 % per annum ( instead of 1 ) has clear additional costs , but may facilitate the adjustment of relative prices and wages across Europe .
This does not mean that collective bargaining agreements do not take into account inflation , but only that at a micro level a little inflation permits more " flexibility " in relative real wages .
Fiscal Policy .
Europe must reduce the deadweight of debt and taxes .
How ?
By reducing primary expenses , then reducing taxes .
But European politicians , of right and left , believe that public expenditures are the engine of growth .
Wrong : economies grow with more markets not with more public expenditures .
Ireland , the European country with the highest rate of growth is also the one that most reduced its deficit and public debt by cutting expenditures and taxes .
Elsewhere in Europe , there is talk about abandoning the Stability Pact before the Pact even goes into effect .
For example : we no longer hear about cutting Italy 's public debt in half ( in relation to GDP ) .
In fact Italy 's government was among the first to support the idea of jettisoning the Stability Pact , and had to be rebuked by the EU Commission for " over optimistic " budget projections .
Germany , too , has traveled far from its anti-inflationary obsessions .
Minister Lafontaine seems to love inflation and public debt without thinking about the consequences .
France 's socialist government continues to believe , despite contrary evidence , that a vast , centralized public sector is compatible with a dynamic market economy .
Widespread ideas about major public investments financed by bloating deficits should be forgotten .
Public infrastructure investments displace private investments and the taxes necessary to finance them introduce further distortions in demand .
In any case , the lions share of public expenditures goes to pensions , transfers , and public sector salaries .
Without drastic reform of the social state , European fiscal policy will continue to have feet of clay .
Labor Policy .
Every few weeks European ministers proclaim new initiatives concerning " labor policy . "
Most are useless .
The only employment policy that makes sense reduces fiscal burdens on the cost of labor and increases flexibility in the market .
Consider this : in Italy in the last 10 years the cost of each job is equal to 1.7 of the average salary ; the average in other countries of EMU is around 1.4 ; the same number for the United States is around 1.25 .
These numbers tell only part of the story .
Increases in income taxes imply that unions demand higher gross salaries in order to compensate for the fall in net salaries due to tax increases .
Therefore income taxes , in part , impact the cost of labor , contributing to high unemployment .
In fact , average unemployment in the countries of the EU in the last 10 years is around 10 % .
Today it is still high , while in the US it was around 6 % and is now 4.5 % .
Europe is trapped in a vicious circle : those employed recoil from more flexibility and the risk of losing their jobs .
But unemployment is high because of taxes and excessive protection for those employed , which prevents the market from creating new employment opportunities .
So the unemployed ask for more social protection , instead of flexibility , increasing the fiscal drain on the economy .
Given lax fiscal discipline , the ECB will likely react with more monetary rigidity , pushing politicians , already enamored with the social state , to spend and tax even more .
Europe and the euro face a crossroads .
One road is where the ECB digs in its heels on price stability and politicians forget about fiscal discipline and the fact that a market economy cannot work with half of GDP absorbed by taxes .
Such a combination would force the ECB to be even more rigid in an economy where the employed and their representatives ( trade unions ) are preoccupied exclusively with protecting existing jobs and excluding outsiders , i.e. the unemployed .
The other road reduces the fiscal burden of the social state , reinvigorating the economy by reducing taxes and providing the employed not with social protection but with more assurance of finding another job if they lose their current one .
If Europe takes this road , monetary policy could help by assuring the minimal stabilization of cyclical fluctuations , without having to keep nominal interest at too high a level .
The first road is that of eurosclerosis , the second takes the best of what the US can teach Europe .
