The Emerging Lessons of the New Economy
CAMBRIDGE : Debates about the New Economy have raged for years , yet preliminary conclusions are now possible .
The New Economy , built on advances in information technology ( IT ) , is real , and is reshaping global industry and services , increases in US productivity in recent years being the clearest demonstration .
Simultaneously , the stock market valuations associated with the New Economy are unreal , in the sense that they reflect more of a speculative bubble than fundamental valuations .
A third conclusion is that like many technologies , adoption and diffusion of information technologies depends not just on private market forces , but on government .
The US , which portrays itself as the bastion of free enterprise , is pursuing the IT revolution through a concerted " industrial policy " as well as through market forces .
Other countries should also adopt national strategies to accelerate the uptake of the new technologies .
The reality of the New Economy is best captured in the data on economic growth and productivity in the US , where the New Economy is most advanced .
Until about five years ago , American economists bemoaned a " growth slowdown , " a downturn in productivity growth beginning in the 1970s .
Studies seemed to show that the computer revolution had contributed little to improvements in productivity .
Economic historians warned that it takes many years for new technologies to show up in actual improvements in industrial productivity , which was true for past major technological leaps .
By the mid-1990s , those predictions were proving correct .
Productivity growth began to soar , from around 1.5 % per year , to around 3 % per year .
Higher productivity growth in turn resulted in an acceleration in GDP growth , from around 2.5 % per year during 1990-96 to more than 4 % per year since 1997 .
The deserved enthusiasm for the real economy translated into an undeserved enthusiasm for the stock market prices of IT-based enterprises .
There is a big difference between productivity growth and profits , and this basic point was largely ignored by market enthusiasts .
Even though productivity gains are likely to be substantial , most benefits will accrue to consumers in the form of lower prices , or to workers in the form of higher wages relative to prices , rather than to firms in the form of higher profits .
This is because of a basic aspect of internet technology : freedom of entry of new firms , and therefore the very high contestability of markets .
Yes , early movers in internet technology such as Amazon.com , the electronic bookseller , will maintain an advantage , but that advantage is likely to remain modest , since the potential entry of competitors will keep profit margins low .
In fact , even as Amazon increased its revenues in recent years , it sustained losses .
Recent reversals in the US stock market , quickly transmitted around the world , are the first glimmers that market participants are waking up to these basic facts .
While the number of new dot-com billionaires created each day is likely to diminish drastically , the benefits of IT to the real economy will continue to spread .
And the gains will not just be in the US and Europe .
East Asian economies are surging in their rapid take-up of the internet , with particularly striking examples in Hong Kong , Singapore , Korea , and Taiwan .
It is estimated that around one-third of all Koreans are now on the internet , a share rising to two-thirds by the end of this year .
Connectivity in China will also boom , with internet use doubling in the past year ( from around 4 million to 8.9 million ) , and likely to increase substantially when nationwide wireless internet services are inaugurated in May .
Singapore launched a major telecoms liberalization which will reduce internet costs and raise usage .
While the US and Canada still dominate in estimated internet usage ( around 140 million users as of March 2000 ) , compared with Europe ( 83 million users ) , and Asia / Pacific ( 70 million users ) , and with South America ( 10 million users ) and Africa ( 3 million users ) far behind , the laggards have a chance to narrow the gap in with the right policies .
Every government should understand that the rapid adoption of the internet benefits strongly from supportive government policies , not just " free market " policies .
The internet was actually first created by a government project ( ARPANET ) , fostered by the National Science Foundation , which helped to get universities and scientists on-line .
Since those early days , the US Government has continued to pour billions of dollars into research and development of IT technologies .
In addition , the Internet Tax Freedom Act established a moratorium on taxation of e-commerce transactions , while the Telecommunications Act of 1996 provided funding and government support for wiring of schools and public libraries .
Developing countries will need their own strategies , and soon .
Market reforms are critical , especially freeing telecommunications from state monopolies so that private companies are free to invest in needed physical infrastructure .
But governments should also foster an environment where much of the population gets on-line .
Government agencies and public schools should be put on-line as fast as possible .
As in the US , tax policies must foster the uptake of the new technologies .
Curricula in schools and universities should be re-designed to ensure the training to support national IT systems .
International donor agencies and foundations can be attracted to provide vital funding to very poor countries to help overcome the " digital divide . "
Harvard University and IBM teamed up in the past year to prepare an " IT Readiness Guide " as a public service to help developing country governments and communities around the world assess where they are in the IT revolution and New Economy .
This guide provides one useful tool for the formulation of an IT strategy .
The guide can be retrieved , free of charge , from the internet website : http : / / www.readinessguide.org.
