The Return of the Ugly German
BERLIN – During the long night of negotiations over Greece on July 12-13 , something fundamental to the European Union cracked .
Since then , Europeans have been living in a different kind of EU .
What changed that night was the Germany that Europeans have known since the end of World War II .
On the surface , the negotiations were about averting a Greek exit from the eurozone ( or “ Grexit ” ) and the dire consequences that would follow for Greece and the monetary union .
At a deeper level , however , what was at stake was the role in Europe of its most populous and economically most powerful country .
Germany ’ s resurgence after World War II , and its re-establishment of the world ’ s trust ( culminating in consent to German re-unification four and a half decades later ) , was built on sturdy domestic and foreign-policy pillars .
At home , a stable democracy based on the rule of law quickly emerged .
The economic success of Germany ’ s welfare state proved a model for Europe .
And Germans ’ willingness to face up to the Nazis ’ crimes , without reservation , sustained a deep-rooted skepticism toward all things military .
In terms of foreign policy , Germany rebuilt trust by embracing Western integration and Europeanization .
The power at the center of Europe should never again become a threat to the continent or itself .
Thus , the Western Allies ’ aim after 1945 – unlike after World War I – was not to isolate Germany and weaken it economically , but to protect it militarily and firmly embed it politically in the West .
Indeed , Germany ’ s reconciliation with its arch-enemy , France , remains the foundation of today ’ s European Union , helping to incorporate Germany into the common European market , with a view to the eventual political unification of Europe .
But in today ’ s Germany , such ideas are considered hopelessly “ Euro-romantic ” ; their time has passed .
Where Europe is concerned , from now on Germany will primarily pursue its national interests , just like everybody else .
But such thinking is based on a false premise .
The path that Germany will pursue in the twenty-first century – toward a “ European Germany ” or a “ German Europe ” – has been the fundamental , historical question at the heart of German foreign policy for two centuries .
And it was answered during that long night in Brussels , with German Europe prevailing over European Germany .
This was a fateful decision for both Germany and Europe .
One wonders whether Chancellor Angela Merkel and Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble knew what they were doing .
To dismiss the fierce criticism of Germany and its leading players that erupted after the diktat on Greece , as many Germans do , is to don rose-tinted glasses .
Certainly , there was nonsensical propaganda about a Fourth Reich and asinine references to the Führer .
But , at its core , the criticism articulates an astute awareness of Germany ’ s break with its entire post-WWII European policy .
For the first time , Germany didn ’ t want more Europe ; it wanted less .
Germany ’ s stance on the night of July 12-13 announced its desire to transform the eurozone from a European project into a kind of sphere of influence .
Merkel was forced to choose between Schäuble and France ( and Italy ) .
The issue was fundamental : Her finance minister wanted to compel a eurozone member to leave “ voluntarily ” by exerting massive pressure .
Greece could either exit ( in full knowledge of the disastrous consequences for the country and Europe ) or accept a program that effectively makes it a European protectorate , without any hope of economic improvement .
Greece is now subject to a cure – further austerity – that has not worked in the past and that was prescribed solely to address Germany ’ s domestic political needs .
But the massive conflict with France and Italy , the eurozone ’ s second and third largest economies , is not over , because , for Schäuble , Grexit remains an option .
By claiming that debt relief is “ legally ” possible only outside the eurozone , he wants to turn the issue into the lever for bringing about a “ voluntary ” Grexit .
Schäuble ’ s position has thrown into sharp relief the fundamental question of the relationship between Europe ’ s south and north , his approach threatens to stretch the eurozone to the breaking point .
The belief that the euro can be used to bring about the economic “ re-education ” of Europe ’ s south will prove a dangerous fallacy – and not just in Greece .
As the French and Italians well know , such a view jeopardizes the entire European project , which has been built on diversity and solidarity .
Germany has been the big winner of European unification , both economically and politically .
Just compare Germany ’ s history in the first and second halves of the twentieth century .
Bismarck ’ s unification of Germany in the nineteenth century occurred at the high-water mark of European nationalism .
In German thinking , power became inextricably associated with nationalism and militarism .
As a result , unlike France , Great Britain , or the United States , which legitimized their foreign policy in terms of a “ civilizing mission , ” Germany understood its power in terms of raw military force .
The foundation of the second , unified German nation-state in 1989 was based on Germany ’ s irrevocable Western orientation and Europeanization .
And the Europeanization of Germany ’ s politics filled – and still fills – the civilization gap embodied in German statehood .
To allow this pillar to erode – or , worse , to tear it down – is a folly of the highest order .
That is why , in the EU that emerged on the morning of July 13 , Germany and Europe both stand to lose .
