The Euro and the Dollar
PARIS : Oskar Lafontaine 's resignation has only brought a brief respite to the Euro .
Its weakness will now continue .
If things keep going as they are going , the Euro will soon stand at a value of less than one euro to the dollar .
This is a threshold fraught with symbolism : within just a few short months of its birth the " strong " euro that its architects seemed to prophecy will have transformed itself into a weak euro .
All sorts of old wounds will inevitably open up if the euro falls so far so soon .
Many European inferiority complexes toward America , which the advent of the euro were supposed to banish forever , could easily reappear .
In Paris , the suggestion is growing that Washington must be made to stabilize exchange rates between the main currencies , in particular the euro / dollar exchange rate .
Replace the euro with the French franc , and the dollar with the DM , and the discussion evokes a strong feeling of déjŕ vu .
So one must now again repeat some old truths that many Europeans seem to be deliberately forgetting .
Just as the strong franc , the so-called franc fort of the 1990s , did not imply an economically strong France , a strong euro should not be equated with an powerfully growing Europe .
The exchange rate is a price , not a score in the last game of the World Cup .
Like all other prices , it must sometimes increase , sometimes decrease , according to market demands .
It is true , of course , that exchange rates are different from many other prices in that they are directly influenced by central bank policies .
As a result , the Federal Reserve Bank and the European Central Bank do possess the means to stabilize the exchange rates .
But it would be a grave mistake to embark on that course .
Stabilization of exchange rates implies an aggressive targeting of interest rates .
Intervening on the currency markets without altering interest rates - a measure economists call a " sterilized intervention " - would affect the exchange rate for a few minutes , at the most for a few days .
America 's Federal Reserve Board chairman Alan Greenspan is choosing the dollar 's interest rate to stand as a function of what is happening in the United States .
The ECB is choosing the euro interest rate as a function of what happens in Europe .
Both choices are good things .
So long as the two central banks behave this way and as the two regions are subjected to highly different choices ( which , as a matter of fact , will be so indefinitely ) , American and European interest rates will each continue to evolve on different paths , and their exchange rates will keep fluctuating .
This is what is currently happening .
The risk of drifting into a recession is larger in Europe than it is in the United States .
As a result , in the coming year interest rates are far more likely to fall in Europe than they are in the United States .
The euro / dollar exchange rate mirrors this anticipated change .
A lower valuation for the euro diminishes the risk of recession in Europe .
Once again , this is good news for Europeans .
To stabilize the euro 's rate at this stage would be equivalent to a European Central Bank 's announcement that it prefers stabilizing the euro at a higher value to avoiding recession .
Alternatively , from the other side of the Atlantic , to keep the euro / dollar exchange where it now is would be tantamount to the Fed 's declaring that , in spite of an unemployment rate as low as 4.4 % , it will decrease interest rates and perhaps revive the corpse of inflation .
Both strategies would be idiotic .
Fortunately , both are unlikely to happen ( never mind that I have more confidence in the Fed than in the ECB ) .
Therefore , the Fed and the ECB must continue to tend to their own shops and leave it to the currency markets to set the exchange rate .
Does this mean that the world 's two great central banks should not only be passive , but mute ?
No , silence is a bad idea .
There is no need to remind ourselves that currency markets occasionally lose their cool , and that exchange rate movements are at times totally disconnected from the real economy , if not from reality itself .
Here is where central banks , in particular the ECB , can play an important role as carriers and disseminators of information .
They can indicate - in the austere language that is so much their speciality - that it is time for currency traders to come back to reality .
Can they succeed ?
Alan Greenspan 's attempts to talk and cajole the American stock market down to earth from what he called " irrational exuberance " are not quite reassuring on that account .
Perhaps he was too reserved , but such efforts are the responsible course for today 's two great central banks .
