Sweden ’ s Other Rape Suspects
NEW YORK – It is difficult for me , as an advocate against rape and other forms of violence against women , to fathom the laziness and willful ignorance that characterize so much of the media coverage of the sexual-assault allegations against WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange .
To report that we are & nbsp ; simply witnessing Swedish justice at work , one must be committed to doing no research – not even the bare minimum of picking up a phone .
In fact , we are witnessing a bizarre aberration in the context of & nbsp ; Sweden ’ s treatment of sex crime – a case that exposes the grim reality of indifference , or worse , that victims there and elsewhere face .
If I were raped in Uppsala , where Assange is alleged to have committed his crime , I could not expect top prosecutors to lobby governments to arrest my assailant .
On the contrary , “ ordinary ” Swedish rapists and abusers of women should assume that the police might not respond when called .
When I tried the rape-crisis hotline at the government-run Crisis Center for Women in Stockholm , no one even picked up – and there was no answering machine .
According to rape-crisis advocates in Sweden , one-third of Swedish women have been sexually assaulted by the time they leave their teens .
Indeed , according to a study published in 2003 , and other later studies through 2009 , Sweden has the highest sexual-assault rate in Europe , and among the lowest conviction rates .
When I reached the Stockholm branch of Terrafem , a support organization for rape survivors , a volunteer told me that in her many years of experience , Sweden ’ s police , prosecutors , and magistrates had never mobilized in pursuit of any alleged perpetrator in ways remotely similar to their pursuit of Assange .
The far more common scenario – in fact , the only reliable scenario – was that even cases accompanied by a significant amount of evidence were seldom prosecuted .
This , she explained , was because most rapes in Uppsala , Stockholm , and other cities occur when young women meet young men online and go to an apartment , where , as in the allegations in the Assange case , what began as consensual sex turns nonconsensual .
But she said that this is exactly the scenario that Swedish police typically refuse to prosecute .
Just as everywhere else , Sweden ’ s male-dominated police , she explained , do not tend to see these victims as “ innocent , ” and thus do not bother building a case for arrest .
She is right : According to a report by Amnesty International , as of 2008 , the number of reported rapes in Sweden had quadrupled in 20 years , but only 20 % of cases were ever prosecuted .
And , while the prosecution rate constituted a minimal improvement on previous years , when less than 15 % of cases ended up in court , the conviction rate for reported rapes “ is markedly lower today than it was in 1965 . ”
As a result , “ in practice , many perpetrators enjoy impunity . ”
Until 2006 , women in Uppsala faced a remarkable hurdle in seeking justice : the city ’ s chief of police , Göran Lindberg , was himself a serial rapist , convicted in July 2010 of more than a dozen charges , including “ serious sexual offenses . ”
One victim testified that she was told her rapist was the police chief , and that she would be framed if she told anyone about his assaults .
Lindberg also served as the Police Academy ’ s spokesman against sexual violence .
The Uppsala police force that is now investigating Assange either failed to or refused to investigate effectively the sadistic rapist with whom they worked every day .
In other words , the purported magical Swedish kingdom of female sexual equality , empowerment , and robust institutional support for rape victims – a land , conjured by Swedish prosecutors , that holds much of the global media in thrall – simply does not exist .
In the Assange case , the Swedish police supported the accusers in legally unprecedented ways – for example , by allowing them to tell their stories together and by allowing testimony from a boyfriend . & nbsp ; But other alleged victims of gender-based abuse , sometimes in life-threatening circumstances , typically receive very different treatment . & nbsp ; In particular , according to WAVE , a pan-European consortium of service providers for rape and sexual-abuse survivors , when migrants , who comprise 13.8 % of Sweden ’ s population , report rape and abuse , they face high systemic hurdles in even telling their stories to police – including longstanding linguistic barriers in communicating with them at all .
Likewise , Swedish intake centers for victims of male violence are woefully underfunded – like all support services for rape and abuse victims across Europe and North America – leaving many women who face threats to their safety and that of their children waiting for unavailable places in shelters .
When I emailed the Rape Crisis support institute in Uppsala , listed by the global rape-crisis organization RAINN , I received an automatic reply saying that the facility was temporarily closed .
So , for most raped Swedish women , the shelters are full , the hotlines inactive , and the police selectively look the other way – that is , unless they are busy chasing down a globally famous suspect .
We have been here before .
Last year , when my left-wing colleagues were virtually unanimous in believing the New York Police Department ’ s narrative of a certain victim and a guilty-before-due-process rapist , I made the same call – to the local rape-crisis center .
There , Harriet Lesser , who works every day with victims whose alleged attacker is not the managing director of the International Monetary Fund , confirmed that the official support shown for the victim – in advance of any investigation – was indeed unprecedented .
Let me be clear : I am not saying that Assange , much less Dominique Strauss-Kahn , committed no crime against women .
Rather , Assange ’ s case , as was true with Strauss-Kahn ’ s , is being handled so differently from how the authorities handle all other rape cases that a corrupted standard of justice clearly is being applied .
These aberrations add insult to the injury of women , undefended and without justice , who have been raped in the “ normal ” course of events – by violent nobodies .
