The Healing of Taiwan
BANGKOK – Last week , a Taiwanese court sentenced Chen Shui-bien , Taiwan ’ s president from 2000 until 2008 , to life imprisonment for corruption .
Chen had been caught stealing millions of dollars of public funds .
He did not act alone .
His wife ( who also received a life sentence ) , children , and other relatives all helped to hide the stolen loot in overseas accounts .
Taiwan ’ s former first family turned out to be a den of common thieves .
Chen and his ruling Democratic Progressive Party camouflaged their personal and parochial financial interests behind the patriotic mask of ensuring the survival of a democratic Chinese society in an independent Taiwan . For years , Chen was perceived as a brave David fighting the communist Goliath , and attracted many admirers around the world ( including me at one point ) .
Presenting himself and his Party as champions of democracy , Chen sought to create the impression among Taiwan ’ s voters that their freedom would perish in the hands of the Kuomintang ( KMT ) or any party other than his own .
But in fact , it was the late President Chiang Ching-kuo , the son of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek , who instituted the unprecedented democratic reforms that paved the way for the eventual electoral triumph of Chen ’ s formerly banned DPP .
Chen ’ s personal wealth grew conspicuously shortly after he assumed office , but no one could produce hard evidence of his corruption back then .
His political supporters initially brushed aside the mushrooming rumors of his self-enrichment as opposition KMT propaganda .
But , one by one , most of the DPP ’ s founding fathers all left the party , accusing Chen of corruption and autocratic behavior even within his own party – which Chen dismissed as sour grapes from people who wanted their share of the political spoils .
In fact , Chen was always more concerned with consolidating his own power than with defending Taiwan .
His most controversial political moves were aimed at his domestic opponents , not the Chinese government on the mainland .
He led a vicious campaign to portray all Taiwanese with mainland Chinese roots , even if born and bred in Taiwan , as untrustworthy carpetbaggers – wai shen ren , or “ not native people ” – as if they were aliens from a different culture .
This official effort to portray native “ Taiwanese ” as a separate ethnic group , with scant relation to Chinese culture , was extended to language , as Chen favored using the Fujian dialect in lieu of the Mandarin spoken by 1.3 billion Chinese and taught all over the world .
Meanwhile , the Ministry of Education sought to expunge all references to China in school textbooks .
So insistent was Chen ’ s campaign that it reminded some people of Mao ’ s Cultural Revolution , a time when Chinese were divided into “ us ” and “ them . ”
Indeed , under Chen ’ s policy , Taiwan nearly became a rigidly divided society , where “ local ” and “ not native ” Chinese lived as potential enemies .
Taiwan ’ s sole aboriginal parliamentarian once provided the logical rebuttal to Chen and the DPP , delivering a speech to a packed Congress entirely in his native tongue , which nobody else in the chamber could understand .
The message was obvious : his was the only group with a legitimate claim to being native Taiwanese .
In the end , Chen ’ s effort was as futile as it was foolish .
The Chinese culture embodied in the daily lives of 23 million Taiwanese of whatever political beliefs was not so easily eliminated by decree .
Moreover , the attempt to do so angered the overwhelming majority of Taiwanese , who finally understood the stupidity of Chen ’ s policy , particularly how it led to economic stagnation at a time when mainland China was booming .
Indeed , Taiwanese capital and know-how built much of China ’ s hi-tech industries , and well over a half-million Taiwanese live and work near Shanghai in a virtual replica of Hsin Chu , Taiwan ’ s Silicon Valley .
But in Chen ’ s Taiwan , domestic squabbles took precedence over economic development .
Chen invariably blamed the KMT for blocking sensible economic plans , but even some of his moneyed supporters knew better .
When it was finally proved that power had turned Chen into a common criminal , the KMT was voted back into power .
But , while Chen ’ s legacy of lies and corruption has ended , the reborn KMT under President Ma Ying-jeou has much to do to convince a cynical public that Chen ’ s ways , reminiscent of KMT ’ s own darker past , have not become embedded in the system .
Chen ’ s jail sentence should also serve to remind the DPP that it must become a party for all Taiwanese , “ local ” or not if it is to have any chance at a revival .
Taiwan ’ s people know that they cannot prosper as a democracy if ethnic divisiveness is allowed to hold sway .
