A Return to Reason
COPENHAGEN – Common sense was an early loser in the scorching battle over the reality of man-made global warming .
For nearly 20 years , one group of activists argued – in the face of ever-mounting evidence – that global warming was a fabrication .
Their opponents , meanwhile , exaggerated the phenomenon ’ s likely impact – and , as a consequence , dogmatically fixated on drastic , short-term carbon cuts as the only solution , despite overwhelming evidence that such cuts would be cripplingly expensive and woefully ineffective .
This scientific pie fight , characterized by juvenile name-calling , ignoble tactics , and intellectual intransigence on both sides , not only left the public confused and scared ; it undermined the efforts of the most important organizations working on advancing the science of climate change .
Almost inevitably , at international summits from Kyoto to Copenhagen , governments failed to take any meaningful action on global warming .
Fortunately , there finally seems to be a growing number of influential scientists , economists , and politicians who represent a more sensible approach to the issue .
As I argued in my 2007 book Cool It , the most rational response to global warming is to make alternative energy technologies so cheap that the whole world can afford them .
In broad strokes , this requires a deliberate and significant boost to research and development spending .
Based on recent work by Isabel Galiana and Chris Green of McGill University , I advocate expenditure totaling around 0.2 % of global GDP – roughly $ 100 billion a year .
Of course , no fix to global warming will work overnight .
So we need to focus more on adapting to the effects of global warming – for example , by stepping up efforts to cope with inland flooding and the urban “ heat island ” effect .
At the same time , we should explore the practicality of climate engineering , which we may need to buy more time for a smooth transition away from fossil fuels .
Acknowledging that man-made climate change is real , but arguing that carbon cuts are not the answer , amounts to staking out a middle ground in the global warming debate – which means being attacked from both sides .
For so-called “ alarmists , ” pointing out what ’ s wrong with drastic carbon cuts is somehow tantamount to denying the reality of climate change , while so-called “ deniers ” lambast anyone who accepts the scientific evidence supporting this “ mythical ” problem .
Nevertheless , there are encouraging signs that the minority of sensible voices in this debate are beginning to get the attention they deserve .
In mid-2009 , as part of a project by the Copenhagen Consensus Center to assess different responses to global warming , Green and Galiana performed a cost-benefit analysis of R & amp ; D spending on green technologies .
Green , a long-time proponent of a technology-led response to global warming , demonstrated the effectiveness of a policy of government investment in R & amp ; D aimed at developing new low-carbon technologies , making current technologies cheaper and more effective , and expanding energy-related infrastructure such as smart grids .
As Green and Galiana bluntly noted , “ No approach to climate stabilization will work without an energy technology revolution . ”
Another academic who has advocated a smarter response to global warming is Roger Pielke , Jr. of the University of Colorado , the author of this year ’ s must-read global-warming book The Climate Fix .
Along with Green , Pielke was one of 14 noted academics who co-wrote February ’ s “ Hartwell Paper , ” commissioned by the London School of Economics and the University of Oxford .
The paper made the case for developing alternatives to fossil fuels , ensuring that economic development doesn ’ t wreak environmental havoc , and recognizing the importance of adaptation to climate change .
In the US , we witnessed an equally promising development in the climate debate just last month , when the conservative American Enterprise Institute , the liberal Brookings Institution , and the centrist Breakthrough Institute teamed up to publish a report that called for revamping America ’ s energy system with the aim of making clean energy cheap .
Entitled “ Post-Partisan Power , ” the report comprehensively and convincingly argues that the US government should invest roughly $ 25 billion per year ( about 0.2 % of America ’ s GDP ) in low-carbon military procurement , R & amp ; D , and a new network of university-private sector innovation hubs to create an “ energy revolution . ”
This sensible proposal predictably drew fire from committed “ alarmists ” and “ deniers . ”
But , promisingly – and surprisingly , given the somewhat toxic state of US politics – it attracted broad support and intelligent commentary from many mainstream pundits .
Adding to the swell of voices , November will see the documentary film based on my book ‘ Cool It ’ released in the US .
It is too early to suggest that politicians might make real progress toward implementing genuinely effective policies on climate change .
But , given the dearth of common sense in recent years , the mere fact that a growing chorus of reasonable voices can now be heard is nothing short of miraculous .
