The Kremlin ’ s Failing Monopoly
CAMBRIDGE – Ever since Vladimir Putin came to power a decade ago , the Kremlin regime has relied on two pillars : the security forces and energy exports .
By suppressing internal rivals and absorbing their assets , the regime created a dual monopoly .
Redistributing some of the profits from high energy prices enabled the regime to improve living standards and make itself popular with ordinary Russians .
And resolving internal problems through a disproportionate use of force reassured even the regime ’ s security obsessed ex-KGB men .
Until recently , this combination of carrots and sticks functioned effectively .
The virtual absence of popular protest in Russia during the Putin years seems amazing .
But make no mistake : Putin ’ s popularity ratings relied not on his vigor , humor , or mystique , but on salaries and credits that Russians had never enjoyed before .
And , as long as oil prices were growing faster than Russian salaries , those in power could still grab a big slice of the profits .
Now that happy union between the Kremlin and ordinary Russians is ending .
Few Russian policymakers , much less the Russian public , expected oil and gas prices to collapse as they have .
We do not know what will happen next .
If prices rebound , Putin and his people will glorify themselves for their wisdom .
But if prices remain stagnant at current levels , Putin ’ s system is doomed to failure .
It is no coincidence that George W. Bush ’ s and Putin ’ s disastrous presidencies were cotemporaneous .
By driving up energy prices , Bush was Putin ’ s greatest ally , with Putin returning the favor by refocusing Russia from its multiple problems to “ terrorism . ”
Both sought to undo the work of their successful predecessors , Bill Clinton and Boris Yeltsin .
Both led their countries into traps with which their successors must deal .
When Bush said that he liked what he saw in Putin ’ s eyes , he meant it .
But their successors are as different as the procedures that brought them to power .
Since Soviet times , the Kremlin has traditionally been wary about Democratic administrations in the United States .
John F. Kennedy refused to tolerate the Soviet military presence in Cuba .
Jimmy Carter boycotted the Moscow Olympics .
Clinton led the successful operation against Slobodan Milosevic ’ s Serbia , the Kremlin ’ s best friend in Europe .
And Obama ’ s triumph heralded the fall in oil prices .
With energy revenues screeching to a halt , Putin ’ s regime will lose popularity .
Central myths about Putin the healer of the nation and the supplier of giveaway budgets are collapsing .
And Putin cannot avoid responsibility .
If the Kremlin claimed credit for the oil- and gas-fired prosperity of the past six years – prosperity due solely to economic exuberance elsewhere in the world – the Kremlin should be accountable for the current devastation .
Americans today compare their current crisis to the Great Depression ; Russians compare theirs to the crisis of 1998 , which is much fresher in the collective memory .
In 1998 , the whole world , which was then enjoying a global boom , looked at Russia with sympathy .
Things could not be more different now .
In 1998 , Russians did not yet take for granted imported cars , foreign tourism , and other middle-class perks .
The ruling group in the Kremlin was variegated and conflict-ridden , but its response to the crisis was effective and even creative .
Now , the ruling group is uniform , unanimous , and most likely unfit for any serious revision of policy .
It is a dangerous situation .
Though the current level of anti-Americanism in Russia ’ s official media seems unprecedented , the regime is most worried about internal problems .
During the current financial crisis , which hit Russia right after the war with Georgia last August , the Kremlin and the Duma issued a series of laws and orders that have turned Putin ’ s authoritarianism into a dictatorship .
Opposition parties have become negligible .
The oligarchs ’ businesses have been largely nationalized .
The presidential term has been extended .
Industrial centers with growing unemployment will receive more troops .
Trial by jury , which was infrequent anyway , is being seen less and less .
The concept of high treason is bandied about almost daily .
We will see more persecution of scientists , journalists , and businessmen , whose work with international charities , media , or corporations will now be construed as treachery .
Some of these people will be murdered rather than tried ; others will be tried by state-appointed judges rather than murdered .
But this is not news anymore in Putin ’ s Russia .
What will become news will be the sort of mass protests that were seen recently in Ukraine , Thailand , or Greece .
Can Putin ’ s dual monopoly survive them ?
Perhaps , but it will do so only if it risks deep change , a new perestroika rather than simply a thaw .
But it is more likely that the regime is too rigid and too blinkered to act .
