Why Russia ’ s Economy Will Not Collapse
GENEVA – The rapid depreciation of the ruble , despite a dramatic – and seemingly desperate – late-night interest-rate hike by the Central Bank of Russia ( CBR ) last month , has raised the specter of Russia ’ s economic meltdown in 1998 .
Indeed , the West has sought to animate that specter in its ongoing confrontation with Russian President Vladimir Putin .
But , though Russia ’ s economy is undoubtedly in trouble , a full-blown collapse is unlikely .
Oil and gas account for more than 60 % of Russia ’ s exports ; other primary commodities make up much of the rest .
Given this , the recent sharp decline in world oil prices obviously represents a major shock – large enough , when combined with the effect of increasingly strict Western sanctions – to provoke a sizeable recession .
To make matters worse , commodity prices are expected to remain low for some time . In that case , the income loss would become much more than a temporary setback .
But Russia is no economic basket-case-in-waiting – at least not yet .
The situation today is very different from that in 1998 , when Russia was running twin fiscal and current-account deficits .
Russia needed to borrow , and it was borrowing heavily in foreign currency .
This meant that as the ruble depreciated , Russia ’ s debts rose .
Eventually , default became inevitable .
By contrast , in recent years , Russia has enjoyed a sizeable budget surplus , and public debt is below 20 % of GDP .
It is true that income from oil and gas , which represents the bulk of government revenues , has been halved when measured in dollars .
But the Russian currency has fallen by about the same percentage , meaning that the government ’ s income in rubles remains approximately unchanged .
Similarly , Russia ’ s current-account balance has been mostly in surplus in recent years .
Gross public and private external debt is below 40 % of GDP , and much of it is denominated in rubles .
The sharp fall in export income is rapidly changing the situation , but Russia is starting from a comfortable position .
To panic would be premature .
The ruble ’ s free fall has been driven mainly by capital outflows .
Russia ’ s famous oligarchs have already stashed most of their wealth abroad , but they retain significant savings at home .
As the economic and political situation deteriorates , they are most likely pulling more money out .
Small savers have every reason to switch into foreign currency as well .
This has put the CBR in a challenging position .
The ruble ’ s depreciation is bound to fuel inflation , already around 11 % and far above the CBR ’ s 5 % target .
In that context , raising the interest rate sharply makes sense , and officials may be hoping that the hike will stem capital outflows – despite the risk that the decision , if interpreted as being aimed at defending the currency , could have the opposite effect .
The trouble is that the higher interest rates are bound to deepen Russia ’ s economic downturn , making the CBR an easy scapegoat .
Never mind that the central bank is not responsible for Russia ’ s troubles – the run on the ruble , the recession , and the flare-up of inflation – and that using interest rates to prevent capital outflows always fails .
Embattled politicians can be counted on to point the finger .
The threat to Putin is clear .
He risks the fate of his predecessor , Boris Yeltsin , who presided during a period of unusually low oil prices .
Until now , Putin has been lucky , coming to power just as oil prices started to rise .
Most Russian citizens credit him with two decades of rising living standards , following decades of decline .
Putin ’ s decision not to implement the unpopular reforms that would have created a strong non-oil export sector may have been bad for the economy ’ s long-term health , but it has allowed him to maintain widespread public support .
His economic good fortune , combined with his readiness to stand up to the West , has created a misguided impression in Russia that the country is , once again , a world power .
Many in the United States and Europe believe that ratcheting up economic pressure on Russia will help drive Putin out .
This is an enormously dangerous gamble .
As Russian living standards decline , Putin ’ s only viable strategy to remain in power will be an aggressive international posture .
Foreign military adventures , after all , are most appealing when the domestic front is on fire .
None of this means that the West should bow and forsake its principles .
But it does mean that the time has come for a diplomatic approach that does not depend on the prospect of Russia ’ s economic collapse .
