Sharing the Burden of Hard Times
PRINCETON – The economic gloom that shrouded the world in 2008 has led many to ask whether the apparent prosperity that preceded it was real .
We know that in countries as diverse as China , India , Russia , and the United States , the number of billionaires soared .
More generally , the top 1 % of the population prospered .
But the gap between the rich and poor widened , and at least in the US , the incomes of the poor and the middle class stagnated.ampnbsp ;
No wonder that many are now skeptical about taxpayer-funded schemes to bail out banks , insurance companies , and even automakers .
Is this just another case of politicians making sure that , even in hard times , the wealthy elite that supports them will once again do better than everyone else ?
But , in assessing the benefits achieved by economic growth , it is a mistake to focus on whether the income gap between rich and poor widened or narrowed .
If a person ’ s annual income increased from $ 300 to $ 500 that may be enough to lift him out of extreme poverty , and will make a huge difference to his welfare and that of his family . If , at the same time , the income of a person earning a million dollars increased by $ 100,000 , the income gap will have widened .
But since $ 100,000 doesn ’ t make that much difference to the welfare of a person earning a million dollars , the gap in welfare will have narrowed .
I believe that we shouldn ’ t really be focusing on inequality anyway .
We should give priority to reducing unnecessary suffering .
So the right question to ask is this : did the economic growth of recent years make the poor better off ?
If we take a worldwide perspective , it clearly did .
In 1981 , about four in every ten people on the planet was living in the degrading condition that the World Bank terms extreme poverty .
Now , it is less than one in four .
Even in absolute terms , despite population growth , the number of extremely poor people fell during that period , from 1.9 billion to 1.4 billion .
There have been especially dramatic reductions in poverty in countries like China and India .
Does it matter so much that a few Chinese and Indians have become billionaires , if in the process hundreds of millions escaped extreme poverty ?
But the prospects for a continuing reduction in world poverty in 2009 are not good .
If the recession cuts deep in the developed nations , many workers will lose their jobs .
Families that can no longer keep up with their mortgage payments will lose their homes .
All of this causes real suffering .
People become accustomed to a level of comfort , and hope to move up to something even better .
When those expectations are disappointed , it is hard to accept having less than one had in the past .
There may be a sense of shame , and a loss of self-esteem , at being poor , even in hard times .
Nevertheless , the poor in industrialized nations will remain , in most cases , poor only by comparison with those who are better off .
In the US , 97 % of those classified by the Census Bureau as poor own a color TV and a car .
When Americans lose their jobs , even if they have no assets , they still have some access to health care and food stamps.ampnbsp ;
The situation of the 1.4 billion people living in extreme poverty is different .
They are poor by an absolute standard based on the most basic human needs .
If the recession reduces demand for imports from developing nations , many people living in those countries will lose their jobs .
They will have no social security to fall back on .
They will struggle to feed their families .
When a poor family ’ s income drops , one of the few expenses on which it can cut back is the cost of sending the children to school .
The most basic health care services will usually be beyond their means .
This will be where the recession hits hardest .
Some will see globalization as the cause of this hardship , for if the poor were not linked to the rich through trade , they would not be affected by the recession .
True , but they would also have missed out on the growth that helped so many of them to escape poverty .
It ’ s difficult to see self-sufficiency providing an adequate standard of living for the world ’ s growing population .
In this dire situation , what will the rich countries do ?
They have , on several occasions , pledged to increase their aid to the poor , and some European countries have started to meet their higher targets .
But they will be tempted to use the current hard times as a reason for backtracking .
US President-elect Barack Obama said , prior to his election , that he would double America ’ s foreign aid , and make it more effective in helping the poor .
But , as the recession hit , and the cost of the bailout became apparent , he indicated that he might have to postpone implementing this commitment .
It is understandable why , in the midst of an election campaign , a candidate would say that , for , even in the best of times , increasing foreign aid wins few votes in America .
Doubling US foreign aid would , however , still leave it below $ 50 billion a year – a modest sum compared to the $ 685 billion that the US spent on defense in 2008 .
I doubt that any $ 50 billion in the Pentagon ’ s budget could do more to make the world safer than doubling aid to the world ’ s poorest people .
It is not a step that should await the return of prosperity .
