The EU \ u0027s New Agenda for a Political Europe
VIENNA / BUCHAREST : One month after the European Summit at Cologne the historic contours of that meeting are becoming visible .
The Cologne summit marked a watershed not just because of a new policy declaration on security and defence .
Rather , it seems to me , this was a summit which may prefigure the transformation of the whole of the European Union 's agenda , in terms which are explicitly strategic and political .
In their " Declaration on Strengthening the Common European Policy on Security and Defence " , EU governments announced the setting up of new permanent security institutions in Brussels , including a Political-Military Committee of civil servants and a Military Committee of staff officers .
Moreover , they appeared ready to turn words into actions , with the launching of a Stability Pact for the Balkan countries , as a first step towards admitting them to membership of the European Union .
With the proposed Balkan Stability Pact , the governments have at last come close to defining the future outer limits of the European Union , to include not just the 10 countries of Central and Eastern Europe , but also eventually the countries of the west Balkans .
This is a deeply significant event , for at least four reasons .
First , the perspective of membership is being held out to the Balkan countries , not for economic reasons or because they have asked for it , but because it appears to be politically and strategically essential for the stability of Europe as a whole .
This is the first time , indeed , that the initiative for enlargement has come from the European Union rather than as a request from a candidate country .
Second , it is now no longer possible to think of the enlargement of the European Union just as a serial process which happens one case at a time .
Membership negotiations will of course continue to take place country by country , and this process will be spread over many years ; probably at least 20 .
But in planning terms , the member states must start to think , right away , of the implications of a Union of 30-35 members .
Third , the governments must start thinking , therefore , not in terms of enlargement , but in terms of the restructuring of Europe .
For it is obvious that a European Union with 30-35 members will not be the same European Union that we know today , but with 15-20 more members .
Instead , it is likely to be radically different in many important ways .
The vast disparity in political and economic development , between the most developed and the least developed countries , makes it virtually impossible that this will be a unitary Union , in which all member states implement all the same policies .
Until now , it has been a cardinal dogma of the Union that all candidates for membership must accept the " acquis communautaire " , as the inherited backlog of Community legislation is known .
Yet the dogma has been seriously eroded by the determination of Britain and Denmark to opt out of the Single Currency .
And this precedent of flexibility will inevitably be much more widespread in a mega-Union .
Indeed , it is possible that the EU may have to think in terms of different kinds of members , or perhaps of different gradations of membership .
But in any case , the EU must start thinking , right away , in terms of a Europe-wide system of integration , in which some candidates are already negotiating for membership , and others are not yet negotiating , but in which all are systematically connected to the European Union constellation .
The fourth and most important consequence of this pan-European perspective , is that the European Union will have to re-think its function and purpose .
And almost inevitably this will imply a re-thinking in political terms .
For a very large and very diverse Union can only be held together by a much more explicit enunciation of its political , strategic and even constitutional rationale .
At its beginnings in the 1950s , the declared purpose of the European Community was to prevent yet another war between France and Germany .
Has this political purpose now been finally achieved ?
Or has it instead been transformed , as the Balkan Stability Pact implies , into the larger and more general purpose of preventing any wars between states inside the European system ?
The conclusion I draw , is that it is no longer enough for Europe 's leaders to seek to make a success of the current wave of enlargement .
The urgent priority is to launch a much larger strategic debate about the medium-term implications of the creation of a mega-Europe .
It is obvious that a European Union of 35-odd member states must have a much more federal structure than the existing EU , if it is not to seize up from sheer weight of numbers .
If , therefore , the governments of the member states are serious in their professed intention to move from a limited Europe of 15 to a mega-Europe of 35-odd , they must show how they propose to recommend this transformation to their voters and their citizens .
Until now , member governments have largely evaded open debate on the pros and cons of federalism , because they were divided on the Union 's long-term destination .
But if the restructuring of Europe is to become possible , member governments will , for the first time , have to start talking seriously about an explicit re-adjustment of the political bargain in the European Union , in ways in which voters and citizens will believe that they are being compensated in political coin , for the erosion of the influence of the traditional political structures of the nation states .
This compensation could take place either through the entrenching of Union guarantees for fundamental human rights , or through the negotiation of a new constitutional settlement in Europe , or both .
But it will no longer be possible for governments to evade the question of Europe 's political destiny .
