The French Socialists ’ New European Identity
The French Socialist Party may well have just saved ratification of the European Union ’ s draft Constitutional Treaty by France in next summer ’ s referendum .
At the beginning of December , party members and supporters voted overwhelmingly in favor of the treaty .
With the popularity of President Jacques Chirac and Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin – and French rightist forces more broadly – in steep decline , a “ no ” vote could have tipped the public against ratification .
But the French Socialists ’ vote is also important for the European Left .
The French Socialist Party never had its “ aggiornamento ” or “ Bad Godesberg ” ( where the German SPD in 1959 renounced its last vestiges of Marxism ) .
Instead , the party long defended the theory of a revolutionary “ rupture ” with capitalism , never clearly acknowledging its reformist nature .
As a result , French Socialists always positioned themselves to the left of their European partners , giving a major economic role to the state following the big nationalizations that took place in 1981 after François Mitterrand was first elected president .
Later it fought against Tony Blair ’ s “ Third Way ” and Gerhard Schröder ’ s “ new center ” in the late 1990 ’ s .
The party did choose Europe over dogma in 1983 , when Mitterrand decided to remain in the European Monetary System .
But the party never debated or theorized this choice , simply accepting former Prime Minister Lionel Jospin ’ s claim that the fiscal stability and financial modernization resulting from the decision was but a “ parenthesis . ”
That December vote on the EU Constitutional Treaty closed this parenthesis : by approving of it , the Socialists consciously accepted a reformist , social democratic , European identity .
They have positioned themselves as a great power on the left , with a central position in the European Socialist Party , offering an alternative to the prescriptions of New Labour and the SPD .
This outcome did not come without a fight .
Powerful mainstream Socialists , such as former Prime Minister Laurent Fabius , joined traditional leftist minorities in the party – either rigidly euroskeptic or unrealistically euromaximalist – to rally around refusal .
This stance came as a shock from Fabius , a signatory of the Single Act of 1986 , a party leader during the Maastricht Treaty negotiations , and Finance Minister when France adopted the euro in 2001 .
Clearly , political calculations played a role : Fabius intuitively felt that the French , especially those on the left , oppose the construction of Europe in its current form , and that carrying the banner of rejection could win him the party leadership – and thus its presidential nomination in 2007 .
This reasoning proved wrong : the Socialists ’ members and voters know that there is no alternative to Europe and accepted the Treaty as a means of going further , despite its imperfections .
But limiting the significance of the “ no ” vote to mere political calculation would be a mistake , for it also reflects the importance of the “ French malaise ” about Europe .
The French perceive Europe as distant , technocratic , and often the Trojan horse of liberal globalization and deindustrialization .
These doubts are even stronger among those who consider the ideals of a social Europe insufficiently fulfilled , owing to the right ’ s political dominance : control of 18 of 25 governments , the same number of European commissioners , and a majority in the European Parliament .
Moreover , Lionel Jospin ’ s elimination from the presidential election in 2002 by the far-right Jean-Marie Le Pen is widely interpreted – wrongly in my opinion – as the result of the Socialists ’ pro-European position .
But the Socialist “ yes ” to Europe should not be confused with the “ yes ” given by the right .
French Socialists support the Constitutional Treaty as a way to strengthen political effectiveness and democratic accountability in the EU , and because it advances the cause of social progress by integrating the Charter of Fundamental Rights and defining goals such as full employment , sustainable development , anti-discrimination , and gender equality .
The Socialist “ yes ” also means support for increasing Europe ’ s standing as a global power through the creation of an EU ministry of foreign affairs .
This doesn ’ t amount to a conversion to liberal principles or a substitution of Europe for the ideals of the left and of socialism .
The treaty is but a necessary step to successful EU enlargement and further progress on Europe ’ s construction ; it is not an end in itself .
The essential task for the European Socialist Party now is to build a vision for Europe that addresses its constituencies ’ concerns and inspires their hopes .
The party cannot evade demands for a more social Europe and for solutions to weak growth and high unemployment .
The European Socialists will also have to define a more ambitious budget strategy , with higher spending for research , education , and other social investments , develop an industrial policy that transcends the simplistic logic of competitiveness , affirm a legal framework for European public services , and support greater EU-wide social and fiscal homogeneity .
There has been progress on all these issues , guided by a report entitled “ For a progressive Europe ” delivered by Pascal Lamy to the European Socialist Party ’ s leader , former Danish Prime Minister Poul Nyrup Rasmussen .
But European Socialists remain divided : German and British members oppose higher spending and fiscal homogeneity .
Clearly , the French “ yes ” did not solve everything .
Europe ’ s left must still clarify its vision of the future .
The internal debates will be heated and their conclusions difficult for some to accept .
But I am happy that the French Socialists have made a powerful statement on behalf of the Treaty .
