The Decline of the West Revisited
MADRID – Since the publication in 1918 of the first volume of Oswald Spengler ’ s The Decline of the West , prophecies about the inexorable doom of what he called the “ Faustian Civilization ” have been a recurrent topic for thinkers and public intellectuals .
The current crises in the United States and Europe – the result primarily of US capitalism ’ s inherent ethical failures , and to Europe ’ s dysfunction – might be seen as lending credibility to Spengler ’ s view of democracy ’ s inadequacy , and to his dismissal of Western civilization as essentially being driven by a corrupting lust for money .
But determinism in history has always been defeated by the unpredictable forces of human will , and , in this case , by the West ’ s extraordinary capacity for renewal , even after cataclysmic defeats .
True , the West is no longer alone in dictating the global agenda , and its values are bound to be increasingly challenged by emerging powers , but its decline is not a linear , irreversible process .
There can be no doubt that the West ’ s military mastery and economic edge have been severely diminished recently .
In 2000 , America ’ s GDP was eight times larger than China ’ s ; today it is only twice as large .
Worse , appalling income inequalities , a squeezed middle class , and evidence of widespread ethical lapses and impunity are fueling a dangerous disenchantment with democracy and a growing loss of trust in a system that has betrayed the American dream of constant progress and improvement .
This would not be , however , the first time that America ’ s values prevailed over the threat of populism in times of economic crisis .
A variation of the fascist agenda once appeared in America , with Father Charles Coughlin ’ s populist onslaught in the 1930 ’ s on Franklin Roosevelt ´ s “ alliance with the bankers . ”
Coughlin ’ s National Union for Social Justice , whose membership ran into the millions , was eventually defeated by the American system ’ s powerful democratic antibodies .
As for Europe , the eurozone crisis has exposed democracy ’ s weaknesses in dealing with major economic emergencies , as well as the flaws in the European Union ’ s design .
In Greece and Italy , technocratic governments have taken over from failing politicians .
In Hungary , Prime Minister Viktor Orbán has pressed for an authoritarian “ re-establishment of the state . ”
Such cases seem to point to the return of a European past in which democracy ’ s failures gave way to more “ expedient ” forms of government .
And yet , while Europe remains a question mark , economic growth and job creation , however fragile , are back in America .
Moreover , even if China becomes the world ’ s largest economy in , say , 2018 , Americans would still be far richer than Chinese , with per capita GDP in America four times higher than in China .
To be sure , income inequality and social injustice are a concomitant of capitalist culture throughout the West .
But challengers like China and India are in no position to preach .
Compared to Indian capitalism , capitalism ’ s ethical failures elsewhere look especially benign .
A hundred oligarchs in India hold assets equivalent to 25 % of GDP , while 800 million of their compatriots survive on less than a dollar a day .
Politicians and judges are bought , and natural resources worth trillions of dollars are sold to powerful corporations for a pittance .
Having the largest economy is vital for a power aspiring to maintain military superiority and the ability to define the international order .
Hence , the receding power of the West means a tougher fight to uphold the relevance of key components of its value system , such as democracy and universal rights .
Europe , with its almost post-historical mentality , has long abandoned the pretension of being a military power .
The same cannot be said of the US .
But , rather than reflecting a decline in its military superiority , America ’ s setbacks in Iraq and Afghanistan are the result of wrongheaded policies that sought to use hard power to solve conflicts that were simply not amenable to it .
The recent massive cuts to the US military budget need not signal decline ; they can launch an age of smarter defense , one that relies on innovative ideas , strong alliances , and building partners ’ capacity .
The shift of US military priorities to the Asia-Pacific region is an understandable strategic rebalancing , given America ’ s excessive focus on the Middle East and its maintenance of an unnecessary military presence in Europe .
Tempered by the US public ’ s fatigue with overseas adventures , America ’ s missionary zeal to save the world from the wickedness of faraway autocrats will be reduced substantially .
But this does not necessarily mean that China will automatically take over ground from which America withdraws .
Despite the recent cuts , America ’ s defense budget is still five times higher than China ’ s .
More importantly , China ’ s long-term strategy requires that it focus in the short term on satisfying its vast appetite for energy and raw materials .
Make no mistake : Euro-centrism and Western hubris have been dealt severe blows in recent years .
But , for those in the West overtaken by fatalism and self-doubt , a message of hope is now emanating from the Arab Spring , and from the resumption in Russia of the unfinished revolution that ended communism .
Nor has the inconsistency between China ’ s capitalism and its lack of civil liberties been resolved yet .
A Chinese Spring cannot be ruled out .
The West faces serious challenges – & # 160 ; as it always has .
But the values of human freedom and dignity that drive Western civilization remain the dream of the vast majority of humanity .
