Stumbling in the Dark
SAO PAULO – As well-intentioned gestures go , Earth Hour is hard to beat .
At the stroke of 8 : 30 p.m. on Saturday , March 27 , nearly a billion people in more than 120 countries demonstrated their desire to do something about global warming by switching off their lights for an hour .
In a show of official solidarity , the lights also went out at many of the planet ’ s most iconic landmarks , from the Opera House in Sydney to the Great Pyramid at Giza , not to mention Beijing ’ s Forbidden City , New York ’ s Empire State Building , London ’ s Big Ben , Paris ’ s Eiffel Tower , and the skylines of both Hong Kong and Las Vegas .
What ever else it may be , Earth Hour is surely one of the most successful publicity stunts ever dreamed up .
First organized in Sydney , Australia , in 2007 by the local chapter of the World Wildlife Fund , its popularity and the level of participation ( both individual and official ) that generates has exploded in recent years – to the point that there is barely a corner of the earth that the campaign hasn ’ t touched .
As Greg Bourne , CEO of World Wildlife Fund in Australia , put it : “ We have everyone from Casablanca to the safari camps of Namibia and Tanzania taking part . ”
But has Earth Hour actually done anything to halt – or even slow – global warming ?
Not so much .
The event ’ s popularity is not hard to fathom .
Who but the most die-hard global-warming denier could resist the notion , as Earth Hour ’ s American website phrased it this year , that merely “ by flipping off your lights on March 27 at 8 : 30 p.m. local time you will be making the switch to a cleaner , more secure nation ” ?
Needless to say , this was not quite the case .
The main thing that anyone accomplished by turning off the lights at nighttime for an hour was to make it harder to see .
The environmental impact was negligible .
Indeed , even if everyone in the world had participated the requisite hour , the result would have been the equivalent of turning off China ’ s carbon emissions for roughly 45 seconds .
Of course , this wildly optimistic calculation assumes that nobody used more power afterwards .
Recent research by two Canadian psychologists found that people who spent money on green products were , immediately afterwards , less likely to be generous and more likely to steal than those who bought non-green stuff .
Apparently doing something virtuous – like turning off the lights – makes us feel entitled to act badly afterwards .
The Earth Hour organizers acknowledged the symbolic nature of the exercise .
Turning off the lights is just a “ call to action , ” they noted .
As WWF Director-General James Leape explained , it provides “ a global platform for millions of people to voice their concern about the devastating effects of climate change . ”
Added another WWF official , “ It ’ s saying to our politicians , you can ’ t give up on climate change . ”
All well and good .
But according to Andy Ridley , Earth Hour actually has a more specific agenda than that .
In addition to being the guy who first came up with the idea for the event over drinks with friends in a Sydney pub several years ago , Ridley is also the executive director of Earth Hour Global , so he presumably speaks with some authority on the subject .
“ What we ’ re still looking for in this coming year , ” he told the Associated Press last week , “ is a global deal that encourages all countries to lower their emissions . ”
Therein lies the big problem with Earth Hour .
As much as we would like to believe otherwise , the fact is that carbon emissions won ’ t be lowered by a deal .
If that were politically possible , it would have been done a long time ago – if not at the 1992 “ Earth Summit ” in Rio de Janeiro , then in Kyoto 12 years later ; and if not in Kyoto , then in Copenhagen last December .
But it wasn ’ t .
Indeed , after nearly two decades of trying , the best climate deal that countries have been able to agree on is one that imposes no real obligations , sets no binding emissions targets , and requires no specific actions by anyone .
Surely , there is a lesson here .
Alas , the organizers of Earth Hour prefer to ignore this inconvenient reality .
But there is no getting around it .
If we are serious about wanting to solve global warming , we need to take action that actually does good – as opposed to wasting valuable resources on empty agreements and moral posturing that merely make us feel good .
Switching off our lights and promising to cut carbon emissions may make us feel momentarily virtuous , but that ’ s all it does .
A meaningful solution to global warming needs to focus on clean-energy research and development , instead of fixating on empty promises of reductions in carbon emissions .
For just 0.2 % of global GDP , or $ 100 billion a year , we could bring about the game-changing technological breakthroughs that will be required to make green energy cheap enough to fuel a carbon-free future .
So let ’ s stop stumbling around in the dark and do something meaningful for a brighter future .
