Taking On Revisionist Russia
MADRID – For some countries , military or political defeat is so intolerable , so humiliating , that they will do whatever it takes to overturn what they view as an unjust international order .
One such revisionist power was Egypt , which resolved to undo its 1967 defeat by Israel and regain the Sinai Peninsula .
This was ultimately achieved , but only after President Anwar Sadat embraced a strategy of peace by journeying to Jerusalem .
The most ominous case , however , was Germany in the 1930s , which systematically shredded the European order that had emerged after World War I.
History suggests that a revisionist power can be disciplined in two ways .
It can be opposed with equal fervor , like that which enabled Europe 's conservative powers to defeat Napoleon in 1815 and the Allies to defeat Germany in World War II .
Or it can reach the limits of its military and economic strength , as in the case of the Soviet Union at the time of its disintegration .
At that point , the country has a choice .
It can , as Germany did , opt for reconciliation with the international order .
Or it can take the route of President Vladimir Putin 's Russia , and develop a new revanchist strategy – in this case , to overturn the order that emerged from the Soviet Union 's Cold War defeat .
Though Putin is undoubtedly the main actor driving this strategy , Ukraine 's pursuit of closer ties with the European Union – a move that Europe and the United States generally welcomed – was bound to accelerate it .
Putin knew that he could take advantage of Ukraine 's ethno-religious division ( the eastern regions are overwhelmingly Russian Orthodox and loyal to the Kremlin ) to undermine these efforts .
Europe , it seems , underestimated Russia 's determination to uphold what it considers a core interest in Ukraine .
The struggle for influence in Ukraine is a game that Putin cannot afford to lose .
For the West , the principle of not redrawing borders by force is a vital political concern – indeed , it is a pillar of a civilized world order .
But both the US and Europe have made it clear that Ukraine 's sovereignty is not worth dying for , with the EU disinclined even to follow America 's lead in imposing increasingly tough sanctions .
Putin gained the upper hand early in the crisis with the annexation of Crimea .
Now , in eastern Ukraine 's Donbas region , he is shrewdly forcing a divided and risk-averse West to choose between war and accommodation .
While neither option is particularly appealing , the dangers of a war with Russia cannot be overestimated .
After all , in such a fight , both sides would possess large nuclear arsenals .
That is why , as Sir Adrian Bradshaw , NATO 's second in command , recently suggested , war can be contemplated only if Russia invades a NATO state – a step that Putin is unlikely to take , even as he ramps up his provocations , including cross-border kidnappings .
And , even then , there would be reasons for hesitation .
The Western powers ' aversion to war raises risks of its own .
Russia 's blatant disregard for the 1994 Budapest Memorandum – in which it , the US , and the United Kingdom promised that Ukraine 's territorial integrity would be respected if it surrendered its own nuclear weapons – is sending a dangerous message to nuclear states like Iran , North Korea , India , and Pakistan .
They know that if Ukraine still had its nukes , it would almost certainly still have Crimea .
Nonetheless , the West 's views about a war over Ukraine are unlikely to change .
And sanctions , despite having crippled Russia 's economy , have proved inadequate , thus far , to breaking Putin 's will .
This leaves only accommodation – which means effectively granting legitimacy to the Kremlin 's claim to authority over Ukraine and , presumably , the rest of its “ near abroad . "
In this scenario , Russia would avoid attempting to govern Ukraine directly but would insist that Ukraine refrain from joining hostile blocs and alliances .
As then President-elect Dmitri Medvedev said in 2008 “ no country would be happy about a military bloc to which it did not belong approaching its borders . "
If the West acquiesces on this critical point , Putin will be eager to end the current war , which Russia 's economy is losing badly .
But the Kremlin-driven crisis would not be over .
Indeed , Putin 's revisionist agenda extends far beyond Ukraine to include the “ Finlandization " of other nearby states , including EU members like Hungary and Romania .
If Putin 's dangerous brinkmanship is to be stopped , Western leaders will need to find a way to initiate strategic cooperation with Russia .
Specifically , they must devise a grand bargain for peace that addresses the fundamental questions relating to global security norms and arms control that have so far impeded such cooperation .
Of course , Russia is no longer a global superpower .
But it retains the vocation and characteristics of a major power : a rich culture and history , vast size , formidable nuclear capabilities , strong influence across Eurasia , and the capacity to be a spoiler in many conflicts .
Any realistic grand bargain would have to account for this .
As for Ukraine , the way forward is difficult to discern – not least because of the conflicting experiences of buffer states in the past .
Kaiser Wilhelm II invaded neutral Belgium to start WWI .
Hitler swallowed Austria and Czechoslovakia when it suited him ; but Austria 's neutrality after 1955 was enough to satisfy the Cold War 's two blocs , and now it is part of the EU .
Likewise , since 1967 , Jordan has served as an informal buffer state between Israel and the rest of the Arab world .
Any future Palestinian state would have to assume a similar position , as Israel would never accept its accession to some hostile military alliance .
The Franco-German plan for Ukraine calls for a demilitarized zone separating government and separatist forces , and granting what French President François Hollande defined as “ rather strong " autonomy to the Russian-speaking eastern regions .
In other words , it fulfills Russia 's vision of a federated Ukraine , whereby the Russian-oriented east would have a say in foreign affairs and security matters .
But such a plan cannot be counted on to curb Putin 's broader revisionist ambitions .
Only a united and determined West can do that .
