A Greek Burial for German Austerity
BERLIN – Not long ago , German politicians and journalists confidently declared that the euro crisis was over ; Germany and the European Union , they believed , had weathered the storm .
Today , we know that this was just another mistake in an ongoing crisis that has been full of them .
The latest error , as with most of the earlier ones , stemmed from wishful thinking – and , once again , it is Greece that has broken the reverie .
Even before the leftist Syriza party ’ s & nbsp ; overwhelming victory in Greece ’ s recent general election , it was obvious that , far from being over , the crisis was threatening to worsen .
Austerity – the policy of saving your way out of a demand shortfall – simply does not work .
In a shrinking economy , a country ’ s debt-to-GDP ratio rises rather than falls , and Europe ’ s recession-ridden crisis countries have now saved themselves into a depression , resulting in mass unemployment , alarming levels of poverty , and scant hope .
Warnings of a severe political backlash went unheeded .
Shadowed by Germany ’ s deep-seated inflation taboo , Chancellor Angela Merkel ’ s government stubbornly insisted that the pain of austerity was essential to economic recovery ; the EU had little choice but to go along .
Now , with Greece ’ s voters having driven out their country ’ s exhausted and corrupt elite in favor of a party that has vowed to end austerity , the backlash has arrived .
But , though Syriza ’ s victory may mark the start of the next chapter in the euro crisis , the political – and possibly existential – danger that Europe faces runs deeper .
The Swiss National Bank ’ s unexpected abandonment of the franc ’ s euro peg on January 15 , though posing no immediate financial threat , was an enormous psychological blow , one that reflected and reinforced a massive loss of confidence .
The euro , as the SNB ’ s move implied , remains as fragile as ever .
And the subsequent decision by the European Central Bank to purchase more than € 1 trillion ( $ 1.14 trillion ) in eurozone governments ’ bonds , though correct and necessary , has dimmed confidence further .
The Greek election outcome was foreseeable for more than a year .
If negotiations between the “ troika ” ( the European Commission , the ECB , and the International Monetary Fund ) and the new Greek government succeed , the result will be a face-saving compromise for both sides ; if no agreement is reached , Greece will default .
Though no one can say what a Greek default would mean for the euro , it would certainly entail risks to the currency ’ s continued existence .
Just as surely , the mega-disaster that might result from a eurozone breakup would not spare Germany .
A compromise would de facto result in a loosening of austerity , which entails significant domestic risks for Merkel ( though less than a failure of the euro would ) .
But , in view of her immense popularity at home , including within her own party , Merkel is underestimating the options at her disposal .
She could do much more , if only she trusted herself .
In the end , she may have no choice .
Given the impact of the Greek election outcome on political developments in Spain , Italy , and France , where anti-austerity sentiment is similarly running high , political pressure on the Eurogroup of eurozone finance ministers – from both the right and the left – will increase significantly .
It does not take a prophet to predict that the latest chapter of the euro crisis will leave Germany ’ s austerity policy in tatters – unless Merkel really wants to take the enormous risk of letting the euro fail .
There is no indication that she does .
So , regardless of which side – the troika or the new Greek government – moves first in the coming negotiations , Greece ’ s election has already produced an unambiguous defeat for Merkel and her austerity-based strategy for sustaining the euro .
Simultaneous debt reduction and structural reforms , we now know , will overextend any democratically elected government because they overtax its voters .
And , without growth , there will be no structural reforms , either , however necessary they may be .
That is Greece ’ s lesson for Europe .
The question now is not whether the German government will accept it , but when .
Will it take a similar debacle for Spain ’ s conservatives in that country ’ s coming election to force Merkel to come to terms with reality ?
Nothing but growth will decide the future of the euro .
Even Germany , the EU ’ s biggest economy , faces an enormous need for infrastructure investment .
If its government stopped seeing “ zero new debt ” as the Holy Grail , and instead invested in modernizing the country ’ s transport , municipal infrastructure , and digitization of households and industry , the euro – and Europe – would receive a mighty boost .
Moreover , a massive public-investment program could be financed at exceptionally low ( and , for Germany , conceivably even negative ) interest rates .
The eurozone ’ s cohesion and the success of its necessary structural reforms – and thus its very survival – now depend on whether it can overcome its growth deficit .
Germany has room for fiscal maneuver .
The message from Greece ’ s election is that Merkel should use it , before it is too late .
