The Blinders of the Left
Is it 1956 for the Left ?
Well , yes .
All over the world , the Left was thrown into confusion and crisis after Khrushchev 's 1956 speech exposing ( some of ) Stalin 's crimes .
It wasn 't only Communist Party members who were dazed by Khrushchev 's revelations ; progressives of all stripes - from trade unionists to Trotskyites - were forced , if they were honest and brave enough , to reassess long-cherished beliefs .
September 11 th has thrust those of us who consider ourselves progressives - who believe in democracy , feminism , human rights and socialism - into a 1956-type crisis .
By this I do not mean that the Islamic fundamentalists who declared war on " the infidels " ( including so many of their own people ) are Stalinists ( though the two groups certainly share some characteristics ) .
I do mean that we must , if we are honest and brave enough , reassess many of our long-cherished beliefs .
Questioning authority must now start with our own .
Are we up to that task ?
I am not at all sure that we will do better than our forebears in the 1950s ; years of self-imposed political correctness have resulted in muddled , strident and obtuse ways of approaching ( or is it avoiding ? ) the world .
I should say here that I consider this piece primarily a self-critique ; but I know , too , that though the universe of " progressives " I am addressing is not infinite , it is larger than one .
The holy grail of much Leftist thinking over the past two or three decades has been cultural relativity .
Terrified of being thought racist , imperialist , arrogant , elitist or " too Western , " we averted our eyes from ( and sometimes even supported ) barbarisms of all types .
Along with this came an odd reverence for " traditional cultures " - strange for those who fancy themselves forward-looking rationalists - at least if those cultures flourish in the so-called Third World .
For example : a student of mine defended female genital mutilation in Africa on the grounds that it is " traditional . "
True , I replied ; and so was slavery in the American south .
That 's different ! , she cried .
Ah , but it 's not .
Indeed , if Marx was writing today , he 'd be vilified for blasting the idiocy of rural life , for today every idiocy is interpreted - all evidence to the contrary - as a form of intelligence .
Then there is the opiate of the people , which has somehow metamorphosed into a self-conscious , nay dialectical , cry for national liberation .
Ah , but it 's not .
Bitter irony : this attempt to purify ourselves of racism resulted in a racist worldview .
What else can we call our willful ignorance of the agony of so many in the underdeveloped world : the torture chambers that litter virtually every Arab nation , the million " martyrs " in the lunatic Iran-Iraq war , the thousands of state executions in China , the grotesque subjugation of women ?
( The Taliban 's strictures against women make the Nuremberg Laws look almost mild , though in spirit the two sets of decrees are one . )
Our " solidarity " with the Third World has been anything but .
Yet another irony : our belief in human rights in some ways abetted this betrayal .
I often hear it said these days that human rights are inalienable - as if rights , like genes or DNA , reside " within " us from birth .
Convenient , this ; for who needs to defend , much less create , something innate ?
Rights , however , are not natural : they are artificial human constructs , the result of deliberate thought , of history , of ethical and political work .
We don 't inherit rights : we make them .
The moment we stop building institutions that embody them ( and resort to basking in feelings that sentimentalize them ) , they cease to exist .
Hannah Arendt put it well ( the year was 1951 , but it could be today ) : " No paradox of contemporary politics is filled with a more poignant irony than the discrepancy between the efforts of well-meaning idealists who stubbornly insist on regarding as ' inalienable ' those human rights , which are enjoyed only by citizens of the most prosperous and civilized countries , and the situation of the rightless themselves . . . . Equality . . . is not given us , but is the result of human organization insofar as it is guided by the principle of justice .
We are not born equal ; we become equal as members of a group on the strength of our decision to guarantee ourselves mutually equal rights . "
Starting in the 18 th century and continuing into the middle of the 20 th , the Left defined itself as the defender of knowledge , science , secularism , progress , skeptical thought and universal ( not relative ) freedoms .
All this has been horribly turned on its head ; in place of our forebears ' robust values , we substituted timid , frightened rationalizations for all sorts of voodoo ideologies and practices .
September 11 th - by which I mean not just the World Trade Center massacre , but the skein of hateful , reactionary worldviews and organizations it revealed with unmistakable force - is a clarion call .
There are times when things change , when history bends if not quite breaks .
This is that time .
Because it is , we must un-learn the wretched habit of thinking that truthfulness resides in the messenger rather than the message .
If a neo-liberal or conservative has more to tell us than a Noam Chomsky , so be it .
All morality begins in realism : our ability to see the world as it is , rather than as we want it to be , must henceforth be ( and should always have been ) the starting point of Left-leaning politics .
Are we honest and brave enough ( which in this case also means scared enough ) to shuck our romantic fantasies about the downtrodden , and our shameful rationalizations borne of guilt , bravado and indifference ?
Our lives - and certainly the kind of world , if any , that we bequeath to future generations - depend on this .
