Sweden in Crisis
STOCKHOLM – After decades of adherence to more or less stable rules and predictable patterns , Swedish politics has entered uncharted territory in recent weeks .
Many are shocked that the government collapsed and had to call a new election only two months after taking office .
After all , Sweden had been a rare beacon of success in Europe in the years since the 2008 global financial crisis .
So what happened ?
The immediate cause of the government ’ s demise was Parliament ’ s rejection of the center-left coalition ’ s proposed budget , in favor of the budget presented by the center-right Alliance parties , which formed the previous government .
Having failed to pass its first budget – owing to the abrupt decision by the far-right Swedish Democrats ( SD ) to support the Alliance alternative – the government could not simply continue as if nothing had happened .
The background to this episode was the September election , which the four-party Alliance lost after eight years in power ( during which I served as Foreign Minister ) .
The Alliance government was widely considered to have been successful ; but eight years is a long time in politics .
Fair enough .
But , though the Alliance certainly lost , the main opposition Swedish Social Democratic Party and its allies on the left did not win .
In fact , the three leftist parties in Parliament gained a slightly smaller share of the popular vote than they did in the 2010 election .
The big winner was the populist SD , which doubled its share of the vote , to more than 13 % .
And , because no other party was prepared to cooperate with the SD , the only viable alternative was a minority government .
To be sure , the Social Democrat-Green coalition , with the support of only 38 % of MPs , was bound to be an uncertain exercise .
But it could have worked , had the government not quickly veered sharply to the left , forging budget and other agreements with the ex-Communist Left party . That strategy sealed the government ’ s fate , though the end came sooner and more dramatically than expected .
But Sweden ’ s current political muddle is also rooted in longer-term changes , which to some extent reflect broader European trends .
One is the structural decline of the once-dominant Social Democrats .
For decades , any election in which the party won less than 45 % of the vote was viewed as a disaster .
Now the Social Democrats ’ popular support hovers at around 30 % , and the last two elections yielded the worst results in a century .
The other trend is the rise of the populist SD .
Until 2010 , Sweden seemed immune to the rise of far-right parties like those in Denmark , Norway , and Finland .
Since then , however , the SD has fundamentally changed the country ’ s political landscape .
Anti-immigrant sentiment is part of the story , though Swedish public opinion has become much more favorable toward immigration since the early 1990s .
For some , immigration has become a symbol of a society gone astray .
For others , the number of immigrants over the last few years has simply been too high .
In fact , the numbers are high – not in comparison with a country like Turkey , but certainly relative to other European Union countries .
Sweden and Germany receive the largest inflows of immigrants by far – and Germany is nearly ten times the size of Sweden .
Our tradition of being open to refugees is not new .
People came from the Baltic countries in the 1940s , Hungary in 1956 , Chile after the 1973 coup , and Iran after the 1979 revolution .
For decades , Swedish industry was dependent on immigrant workers .
During the Bosnian War of the 1990s , Sweden opened its doors to some 100,000 people – a challenge at any time , much less during a period of profound economic crisis .
But it still turned out well : The Bosnian immigrants have fared roughly as well as the Swedes who received them , and they have enriched our society .
In the new century , refugees have come increasingly from the Middle East and the Horn of Africa .
One percent of Sweden ’ s population today is from Iran , and almost 2 % are from Iraq .
Indeed , after the Iraq war , the small town of Södertälje took in more Iraqi refugees than the United States did .
Given the numbers , immigration in Sweden has worked much better than expected .
But there are problems .
The Swedish labor market ’ s sometimes rather strict systems and stable structures have impeded integration relative to many other countries .
And now the number of immigrants is increasing again , reflecting chronic turmoil in the Middle East and elsewhere , as well as Europe ’ s increasingly turbulent and dangerous neighborhood , largely owing to Russian revisionism and military expansion .
Sweden , already a humanitarian superpower in terms of the aid it provides to conflict regions , certainly will not close its doors .
But other European countries will have to bear more of the burden , and the authorities will have to do more to facilitate integration .
In particular , the pace of job creation achieved in the last few years must be maintained .
For all of its economic success during the past two decades , not least since the 2008 crisis , industry is hollowing out , and structural issues are beginning to be felt .
Our celebrated welfare state will come under strain from an aging population .
Indeed , in this respect , immigration is more a part of the solution than a part of the problem .
There is no guarantee that the election in March will resolve Sweden ’ s political crisis , particularly if the SD performs well again .
A German-style grand coalition has never been tested in Sweden ; and Austria ’ s experience suggests that it could play into the extremists ’ hands .
But a more cooperative atmosphere might well be needed .
In that case , the key question will be whether the Social Democrats can ditch their allies further to the left .
