The Blair Option in Palestine
The release of an abducted BBC journalist in Gaza is being seen by some as an attempt by Hamas ( which denies any part in the kidnapping ) to curry favor with Tony Blair , who on stepping down as Britain ’ s prime minister was appointed international envoy to Israel and Palestine .
Blair has the thankless task of helping the Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas build institutions for a viable state , following Hamas ’ military takeover of Gaza .
Given the stakes , this is a task worth doing despite the high risk of failure .
But unless Blair gets a lot of unexpected support , failure is what will happen .
Four basic facts govern Blair ’ s role :
No peace is possible unless the Palestinian government becomes master in its own house ;
Nothing is possible if Gaza remains a virtual charnel house ;
Abbas cannot succeed and Hamas cannot be politically weakened unless there is massive external economic assistance ;
It is imperative to limit the damage caused by the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to everything else that has to be done in the Middle East .
Blair isn ’ t the first statesman to try helping the Palestinians .
James D. Wolfensohn , former head of the World Bank , tried earlier in Bush ’ s term .
Wolfensohn made some progress , but it was not enough , especially when the United States , Israel , and the European Union chose to starve the Palestinians financially after Hamas won its unexpected victory in the January 2006 Palestinian elections .
Wolfensohn quit in frustration .
Blair is the most senior out-of-power statesman ever to get engaged in the Arab-Israeli conflict .
He cannot be dismissed as a functionary with no political base .
His role has been blessed both by Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert .
He has a long history of engagement in Arab-Israeli issues , and for years pressed for effective outside efforts to move the Palestine problem toward resolution .
At the same time , Blair won ’ t just take orders from the US .
That would be the kiss of death , following Blair ’ s controversial mimicking of US policy in Iraq .
Instead , at least on paper , Blair will work for the so-called Quartet , which also includes the EU , the United Nations , and Russia .
Also , his formal role is limited to helping the Palestinians sort out their economic and political affairs , not trying to negotiate a peace settlement – a task reserved for US Secretary of State , Condoleezza Rice .
But Blair ’ s high political profile means that what he does can ’ t be divorced from the broader politics or quietly played down if things don ’ t go well .
At the least , Blair must press for a radical increase in funds provided by the outside world to the Palestinian government as well as to the 1.4 million Palestinians trapped in Hamas-run Gaza .
So far America has pledged $ 40 million in humanitarian funds for Gaza ( just $ 30 a person ) , and about $ 86 million in security training money for the West Bank .
These sums will be added to Palestinian tax receipts that Israel collected but refused to hand to over to a government that included Hamas ; Israel is now releasing about half of the approximately $ 700 million .
But total funds pledged by all sources are only a small fraction of what is urgently needed .
If Abbas is to compete with Hamas and its well-developed social-welfare structure and to avert human catastrophe in Gaza , he needs billions rather than millions of dollars in aid .
Along with a major increase in US funds , the EU needs to increase its aid dramatically .
But if outside money is to flow , Blair must get the Palestinian government to rein in its rampant corruption .
All this requires clear thinking .
At the RAND Corporation , for example , a team of researchers has laid out a comprehensive approach to building a successful Palestinian state , covering governance , security , education , health , water , investment – as well as long-term economic relations with Israel and the outside world .
RAND ’ s practical ideas have drawn praise from some Palestinian as well as Israeli leaders , precisely because they are about people more than about politics .
But even if Blair can get the economic development issues right , he can ’ t stop there if Abbas is to have a chance to succeed .
Blair will need to gain Israel ’ s assurances that life for Palestinians , both in the West Bank and in Gaza , will become better .
That includes greater freedom of movement , both within the West Bank and between it and Gaza .
Blair will also likely press Israel to prove its intentions by stopping all settlement activity in the West Bank – no new settlements , no expansion of existing ones .
By the same token , Blair will need to press the Palestinians to deliver a virtual cessation of attacks on Israel from Palestinian territories , including by Hamas , lest all peace efforts be blown apart by renewed fighting .
As always , such a cessation would be at the mercy of extremists competing for power or bent on making peace impossible .
In the process , Blair will have to talk to all parties , including Hamas – an Israeli and US sticking-point .
These are all needs to be met even before the US can try again to broker a political settlement between Israel and the Palestinians .
In the end , the obstacles may cause the “ Blair option ” to fall short .
But everyone committed to a positive outcome for Israel , Palestine , and the Middle East should wish Blair good luck .
