The Lebanon War One Year Later
LONDON - It is now almost one year since the European Union committed to stabilize Lebanon following last summer ’ s war .
With its decision to send thousands of soldiers to Lebanon to implement United Nations Security Council Resolution 1701 , the EU took its boldest step yet in creating a common foreign and security policy .
But it remains an open question as to whether the EU will actually be able to stabilize the most fractured polity in the most dangerous area of conflict in Europe ’ s immediate neighborhood .
The Israel-Hezbollah war of 2006 reminded the Union , once again , that its strategic interests do not always coincide perfectly with those of the United States .
Because the Bush administration took a “ hands off ” approach to the Israel-Hezbollah war in south Lebanon , and given the military straitjacket the US finds itself in because of the Iraq war , the EU had to take the lead .
The EU remains – for now – relatively uncontaminated by America ’ s disintegrating reputation in the Middle East .
But the Union could see its reputation worsen if it allows its commitment to Lebanon to become part of the emerging US strategy of isolating Iran by hardening today ’ s regional Sunni-Shia divisions .
To avoid this fate , the EU ’ s commitment in Lebanon needs to be supplemented with a nuanced political strategy that seeks to avoid isolating Lebanon ’ s long suppressed Shia population .
The threats emanating from the Middle East are diverse : regional conflicts , totalitarian religious ideologies ( mainly led by Shia Iran and Wahhabi Saudi Arabia ) , terrorism , nuclear armament programs , obstacles to modernization , and unstable regimes .
All of these affect Lebanon , and are aggravated by the country ’ s own peculiar socio-political dynamics – i.e. , its Maronite , Sunni , and Shia divisions .
The EU ’ s mission in Lebanon is risky .
Neither Hezbollah nor Syria , let alone Iran , has an interest in stability without some say in creating it .
Resolution 1701 presupposes – in addition to separating the combatants – enforcement of the internal and external sovereignty of Lebanon ’ s elected government , without saying how this is to be accomplished given Hezbollah ’ s superior military power relative to the government ’ s forces .
In effect , the resolution envisaged reversing Hezbollah ’ s gains and ignores the deep changes that have occurred in Lebanese society , most importantly the Shia community ’ s growing self-confidence .
Attempting to politically isolate and disarm Hezbollah is a task that the EU-led UN force cannot accomplish and should not attempt , for it would mean war , with Syria and Iran in the background .
But were the EU to resign itself to mere observer status in Lebanon , the UN and Europe would lose all credibility .
An armed peace has held for a year . But an armed peace never lasts .
The mission must therefore walk a fine line to bridge the country ’ s communal divisions , which will be possible only with a clear understanding of Lebanon and the wider Middle East .
The road toward peace rather than ceasefire in Lebanon precludes the EU ’ s participation in America ’ s emerging “ containment ” strategy vis-à-vis Iran , at least in its current form , which is based on organizing the resistance of Sunni states to Shia influence .
For the Shia are the biggest of Lebanon ’ s three religious communities .
They also form a majority in some Gulf states , as well as in the oil-rich regions of Saudi Arabia .
So a neat Shia-Sunni dividing line cannot be drawn .
Europe should instead push for new constitutional and institutional solutions that ensure the Shia a legitimate role in the political arrangements of Lebanon , Saudi Arabia , and the Gulf states – all places where they now regard themselves as third-class citizens .
Giving the Shia a real stake in the nations in which they live is the only way to satisfy the craving for empowerment that they feel after so many years of suppression .
Europe must also recognize why leaders like Hezbollah ’ s Sheikh Hasan Nasrullah are popular .
Anti-Americanism and an aggressive foreign policy are , of course , part of the allure of men like Nasrullah .
But what has really allowed Hezbollah ( and Hamas , for that matter ) to win elections and cement support is their ability to provide education , health , and other social services , particularly to the poor .
The US and the political groups that it tends to support in the region , by contrast , offer very little in this regard .
The Bush administration stresses democracy and human rights , which is a good agenda as far as it goes .
But it is an agenda for the region ’ s “ haves , ” not its “ have nots . ”
In places like south Lebanon , which suffer from deep social cleavages and inequalities , free elections and free trade hold little resonance for people who are impoverished and marginalized .
If the EU mission is to compete successfully against Lebanon ’ s Islamists and populists , it must start thinking seriously about a social agenda that appeals to the poor .
Of course , no one wants to break budgets or create dependency .
But healing Lebanon ’ s wounds requires finding the means to offer alienated Shia what they want and need most , and not what outsiders think they should want or need .
