China ’ s Asia ?
CLAREMONT – Distinguishing diplomatic rhetoric from official policy is never easy .
But it is especially difficult in China , where the government ’ s actions so often fail to match its statements .
Given this , it is worth asking whether the latest slogan adopted by Chinese officials – “ Asia for Asians ” – is merely nationalist posturing for domestic consumption or a signal of a genuine policy shift .
The most authoritative reference to an “ Asia for Asians ” occurred in May , during Chinese President Xi Jinping ’ s keynote speech at the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia .
In a carefully crafted statement , Xi laid out China ’ s vision for a new regional security order – one in which , as the slogan suggests , Asians are in charge .
According to Xi , at the fundamental level , “ it is for the people of Asia to run the affairs of Asia , solve the problems of Asia , and uphold the security of Asia . ”
Fortunately , he declared , they have the “ capability and wisdom ” to build peace and security in the region through cooperation .
This vision , of course , entails an overhaul of the Asian security structure , with a drastically reduced role for the United States .
Indeed , Xi implicitly criticized the existing US-dominated security architecture in Asia as stuck in the Cold War , and characterized “ military alliance targeted at a third party ” as “ not conducive to maintaining common security . ”
Since the speech , lower-level officials and the Chinese media have reiterated similar lines .
At first glance , this vision seems entirely reasonable ; after all , most countries prefer to manage domestic and regional affairs without the meddling of outside powers .
But Xi ’ s statement marked a significant departure from China ’ s long-standing position on America ’ s presence in the Asia-Pacific region .
Since the US-China rapprochement four decades ago , China has maintained a studied ambiguity regarding America ’ s role as the guarantor of Asia ’ s security .
China ’ s pragmatic leaders knew that the US presence helped to contain the Soviet Union ( and subsequently Russia ) , prevented Japan from re-arming , and kept sea-lanes open .
They also recognized that they lacked the power to challenge the US-led security order or offer a feasible alternative .
This may be changing .
Though some analysts remain convinced that Xi ’ s “ Asia for Asians ” line is an empty attempt to bolster his nationalist credentials , an equally strong case can be made that it signifies a genuine policy shift .
While the argument is not overwhelming , it should not be dismissed out of hand .
The most conclusive evidence of Xi ’ s readiness to challenge the established order lies in the economic sphere .
Most notably , China has established new development institutions , the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the new Silk Road Fund , to which it will channel tens of billions of dollars – clear challenges to the established Western-dominated multilateral institutions .
On the security front , however , China has made much less headway in turning its “ Asia for Asians ” vision into reality .
To be sure , it has acquired some military capabilities to deter the US from intervening in the Taiwan Strait or the South China Sea , and it has improved its security cooperation with Russia and Central Asian countries through the Shanghai Cooperation Organization .
But such modest gains are more than offset by the security setbacks that China has suffered as a result of its assertiveness in regional territorial disputes .
Indeed , after many months of increasingly forceful military moves – most notably , the unilateral declaration of an air-defense identification zone covering a large swath of the South China Sea , including disputed territories – China ’ s ties with Japan reached an all-time low .
And concerned Southeast Asian countries have been entreating the US to remain in the region as a counterweight to China .
Underlying the “ Asia for Asians ” trope may be China ’ s belief that the US , not its own behavior , is to blame for its neighbors ’ defiance .
Some Chinese strategists believe that the US is using Asian states , particularly Japan , Vietnam , and the Philippines , as pawns to contain China .
If this perspective has prevailed in the internal policy debate , Chinese leaders , including Xi , could have reached the fateful conclusion that , on balance , America ’ s security presence in Asia directly threatens Chinese interests and must be eliminated .
That would be a grave strategic error , based on a fundamental misreading of Asian security dynamics .
Most of China ’ s neighbors , even North Korea , fear an unconstrained Chinese hegemon – and , if the US security presence were eliminated , that is precisely what they would face .
“ Asia for Asians ” would be “ Asia for the Chinese . ”
It is difficult to imagine that Chinese policymakers , known for their sophistication and realism , could be pursuing a strategy that is not only unlikely to gain support from fellow Asians , but also is guaranteed to spark conflict with the US .
Given this , it is likely – indeed , desirable – that “ Asia for Asians ” will remain a mere slogan .
In fact , Xi has lately toned down his description of China ’ s aims , recently telling Communist Party leaders that , “ We should increase China ’ s soft power , give a good Chinese narrative , and better communicate China ’ s message to the world . ”
But , even as rhetoric , the phrase “ Asia for Asians ” is problematic for historical reasons .
In the 1930s , Japanese militarists used the idea of an “ East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere ” as a cover for their imperial ambitions and conquests .
The slogan was widely ridiculed , particularly in China , for its transparent absurdity .
This may help to explain the lukewarm reception that the concept of “ Asia for Asians ” has received this time around .
The smartest thing for Chinese leaders to do would be to drop it , once and for all .
