The China Debate
CAMBRIDGE : The growls between China and Taiwan have grabbed the world 's attention recently , but China 's economy is poised to retake center stage .
World Bank chief economist , Joseph Stiglitz has called on China to pursue a beggar-thy-neighbor strategy , never mind that China is a trade surplus country , has large reserves , little debt , and grows at more than 7 % .
Is Mr. Stiglitz 's devaluation the answer to China 's current troubles and is it a good idea for the world economy ?
No .
Large countries cannot expect to recover economically at the expense of the rest of the world ; they need to find ways to boost their own domestic demand .
Budget deficits and printing money , effective in the short run , provide only limited answers .
Tung Tsu in the Art of War instructs commanders : " When encircled in deep ground , break out ! "
Good advice for China 's leadership today .
With its huge state enterprise sector and pervasive restrictions on just about anything , China has only one option : radical transformation of its economy .
Chinese devaluation rumors abound and the most common view is that sometime next year one is inevitable .
Of course , this won 't take place before the 50th anniversary of Mao 's revolution this October , but expect it soon afterwards .
The continuing focus is the lack of growth in China -- it has fallen to " only " 7.1 % -- along with deflation , the lack of confidence on the part of households who will feel the impact of the formidable restructuring problems in state enterprises , and the loss of international competitiveness .
If big budget deficits don 't do enough to get growth back to where China 's leaders want it , and monetary policy will not do the trick , why not try devaluation ?
China 's current account surplus and export growth have , indeed , fallen .
In part that reflects an aggressive export strategy in Asia 's other economies where the collapse of domestic demand brought about export dumping over and above what comes from increased competitiveness .
But competitiveness is an issue , too .
All of Asia 's economies that suffered in the recent crisis , including Japan , have seen a fall in their dollar price level .
For Japan this is insignificant .
But for the other economies the decline in price levels ranges from 15-25 % , and to nearly 50 % in Indonesia .
Moreover , inflation rates are not high and hence will not rapidly eliminate this real depreciation .
Since 1998 , with the rebound of Asian currencies and the strong Yen , there has been a significant improvement in China 's competitiveness .
This , however , has not been enough to return to 1997 or 1996 growth levels .
A rough number for the loss in China 's competitiveness in Asia is 10 to 15 % -- by no means negligible , but not devastating either .
Accordingly , the numbers don 't get us much further than recognizing that there is a problem , that devaluation is the traditional medicine and the question of whether and when it will happen .
Even if there is some loss of Chinese competitiveness , devaluation is not the answer .
Urging large surplus , low debt countries to devalue is an invitation for beggar-thy-neighbor policies 1930s style , for a Chinese devaluation would trigger an outburst of devaluation across Asia , or at the very least the expectation of one .
Asset prices would drop everywhere , including in Japan , and growth would fall .
An already far too high dollar would be pushed even higher as Asia seeks to resolve its employment problems by ever-larger trade surpluses .
Emerging market lending would once again get hit .
China 's accession to the WTO would become even more troubled , as protectionists everywhere get hit by another cheap-Asia wave .
Clearly , this is not a good direction to go .
China has been right to use monetary and fiscal policy to stimulate growth .
As a temporary strategy , this cushions the impact on demand of a more difficult external environment .
Exchange controls , after all , are most useful when you want to cut interest rates dramatically ?
Low debts are most useful for those who want to run temporary budget deficits .
Yet these are temporary remedies that cushion the unfavorable external and domestic environment , they go no further than that .
Something more needs to happen .
China 's problems won 't be resolved by a devaluation of 20 % or even 40 % .
Much of the trouble is not the loss in competitiveness from the recent devaluation of other Asian economies .
China is stuck in a much more fundamental way , stuck between inefficient statism and free enterprise .
China needs to make major moves in the way it organizes economic activity .
A vast number of people can be employed if only the government stops protecting State enterprises by restrictions on production and internal trade .
China needs to decentralize by opening up the production system to private initiative .
Self-employment as well small and medium sized businesses have to be the way out .
Aggressive lending from a cleaned up banking system with a new credit culture based on picking winners will supplement that strategy , as will business friendly taxation .
Now is a time for radical moves .
Opening up China to a major joint enterprise , foreign direct investment , or privatization drive provides a one-time bonus to prosperity over and beyond the supply side effects .
The proceeds can be divided equally between workers , local authorities , a general tax cut and the central government .
In a short time , money and self-interested initiative would create a boom in employment and activity because China has an immensely entrepreneurial culture .
China 's mistake has been excessive attachment to existing economic structures which have turned deeply counterproductive and need to be dismantled very fast before the loss in the population 's confidence pushes the economy much deeper under water .
Anyone who believes devaluation is an answer to China 's problems misses the point .
If China 's leaders look to devaluation , they will add to their headaches and put Asia at risk .
