The East Asian Triangle
Once again , North Korea ’ s pursuit of nuclear weapons is threatening Asia ’ s stability .
Japan ’ s new prime minister , Shinzo Abe , hastily arranged a summit in China with President Hu Jintao on the eve of North Korea ’ s nuclear test , a meeting that saw both men agree that such a move was “ intolerable . ”
The meeting is a welcome development .
But Abe comes into office with a reputation as a stronger nationalist than his predecessor , Junichiro Koizumi , whose insistence on visiting the controversial Yasukuni Shrine ( where Class A war criminals from World War II are buried ) helped sour relations with China .
For stability to be preserved , Sino-Japanese relations must improve .
Although North Korea ’ s nuclear ambitions are worrying and destabilizing , China ’ s rise is the key strategic issue in East Asia .
For three decades , its economy has grown by 8 % to 10 % annually .
Its defense expenditures have an even faster pace .
Yet Chinese leaders speak of China ’ s “ peaceful rise ” and “ peaceful development . ”
Some believe that China cannot rise peacefully , and will seek hegemony in East Asia , leading to conflict with the United States and Japan .
Others point out that China has engaged in “ good neighbor ” policies since the 1990 ’ s , settled border disputes , played a greater role in international institutions , and recognized the benefits of using soft power .
A decade ago , I oversaw preparation of the US Pentagon ’ s East Asian Strategy Report , which has guided American policy under the Clinton and Bush administrations .
Back then , there was a debate between those who wanted to contain China ’ s growing strength increased and those who urged China ’ s integration into the international system .
Containment was unfeasible , because , unlike the Soviet Union during the Cold War , China ’ s neighbors did not see it as a clear and present danger .
Moreover , treating China as an enemy would ensure that it became one , thus unnecessarily ignoring the possibility of benign outcomes .
The strategy we chose was to “ balance and integrate . ”
The East Asian balance of power rested on the triangle of China , Japan , and the US .
By reaffirming the US-Japan security relationship in the Clinton-Hashimoto declaration of 1996 , the US helped structure a favorable regional balance .
By simultaneously encouraging China ’ s entry into the World Trade Organization and other institutions , we created incentives for good behavior .
So integration was hedged by realism in case things went wrong .
That strategy has largely worked .
China ’ s military power has increased , but its behavior has been more moderate than it was a decade ago .
China is a long way from posing the kind of challenge to American preponderance that the Kaiser ’ s Germany posed when it surpassed Britain at the beginning of the twentieth century .
The key to military power in today ’ s information age depends on the ability to integrate complex systems of space-based surveillance , high speed computers , and “ smart ” weapons .
It is not likely that China ( or others ) will soon close that gap with the US .
Of course , the fact that China is unlikely to compete with the US on a global basis does not mean that it could not challenge the US in East Asia , or that war over Taiwan is not possible .
If Taiwan were to declare independence , it is likely that China would use force , regardless of the perceived economic or military costs .
But it would be unlikely to win such a war , and prudent policy on all sides can make such a war unlikely .
So what is the strategic problem today ?
Stability in East Asia depends upon good relations between all three sides of the US-China-Japan triangle , but ties between China and Japan deteriorated in the Koizumi years .
China permitted demonstrations , sometimes violent , against Japanese consulates in protest of changes in Japanese textbooks that softened descriptions of Japan ’ s invasion in the 1930 ’ s .
After 22 million Chinese signed a petition against Japanese membership of the United Nations Security Council , Premier Wen Jiabao announced China ’ s opposition to such a step .
China also objected to Japanese statements about Taiwan .
And there are territorial disputes about small islands and potential gas reserves near the China-Japan maritime boundary .
The most contentious issue , however , has been prime ministerial visits to the Yasukuni Shrine , and , until Abe ’ s visit , China had been reluctant to engage in any summit meetings with Japan so long as such visits continue .
Although China has become Japan ’ s largest partner in trade and foreign direct investment , nationalists in the two countries have fueled each other ’ s extremism , while their governments play with fire .
American interests rest on regional stability and continued growth in trade and investment .
So President George W. Bush could quietly tell Abe that we welcome good relations between Japan and China , and that prime ministerial visits to the Yasukuni Shrine undercut Japan ’ s own interests in East Asia .
It reminds Asians of the repulsive Japan of the 1930 ’ s rather than the attractive Japan of today .
At the same time , the US can be cautious about involving Japan in Taiwan issues – a neuralgic point for China – while encouraging the development of Asian institutions that increase contacts and dampen conflict .
This can include the development of the East Asian Summit , revival of the Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation ( APEC ) , and the evolution of the current six-party talks on North Korea into a permanent Northeast Asia Security Dialogue .
Fortunately , there are signs that both China and Japan are seeking to back away from the impasse of recent years .
While Abe has maintained his position on Yasukuni , his summit with Chinese President Hu Jintao was a promising step forward .
Some Chinese analysts , for their part , recognize the danger in stimulating too much nationalism toward Japan .
The US should quietly try to nudge these steps forward .
The US-Japan alliance remains crucial to stability in East Asia , but it takes three sides to make a triangle .
