A New Peace Paradigm
TEL AVIV – The collapse of yet another attempt by the United States to broker an Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement should do more than provoke finger-pointing .
It should spur a fundamental reconsideration of a paradigm of peacemaking – direct bilateral negotiations , under US guidance – that lost its relevance long ago .
While the US remains an indispensable global actor , it is no longer willing to use coercive diplomacy in its quest to build a new order .
But it is not just a matter of willingness ; the US has lost its ability to intimidate other countries , even allies and clients like Israel and the Palestinian Authority .
In the Middle East alone , the US has overstretched its capabilities in two controversial wars ; repeatedly failed to broker a peace between Israel and Palestine ; estranged key regional powers ; and performed disappointingly on issues like Iran ’ s nuclear program and Syria ’ s civil war .
All of this has diminished its capacity to shape the region ’ s future .
The problem is not limited to the Middle East .
Despite its professed strategic pivot toward Asia , US President Barack Obama ’ s administration has done little to address China ’ s increasingly assertive efforts to stake its territorial claims in the South and East China Seas or North Korea ’ s affronts to the status quo on the Korean Peninsula .
Add to that America ’ s weak response to Russia ’ s annexation of Crimea , and it is no wonder that Israeli and Palestinian leaders have dismissed its peace overtures .
US Secretary of State John Kerry , in his bid for an Israeli-Palestinian settlement , operated as if conflict resolution could be achieved through non-coercive solutions , deriving from the good will of the relevant parties .
According to this plainly naive approach , the negotiation process operates according to its own embedded logic , independent of considerations of power , coercion , and leverage .
But treating force and diplomacy as distinct phases of foreign policy gives the negotiating parties the sense that American power lacks purpose and resolve .
Diplomatic ripening sometimes requires the mediator to be a manipulator and an arm-twister .
Indeed , America ’ s only successful attempts at peace diplomacy in the Middle East involved a masterly combination of power , manipulation , and pressure .
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger used it to lead Israel toward groundbreaking interim settlements with Egypt and Syria following the 1973 Yom Kippur War .
President Jimmy Carter used it to conclude the 1978 Camp David Accords , establishing diplomatic relations between Egypt and Israel .
And Secretary of State James Baker used it to overcome the recalcitrance of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir during the 1991 Madrid Peace Conference .
If the US cannot provide this today , it must relinquish its monopoly on international conflict resolution .
It is time for the US to recognize that it cannot resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict , defuse the Iranian nuclear dispute , change North Korea ’ s behavior , or stop the Syrian civil war on its own .
Over the last two decades , the world grew accustomed to US-led international coalitions for war in the Middle East .
America should now try to form a different kind of coalition – one aimed at achieving peace .
Such an alliance would entail a larger role for the other three members of the so-called “ Middle East Quartet ” – the European Union , Russia , and the United Nations – and key Arab countries .
Within this new peace paradigm , the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would become amenable to a truly international solution .
If Iran ’ s nuclear program demands negotiations with the five permanent members of the UN Security Council , plus Germany , and North Korea ’ s requires the so-called “ six-party talks , ” why should the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict be left exclusively to the US ?
As if the Israeli-Palestinian conflict ’ s depth and duration were not enough to merit an international solution , there is also the issue of Palestine ’ s mistrust of the US .
For Palestinians , the US – a staunch ally of Israel whose leaders have strong domestic political incentives not to challenge it – cannot act as an honest broker in negotiations .
Under a truly international paradigm , the principles underlying a peace deal – two states along the 1967 border ( with territorial swaps to accommodate Israel ’ s settlement blocs ) , two capitals in Jerusalem , an agreed solution to the refugee problem , and robust security arrangements – could be enshrined in a Security Council resolution .
After establishing the terms of a fair deal , the international alliance – under US leadership – could devise an implementation strategy .
Such an international approach would also require a broader peace process , aimed at achieving a regional settlement between Israel and its Arab neighbors .
This is critical , because the future Palestinian state could not offer Israel much security .
Even now , Palestine is a relatively minor security challenge for Israel ; the more formidable threats , which have compelled Israel to build up its military considerably , come from the Arab states that surround it .
The promise of a regional settlement that offers Israel the needed security guarantee – not to mention a considerable boost to its international standing – would make the painful concessions , including compromises on borders and Jerusalem , which are critical to the creation of a Palestinian state , more digestible for Israeli leaders .
The initiators of the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative understood this ; perhaps now the US will come to appreciate it as well .
