Asia ’ s Middle Eastern Shadow
TEL AVIV – In 2010 , then-US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced America ’ s eastward shift in global strategy .
The United States ’ “ pivot ” to the Asia-Pacific region was required not only because of the security threats posed by the rise of China , but also as a consequence of America ’ s long and costly obsession with the Middle East .
The Middle East has long confronted the US with formidable challenges , which ultimately exceeded America ’ s imperial capacities and sapped public support .
But the real question now is whether America is still able and willing to uphold its global pretensions .
After all , Asia is no less a demanding theater than the Middle East .
Indeed , dealing with it might require reconciling the pivot to Asia with an ongoing presence in the Middle East , if only because the two regions have much in common .
For starters , in a region replete with territorial disputes and old rivalries that are as bitter as the Arab-Israeli conflict , America faces a geopolitical environment with no security architecture and no agreed conflict-resolution mechanism .
The division of the Korean Peninsula , the India-Pakistan conflict over Kashmir , and the question of Taiwan ( which by 2020 the US will no longer be able to defend from a Chinese attack , according to a 2009 study by the RAND Corporation ) appear as intractable as the Israeli-Palestinian dispute .
Moreover , like the Middle East , Asia is home to an uncontrolled arms race that includes both conventional capabilities and weapons of mass destruction .
Four of the world ’ s ten largest militaries are in Asia , and five Asian countries are full-fledged nuclear powers .
Nor does the Middle East have a monopoly on Islamist extremism , ethnic tension , or terrorism .
China ’ s restive Muslim Uighurs , the Hindu-Muslim conflict in India , the ethnic cleansing of the Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar , the secessionist Muslim insurgency in the Philippines , and the ethnic separatist insurgency in southern Thailand all highlight Asia ’ s complex tapestry of unresolved religious and ethnic trouble spots .
Moreover , America ’ s Asian pivot is occurring at a time when its international credibility has been badly eroded by domestic political dysfunction and disappointing performance in the Middle East .
This , for example , explains Japan ’ s fear that the US might eventually reach an accommodation with China over the disputed Senkaku Islands ( Diaoyu Islands in Chinese ) .
Indeed , Japan ’ s quest to re-establish its own military capability is a vote of limited confidence in its US ally .
Obama ’ s recent wavering on the use of force in Syria has left many in Asia doubting whether they can rely on America not only if China forcibly asserts its maritime claims , but also if North Korea carries out its threats to attack the South .
Conspicuously , South Korean President Park Geun-hye ’ s “ Trustpolitik ” – a soft-power approach to North Korea that calls for deeper cooperation with China , the North ’ s most important ally – is particularly popular .
As in the Middle East , America ’ s bilateral military relationships in Asia are often with “ frenemies , ” countries that share an alliance with the US while deeply mistrusting one another .
US Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel ’ s agreement in early October with his South Korean counterpart on a Tailored Deterrence strategy became untenable a few days later , when the US promised Japan a massive upgrading of its military capabilities .
South Korea views this as tantamount to outsourcing China ’ s containment to an unrepentant imperial power .
In any case , an American withdrawal from the Middle East is hardly a recipe for countering China ’ s rise in East Asia , given that the two regions are increasingly intertwined .
While the US is pivoting to the East , leaving old allies like Saudi Arabia and Egypt deeply resentful , China is pivoting westward .
China ’ s exports to the Middle East are already more than twice those of the US .
Its annual exports to Turkey total $ 23 billion , and now include military supplies , such as a missile-defense system that is not compatible with those of Turkey ’ s NATO allies .
If China ’ s penetration into the Middle East persists at the current pace , it might even be able to obstruct the flow of energy resources to America ’ s Asian allies .
In a global competition , a superpower ’ s competitors are bound to exploit its weaknesses .
The 2008 financial crisis , which destroyed the mystique of Western economic prowess , led to a marked a shift in China ’ s global strategy .
The Chinese began toying with the idea of abandoning their “ peaceful rise ” in favor of what then-President Hu Jintao defined at a July 2009 conference of Chinese diplomats as “ the democratization of international relations ” and “ global multipolarity . ”
The US , as hegemon in the Middle East for many years , could not solve any of the region ’ s major problems single-handedly .
If its pivot to Asia is to be credible , the US will eventually have to agree to be one among a number of great powers in Asia , a co-equal partner with China , Japan , and India in shaping the region ’ s strategic environment .
