The Elephant ’ s Choices
New Delhi – A month after they first queued to vote in India ’ s mammoth general election , the country ’ s voters will learn the outcome on May 16 .
The election , staggered over five phases – involving five polling days over four weeks , rather than one “ election day ” – will determine who rules the world ’ s largest democracy .
Only one thing is certain : no single party will win a majority on its own .
India is set for more coalition rule .
That may not be a bad thing .
India ’ s last two governments each served a full term and presided over significant economic growth , even though they comprised 23 and 20 parties , respectively .
Coalition politics gives representation to the myriad interests that make up a diverse and complex society , and ensures that the country as a whole accepts the policies ultimately adopted .
But coalition rule can also often mean governance of the lowest common denominator , as resistance by any of the government ’ s significant members to a policy can delay or even thwart it .
In India ’ s parliamentary system , if a coalition loses its majority , the government falls , and keeping allies together can sometimes prove a greater priority than getting things done .
India ’ s national elections are really an aggregate of thirty different state elections , each influenced by its own local considerations , regional political currents , and different patterns of political incumbency .
Soon after May 16 , the largest single party that emerges will seek to construct a coalition out of a diverse array of victors from the various states .
Several outcomes are possible .
The most likely is that Prime Minister Manmohan Singh ’ s Indian National Congress , currently leading the government , emerges once again as the largest single party and assembles a new ruling coalition .
The main alternative would be majority alliance put together by the Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) , led by the 82-year-old Lal Krishna Advani .
But there is a third possibility : a motley collection of regional parties , together with the Communists , gets enough seats to prevent either of the two big parties from forming a government .
In that case , a “ hung parliament ” could see a “ third front ” coming to power as a minority government , supported tactically by one of the big parties .
This has happened before – and each time , the government that resulted fell within a year .
Each alternative could have serious implications for India .
Though the big parties are broadly committed to continuing an economic policy of liberalization and growth , the BJP is mostly focused on the well-being of India ’ s merchant class , whereas Congress wishes to redistribute enhanced government revenues to the poor through generous social programs .
The left , which would strongly influence any “ third front ” government , are staunchly opposed to economic liberalization and wish to strengthen , rather than dilute , India ’ s large public sector .
In foreign policy , India ’ s growing closeness with the United States under both the BJP and the Congress has proved controversial at home , with leftist parties threatening to scrap the Indo-US nuclear deal and break defense ties with Israel if they come to power .
Should the regional parties dominate the government , domestic politics would strongly impact India ’ s foreign policy : the anger of Tamil voters over events in Sri Lanka , or of Muslims over Gaza , would be reflected in the government and therefore constrain policy options .
The BJP has promised a more hawkish security posture than Congress in the wake of the Mumbai terrorist attacks , but when it was in power it conducted itself remarkably similarly to its rival , initiating a peace process with Pakistan .
The biggest differences among the various groupings consist in the tone and tenor of their respective visions of India .
Congress remains a “ big tent ” party , committed to preserving India ’ s pluralism and conscious of the multiple identities and interests of India ’ s many peoples .
The BJP , which accuses Congress of “ appeasing ” India ’ s minorities , hews to a staunchly Hindu-chauvinist line , and has received support from some of the most bigoted and intolerant sections of Indian society .
The “ third front ” involves assorted petty particularisms – parties representing the sectarian interests of specific castes , sub-regions , or linguistic groups .
The danger is that such groups could accentuate the divisions of a fractious society , rather than pull everyone together in the collective national interest .
That would be a startling change from five years ago .
The 2004 elections were won by the Congress party , led by a woman political leader of Roman Catholic faith and Italian descent ( Sonia Gandhi ) , who made way for a Sikh prime minister ( Manmohan Singh ) to be sworn by a Muslim ( President Abdul Kalam ) in a country that is 81 % Hindu .
That single moment captured much of what elections have meant for this diverse democracy .
But the ultimate reality will remain that of a coalition government trying to make progress in a contentious polity .
In India , policy changes require political consensus within the ruling coalition , labor laws are strongly defended by unions and political parties , and controversial decisions can be challenged on the streets , in the courts , and ultimately at the polls .
Necessary policy reforms advocated by a ruling party are often held hostage to the prejudices of its allies .
So change comes slowly .
But it does come , and once a policy consensus has been established , it tends to be durable .
Indian democracy has often been likened to the stately progress of the elephant – ponderous in its gait and reluctant to change course , but not easily swayed from its new path when it does .
The elephant of Indian democracy will acquire a new set of mahouts before the month ’ s end .
Who they are will have a major impact on the fortunes and prospects of one-sixth of humanity .
That alone makes the election results due on May 16 worth the world ’ s attention .
