The Inevitability of Chinese Democracy
Fifteen years ago , Fang Hongin was protesting in Tienanmen Square .
A few years ago , in Beijing , he ran one of China 's most popular TV shows , each week testing the limits of the authorities ' indulgence .
Today , he runs Dragon TV , Shanghai 's leading station , and advertisements featuring him hang from the city 's skyscrapers .
Hu Shuli belongs to the same generation : the journalist whom the Economist magazine calls " China 's most dangerous woman , " moved from her first job , with the Party press , to editing Caijng , a business magazine that runs stories on corruption , exposing businessmen and public officials .
It would be a mistake , however , to interpret these experiments with a free press as signs that democracy in China is near .
The Party allows Caijng to expose corruption because this helps it to stop China 's most serious disease .
" The first civil right is getting out of poverty , " says Yongtu Long , one of China 's WTO negotiators .
" In 15 years , we got 200 million people out of poverty ; 700 million Chinese today have access to electricity , an unknown luxury 15 years ago .
This is why our priority is growth : everything else , frankly , is less important . "
Growth , however , does only mean getting people out of poverty .
Twenty-five years ago , China had a more egalitarian society than Sweden ; today there is vast inequality between city and countryside , between the western provinces and those bordering the Pacific ocean , and within cities , which attract a constant flow of former peasants looking for jobs .
Indeed , China 's income distribution today looks more like that of Brazil than that of Sweden .
But more inequality also means more opportunities : becoming rich today in China remains very difficult , but it is no longer impossible - just walk into one of the pubs of downtown Shanghai .
Inequality can be accepted , but not if it is the fruit of corruption , and this remains China 's foremost social problem , which the Party has been unable to eradicate , despite Caijng ' s exposés and the death penalty .
Can China really do without democracy ?
A few years ago , Fareed Zakaria , then an editor of Foreign Affairs , argued against the priority normally given to democracy , simply defined as the possibility of choosing political leaders through free elections .
The world is full of democracies , he argued , that routinely violate human rights .
" Elections are of little use if democratically elected governments limit the freedom of the press and the independence of the judiciary . "
" There is certainly more freedom in Shanghai than in Moscow , " says a professor from Tsinghua University in Beijing , echoing Zakaria .
She is probably right , although India reminds us that sometimes elections are a powerful and effective mechanism to correct the path a country has taken .
India 's economy is growing almost as fast as China 's , with a similar increase in inequality and , to some extent , corruption .
But Indian voters have turned against this model .
As a result , India 's economy is likely to slow .
It is hard to tell whether this is good or bad .
It is probably bad in the short run , but who knows about the longer term ?
The point is that questions such as , " Are we creating too much inequality ? " cannot even be asked in China .
The upshot is that whenever a problem gets out of hand , the turnaround comes too late and is dramatic .
This is why China cannot shelve the problem of its transition to democracy .
Democracy is not only a mechanism to help prevent strategic mistakes .
There is a more mundane reason why many , even within the Party , think that a democratic transition has become inevitable : the Party is simply losing control of the country .
Deng Xiaoping was the last Chinese leader to possess undisputed authority to decide on public policy .
Today , the Party 's political bureau has more than 20 members and each resolution requires unanimity .
More important decisions require an even larger consensus , involving up to 3,000 people .
For example , the Party 's main current activity is drafting the documents that will be approved at the next congress , scheduled for the autumn of 2007 .
The difference between the economy 's pace and that of the Party means that the country increasingly runs on its own .
As in the past , when a dynasty weakens , the provinces make their own decisions .
Even slowing the economy is hard : lacking an efficient financial system , credit growth must be controlled directly through banks .
But the director of the Guangzhou office of China Construction Bank , China 's largest , consults with the party leader of his province before executing the directives he receives from the bank 's head office in Beijing .
Considering these difficulties , some inside the Party admit that " there is only one way forward : let someone be in charge , no matter how she or he is chosen , even through an election , provided effective decision-making is restored . "
So China 's democratic transition may be closer than anyone realizes .
But if it happens , it will not result from grassroots democratic experiments in towns and villages ; rather , it will be an elite-driven transition , careful to preserve the government 's control .
This is the only condition under which the People 's Liberation Army and the all-powerful Military Commission will accept democratization .
