The Earth Moves in Britain
LONDON – Volcanoes have consequences – and I ’ m not just thinking about the chaos caused to air travel by Iceland ’ s unpronounceable last eruption ( known to the Pentagon as E-15 ) .
In 1783 , a volcano in Iceland spewed so much ash into the atmosphere that the entire northern hemisphere was cooled for almost three years .
This resulted in crop failures and famine , and some historians argue that it helped to precipitate the French Revolution .
Should we blame the “ British Revolution ” of 2010 on E-15 ?
This undoubtedly would be going too far .
But the agreement between the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats to form a coalition government does look revolutionary to many British voters .
In London , governing arrangements that other countries take for granted look like a radically new type of politics .
The election produced an inconclusive result , even though the Conservative Party received 7 % more of the popular vote than the second-place Labour Party .
The failure to equalize electorates in different constituencies counted heavily against the winners , as it takes more votes to send a Conservative MP to Westminster than it does a Labour MP .
But the coalition negotiated by David Cameron ’ s Conservatives with the third-place Liberal Democrats ( which should give the government a comfortable majority in Parliament ) is not so novel as some people think .
In the last years of the nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth , coalition governments were quite common in Britain .
It is only in the years since the Second World War that one-party government has been the rule , though the country did have an informal pact between Labour and Liberals in the 1970 ’ s .
Benjamin Disraeli , the nineteenth-century prime minister , famously said that Britain does not like coalitions .
Although it is too early to judge , opinion polls suggest that the British people do at least like the look and the purpose of the current one .
But can this infatuation possibly last ?
At the local level , Conservatives and Liberals tend to be at daggers drawn .
This is partly because Liberals have usually thrived by winning seats from Conservatives when Conservative administrations are unpopular .
Conservatives , for their part , think of Liberals as combining sanctimoniousness with hard-ball electoral tactics .
Moreover , there are substantial policy differences between the two parties , with Liberals placing political reform at the top of their agenda , in order to establish an electoral system that would suit them better .
Despite all this , the marriage has taken place , with the two parties ’ smart , attractive , and socially similar leaders – David Cameron and Nick Clegg – taking a bold gamble on their ability to get this new show on the road and to keep it there .
Cameron and Clegg have agreed , in a constitutional innovation , that the coalition should last the full five years until the deadline for the next election .
They have hammered out a common platform that has involved give-and-take on both sides .
The Liberals have taken five seats in the Cabinet , and more in the lower ministerial ranks .
The Conservatives have agreed to hold a referendum on whether Britain should change its first-past-the-post electoral system to an alternative-vote arrangement .
For both parties , the biggest justification for this unorthodox act of political courage is the scale of the economic problems facing Britain .
The Liberal-Conservative coalition inherits , by common consent , the worst economic legacy since the war , with a huge hole in the public finances that is starting to look ever deeper as new ministers get a chance to inspect things for themselves .
Indeed , Liam Byrne , the outgoing Labour budget chief , left a note to his successor saying “ I ’ m afraid there is no money .
Kind regards and good luck . ”
It was meant to be a joke .
But there won ’ t be many laughs when cherished public programs are cut , welfare entitlements curbed , and taxes raised .
The bond markets will demand quick and effective action .
So the new government has no alternative but to begin the long haul of restoring the nation ’ s finances to the black .
The lesson for other governments is clear : if you want independence of action , don ’ t put yourself in hock .
From the Conservatives ’ point of view , there is much to be said for sharing responsibility for what has to be done .
The Liberals , meanwhile , have a golden opportunity to show that they are capable of government , rather than simply flakey representatives of the “ None of the Above ” party .
As the months pass , both parties will probably find that they face their greatest political difficulty in managing the fringes of their own camps – rightists in the Conservative Party , who don ’ t like the centrist moderation of the coalition ’ s policies , and leftists in the Liberal Democratic Party who don ’ t want to support a largely Conservative government .
But if the coalition works and lasts , then we will see not so much a political volcano in Britain as a real shift in the tectonic plates .
Nothing will be quite the same again .
