Romano Prodi Raises The Stakes
BRUSSELS : Romano Prodi , the new President of the European Commission , has wasted no time in laying down a challenge on the biggest issue facing Europe today : the pace and the scale of enlargement of the European Union , and what this enlargement will mean for the EU itself .
It is a challenge whose implications may be deeply unwelcome to the governments , and the electorates , of many of the Member States .
Indeed , Prodi told the European Parliament that he would recommend that membership negotiations , ( currently under way with five countries from Central and Eastern Europe , plus Cyprus ) , should also be opened with the second wave of six applicants : the remaining five countries from the CEE , plus Malta .
He also implied that the countries of the Balkans should become virtual members of the European Union , even before they could possibly qualify as real members .
And he said that Turkey , until now treated by the EU as a political pariah , must be considered a potential candidate , provided it first makes far-reaching political reforms .
First impressions of Prodi 's remarks , in some candidate countries , was that he appeared to be recommending that EU membership should be easier and quicker .
This was a serious misunderstanding .
To be sure , Prodi was recommending a more flexible negotiating process , in which all the candidates from Central and Eastern Europe would be treated on their merits ; so individual candidates in the second wave might be able to catch up with the first .
And in fact some candidates in the second wave are making good progress .
The Commission has particular praise for the efforts of Latvia , Slovakia and Bulgaria , and suggests that , in economic terms , Latvia could be included in the first wave . But there is no suggestion that the membership criteria should be relaxed .
On the contrary , the Commission continues to insist that the political and economic criteria must be strictly adhered to .
No doubt Prodi hopes that the candidate countries of Central and Eastern Europe can join as soon as possible .
He even seemed to hint that the first accessions might possibly take place as early as January 1 , 2003 , which is at least a year earlier than most previous forecasts .
But this was a misleading impression , for he went on to predict that even the most advanced membership negotiations would only be reaching their conclusion towards the end of 2002 .
Since negotiations must be followed by ratification in all the member states , and since ratification can be assumed to take at least one year , and possibly two , this implies that the first new members cannot expect to join before 2004 or even 2005 .
But the significance of the Commission 's new line , is not so much the speed as the scale of the enlargement process on which the European Union is now embarked .
Romano Prodi 's policy may encourage the candidates , by allowing some to join quicker than others .
But the point of his speech was to stress the fact that the European Union now faces the prospect of taking in 15 or 20 new members within the next 15 or 20 years .
Hitherto EU governments have largely pretended that enlargement is a small-scale serial process , with individual new members coming in one after another .
But if the Commission 's new line is adopted by the member states , at their December summit in Helsinki , they will then have to deal with the fact that the EU is really engaged in a large-scale process of expansion which will include most if not all of Europe ; and that , in this process , the Union will inevitably be transformed by such a doubling of membership .
The first implication of such a massive expansion , is that there has to be a major overhaul of the Union 's political and decision-making institutions .
At their June summit , the member states agreed that there have to be some reforms of the institutions before the next enlargements , but they set a timid reform agenda limited to some minor tinkering at the edges .
Prodi took issue with this minimalist approach soon after his nomination .
He argued that more far-reaching reforms would be required , and appointed a three-man committee under Jean-Luc Dehaene , former Belgian prime minister , to make recommendations .
This committee has now produced its report and , sure enough , it endorses the Prodi call for comprehensive reforms to improve the effectiveness of decision-making in Brussels .
Some of their ideas are predictable , such as that majority voting should be the normal rule in the Council of Ministers .
But there are two proposals which are more dramatic .
The first is a call for more " flexibility " . What this means is a multi-speed Union , in which some members can integrate more closely together than others .
The implication is , first , that there might be member states which did not participate in all policies ; and second , that Euro-sceptic countries like Britain , which is not in the Euro zone , could not prevent further integration by the 11 countries which are .
The second proposal is that the European Union treaty should be re-organised into two separate parts .
The first , containing the aims and general principles of the Union , plus the citizens ' rights and the institutional framework , would be the real Treaty and could only be changed by unanimity , and with national ratifications .
The second , containing detailed and workaday policy provisions , could be changed by the Union institutions , perhaps by majority vote .
By implication , the process of drafting the real Treaty would require the member states to start thinking of it as the beginning of a Constitution .
Initial reactions from member states has been unenthusiastic or hostile , especially from the British .
Sooner or later they will have to face the fact that they cannot embark on the building of a mega-Union of 30-plus member states , without corresponding reforms to the decision-making institutions .
