Defusing the Syrian Time Bomb
TEL AVIV – It is remarkable that a stern warning about the scale of the threat posed to the United States by Syria ’ s civil war has gone practically unnoticed .
Is President Barack Obama ’ s administration stumbling toward the abyss ?
Earlier this month , the Wall Street Journal reported that , according to the CIA ’ s deputy director , Michael Morell , “ Syria ’ s volatile mix of Al Qaeda extremism and civil war now poses the greatest threat to US national security ” – indeed , “ probably the most important issue in the world today . ”
By contrast , Morell described the Iranian regime ’ s “ merging of ... nuclear ambitions with its desire to be a hegemonic power in the Middle East ” as a mere “ cause for concern . ”
Morell , who is preparing to step down from the CIA soon , has little reason to dissemble .
Just two months ago , in mid-June , when the Syrian crisis was the focus of international attention and the subject of heated policy debate , such a statement by a senior administration official would have drawn strong reactions from several quarters .
But Syria has since moved from the center of attention , displaced by the coup and ongoing crisis in Egypt , the threat of an Al Qaeda terror offensive in Yemen and elsewhere , and the renewal of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations .
The apparent ( and deceptive ) lull in the fighting in Syria has contributed to this shift .
After the government ’ s military achievements in Quseir and Homs , there has been some tactical regrouping by the opposition .
Both sides are trading minor blows as they prepare for a major round of fighting in Aleppo , Syria ’ s largest city , now held by the opposition .
Overall , and despite the regime ’ s recent victories , the fighting remains at a stalemate .
So this is a convenient time for the international community to look away from a crisis that seems to have no good solutions .
But this does not diminish the gravity of what is happening in Syria , or lessen the seriousness of Morell ’ s warning .
As Morell put it , the most acute danger is that a regime with a large stockpile of weapons of mass destruction will be supplanted by a regime affiliated with , or dominated by , Al Qaeda .
Pointing to the inflow of jihadis , Morell said that Syria ’ s “ current track is toward the collapse of its central government , ” after which it would replace Pakistan as Al Qaeda ’ s preferred haven .
Morell thus placed himself squarely within one of the two principal schools of thought in the policy debate on Syria ( a debate that is articulated almost exclusively in geopolitical terms and ignores humanitarian issues ) .
One school regards Syria primarily as a theater of battle against Al Qaeda and other extremists .
Its adherents , preoccupied with the prospect of a jihadi takeover in Syria , argue ( sometimes implicitly and sometimes explicitly ) that the US and its allies must not support or intervene on the side of the rebels and , in fact , should view Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime as the lesser evil .
Those who fear a jihadi takeover cite recent events in Sinai .
Just a few days ago , Israel closed its airport in Eilat after receiving a warning that jihadis in Sinai planned to attack it with rockets .
This , it is argued , is only a dress rehearsal for what can be expected in a post-Assad Syria .
The other school of thought does not take this scenario lightly .
Nonetheless , it argues that a victory in Syria by a coalition of Russia , Iran , Hezbollah , and Assad ’ s regime would pose an even greater danger .
Moreover , in the event of the Assad regime ’ s fall , there would be plenty of ways to deal with the jihadi groups in Syria .
But the most appropriate response to Morell ’ s statement is that the US does not necessarily have to choose between two sharply defined options .
Yes , Syria ’ s secular opposition is weak and divided , while the jihadis are more dynamic ; but jihadi supremacy in the event of an opposition victory is not inevitable .
The US and its allies should conduct a robust policy , make a more significant investment in the secular opposition , and articulate clear goals .
In June , Obama announced that Assad ’ s regime had used chemical weapons against its own population and had thus crossed his administration ’ s “ red line . ”
But no coherent action or policy followed this powerful statement .
For Obama , Syria ’ s fate simply does not seem urgent ; but when the decisive battle for Aleppo begins , it may be too late .
Morell ’ s warnings may yet be vindicated – by default , if not by design .
