The German Tortoise and the American Hare
CAMBRIDGE : For almost a decade Germany has searched its soul about its economic viability .
Is there too little flexibility in our labor markets ?
Are wages too high ?
Is there too much regulation ?
How can German firms which should be world-beaters succeed if they have to fight with one arm tied behind their back by their very own government and workers ?
Of course , one would not want American ways of doing business imported here .
Still , things have got to change .
But the talk drones on and on without any change being decided upon .
For a brief moment earlier this year the debate came to a grinding stop as former finance minister Oskar Lafontaine jerked the questioning onto entirely different grounds .
Squeeze big business , that was Oskar 's answer to Germany 's dilemma .
But it did take long before the corporatism underpinning Germany 's economic model reasserted itself .
Lafontaine 's brief and turbulent bid for mastery in Germany , and his spectacular crash , opened a rare opportunity to see how the country 's domestic interests are really aligned ; what can happen and what must not take place .
Lafontaine , it seems , had forgot that the deepest belief of German social democracy is " don 't rock the boat " . Don 't rock the boat stepping on the toes of big business , which was Lafontaine 's error , nor on union sensibilities , as Chancellor Schroeder almost did as he dickered about making a Thatcher / Blair style bid to reshape Germany 's economy .
The Economist , indeed , recently asked if Germany and Europe are really doing so bad in comparison with the United States .
Over the past 2 decades , America has had higher growth and higher productivity growth .
But have living standards in the US raced ahead ?
If they haven 't , isn 't it all the talk about the new American model just hype and bubble ?
Indeed , perhaps it is even a dangerous hype .
Perhaps it is even possible to argue that Germany 's , and Europe 's , lack of competition and flexibility are the very attributes that produce long term economic performance ?
Perhaps the world economy is at a turning point , just ahead of the American bubble bursting at last , so that it is even now possible to put the US success in perspective as something that " obviously could not last " , not with America 's big external deficits , scant household savings , and prosperity driven by paper wealth .
If we accept sheer GDP growth as the bottom line , yes the US has done better over the past 20 years , 2.8 % on average versus 2.2 % in Germany . But that is hardly something to write home about .
Even if it means that over say half a century it makes for a 35 % difference ; the gap is nice but not spectacular .
But the difference goes further : America has overcome it 's # 1 enemy of the past , inflation while Germany has lost the battle against its great enemy , unemployment .
Joblessness in Germany seems here to stay .
The US has won its battle against its enemy # 2 , the budget deficits that ballooned under President Reagan .
Today , the US is running surpluses and is seeing a rapidly falling debt ratio while Germany , by contrast , has just negotiated a truce called the Waigel Pact .
Third and most importantly , America has created vast public enthusiasm for capitalism and self-responsibility while in Germany the government is still expected to be the answer of last resort .
In Germany ministers and the entire civil service bank on the premise that there is such a thing as a knowledgeable society and that a country with a good education has a seat in the front row .
They have not figured out that even more important than high school education or a university degree is self-reliance , initiative and entrepreneurship ; without these attributes , education is like a car on square wheels .
It looks like the real thing , but it won 't move .
There is a nasty little story of one of Germany 's mega-businesses that went shopping to buy a high tech boutique in the US .
The domestic staff back home revolted : " we can do the same things the Americans do " .
Asked why they didn 't , the staff replied " nobody asked us " .
Of course , no generalization can do better than describe the average .
But today Germany , like Japan , is merely a finalist in midlevel technology .
But the shift to the frontier of " cool " and " soft " and " high " tech defies Germany 's disciplined and ingrained engineering culture , the organization of business where administrators predominate over greedy entrepreneurs .
