The EU ’ s Viennese Mirror
If a European Union bureaucrat could travel to fin de siècle Vienna , he would be surprised by how closely the Hapsburg Empire resembled today ’ s EU .
Like the EU , Austria-Hungary was an experiment in supranational engineering , comprising 51 million inhabitants , 11 nationalities , and 14 languages .
Presiding over this microcosm of Europe was a double-throned Emperor-King and twin parliaments representing the largely independent Austrian and Hungarian halves of the realm .
The Hapsburg Empire acted as a stabilizing force for its peoples and for Europe .
To its scattered ethnic groups , it performed the twin roles of referee and bouncer , pacifying indigenous rivalries and protecting pint-sized nations from predatory states .
It also filled a geopolitical vacuum at the heart of the continent , placing a check on Germany and Russia .
So long as it performed these functions , Austria was viewed as a “ European necessity ” – a balancer of nationalities and of nations for which there was no conceivable substitute .
But , by the early 1900 ’ s , the empire faced two problems that cast doubt on its ability to fulfill these missions .
First , it proved incapable of reconciling and representing its constituents ’ interests .
The heart of the problem was the 1867 Compromise , which divided the empire into Austrian and Hungarian halves .
By excluding the Slavs – who accounted for half the empire ’ s population – the Compromise was seen as a vehicle for German / Magyar domination .
All attempts at modifying the arrangement stopped short of what was needed : a political settlement between Germans and Slavs like that between Germans and Magyars .
Second , due in part to internal nationalist crises , the empire found it increasingly difficult to chart a unified , independent course in international affairs .
Confronted after 1906 with a more assertive Russia , Austria-Hungary resorted to increasing reliance on Germany , thereby relinquishing the empire ’ s special status as a geopolitical stabilizer .
These problems inflicted irreparable damage to Austria-Hungary ’ s image as a “ necessity ” – both for its subjects , who came to see national self-determination as a superior alternative to supra-nationalism , and for outside powers , which dismembered the empire in 1918 .
So ended the first European union .
Like Austria-Hungary , the EU ’ s raison d ’ etre consists in its ability to transcend the indigenous balance of power among its members , and the service this renders to the international system .
On both counts , the EU confronted challenges in 2007 much like those confronting Austria-Hungary in 1907 .
Many of the EU ’ s newest members continue to grapple with questions of geopolitical trust .
This is revealed in the tensions that have existed between Poland , which fears domination by the EU ’ s steering group , and Germany , which is reluctant to shoulder the financial burden for a union in which it is under-represented .
If allowed to fester , this feud could metastasize , leaving the EU in a state of crisis like that which plagued Austria-Hungary .
A second set of problems confronts the EU externally .
Like Austria-Hungary , the EU finds itself lodged between two powerful neighbors : a resurgent Russia intent on regaining lost influence , and a seemingly revisionist United States preoccupied with foreign military adventures .
Three lessons of Austria-Hungary ’ s experience are instructive for the EU .
First , despite enjoying greater political inclusion than the Habsburg Slavs , many Central Europeans see themselves as lacking equal standing with the EU-15 , both economically and strategically .
The upshot may be a tendency for the new members to press their national interests more forcefully in EU fora .
Fearing a new era of obstructionism , EU leaders have revived talk of a two-speed union , in which a vanguard of western states seeks deeper integration , leaving the newcomers to catch up .
But , as Habsburg history shows , such arrangements create entrenched privileges among the “ haves ” and grudges among the “ have-nots . ”
In a union of many parts , there are no shortcuts : the EU must provide the same level of integration at the periphery as at the imperial core .
Second , just as Austria needed a settlement between Germans and Slavs , the EU needs to repeat the Franco-German reconciliation of 1952 between its largest western and eastern members , Germany and Poland .
The shared steel initiative of 1952 could find its parallel in a German-Polish initiative to jointly manage natural gas imports .
Finally , much as Austria-Hungary formed an alliance with Germany to fill a strategic need for military security , EU members have sought , through their intake of Russian gas , to meet a strategic need for energy security .
However , over-reliance on Russia for a strategically vital commodity widens the divergence of interests between members , like Germany , that share a privileged partnership with Russia , and those , like Poland , that consider the Kremlin a threat .
Much as Austria ’ s alignment with Germany drove the Slavs to seek Russian patronage at the expense of imperial unity , European alignments with Russia drive the new members to seek US patronage at the expense of EU unity .
As Austria-Hungary discovered , once geopolitical dependency starts , the dominant power will seek to use the dependent ally as an extension of its own interests rather than see it regain freedom of maneuver .
While the EU is unlikely to ever achieve independence from Russian energy , it can improve its ability to cope with dependence by finding what Austria-Hungary lacked : a source of leverage to maintain the relationship on relatively equal terms .
This means , above all , establishing a united voice on energy .
In the end , many who fought to bring about Austria-Hungary ’ s demise would live to mourn its passing ; as subsequent events would show , the old empire was still more of a necessity than they realized .
By learning from its mistakes , today ’ s Europeans may yet be able to reform and reinvigorate an “ empire ” whose most important work still lies ahead .
