A Metaphor for Obama
NEW HAVEN – As US President Barack Obama begins his second term , he needs a simple way to express his vision and policies for the economy – a metaphor around which support for his policies might crystallize , thereby boosting his administration ’ s political effectiveness .
So , what makes a successful metaphor work ?
The 2008 Obama campaign used the slogan “ Change we can believe in . ”
But “ change ” is not a metaphor for a new government : it does not stand for any policies .
Nor does “ Hope ” or “ Yes we can ! ”
The 2012 Obama campaign used the one-word slogan “ Forward ! ”
Once again , it signifies nothing about policies or their underlying philosophy .
Every politician , whether liberal or conservative , wants to move forward , not backward .
Obama ’ s slogans are examples of “ dead metaphors ” : they are not part of an overall conceptual scheme .
By contrast , in the 1930 ’ s , President Franklin Roosevelt used a metaphor that remains very much alive today .
The idea of a “ new deal ” was conceived during his first presidential election campaign in 1932 , though at the time he was still very vague about what the term stood for .
Apparently , Roosevelt , or his speechwriters , borrowed it from A New Deal , a book by Stuart Chase that was published in 1932 and adapted the same year into a cover story for the magazine The New Republic .
Chase described his new deal in general terms as “ the drastic and progressive revision of the economic structure , avoiding an utter break with the past . ”
And , while the book ’ s specific policy proposals bear little resemblance to Roosevelt ’ s subsequent actions , the title had an intrinsic appeal that he must have recognized .
The New Deal created an image of a commercial transaction , like the buyout of a company or an incentive package for executives – something that contracting parties bargain over and agree to .
It is not imposed .
By calling it a “ deal , ” Roosevelt made clear that the plan was not anti-business : it sounded like an offer to work , to participate , to seize an opportunity .
And , because deals can be good or bad , fair or exploitative , the word “ new ” provided metaphoric depth , suggesting that Roosevelt ’ s deal was better , fairer , and more attractive .
The metaphor , overwhelmingly endorsed by voters , stood for Roosevelt ’ s mandate to fix the ailing economy along lines that were innovative but still essentially capitalist .
Some of his administration ’ s initiatives , such as the creation of the Securities and Exchange Commission , seemed anti-business to some at the time , but have long since been accepted as a boon to competition and dynamism by hemming in unfair or manipulative behavior .
Metaphors , it turns out , are not just words .
Modern neuroscience is revealing that metaphors are intrinsic to creativity , for their use activates diverse regions of the brain associated with their multiple meanings .
Good metaphors are those that set off the right intuitive connections in our brains .
For example , much progress in understanding sound and light resulted when scientists imagined them in terms of sea waves .
Formulating a good metaphor for Obama ’ s second term is itself a task for intuitive creative thought that entails rethinking what he will propose in his second term .
A good metaphor might embody the idea of an “ inclusive economy . ”
The word “ inclusive ” resonates strongly : Americans do not want more government per se ; rather , they want the government to get more people involved in the market economy .
Opinion polls show that , above all , what Americans want are jobs – the beginning of inclusion .
The parallel to Chase ’ s book today is the 2012 bestseller Why Nations Fail by the economist Daron Acemoglu and the political scientist James Robinson .
Acemoglu and Robinson argue that in the broad sweep of history , political orders that include everyone in the economic process are more likely to succeed in the long term .
The time seems ripe for that idea , and it fits with the triumph of inclusiveness symbolized by Obama himself .
But another step in metaphor-building is needed to encapsulate the idea of economic inclusion .
The biggest successes of Obama ’ s first term concerned economic inclusion .
The Affordable Care Act ( “ Obamacare ” ) is providing more people with access to health care – and bringing more people to privately-issued insurance – than ever before in the United States .
The Dodd-Frank financial reforms created the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau , so that privately issued financial products would serve the public better , and created incentives for derivatives to be traded on public markets .
And he signed the JOBS Act , proposed by his Republican opponents , which aims to create crowdfunding Web sites that allow small investors to participate in start-up ventures .
We have not reached the pinnacle of economic inclusion .
There are hundreds of other possibilities , including improved investor education and financial advice , more flexible mortgages , better kinds of securitization , more insurance for a broader array of life ’ s risks , and better management of career risks .
Much more progress toward comprehensive public futures and derivatives markets would help , as would policies to encourage the emerging world to participate more in the US economy .
( Indeed , the inclusion metaphor is essentially global in spirit ; had Obama used it in the past , his economic policies might have been less protectionist . )
The right metaphor would spin some of these ideas , or others like them , into a vision for America ’ s future that , like the New Deal , would gain coherence as it is transformed into reality .
On January 29 , Obama will give the first State of the Union address of his new term .
He should be thinking about how to express – vividly and compellingly – the principles that have guided his choices so far , and that set a path for America ’ s future .
