The Benefits of Chinese FDI
BERKELEY – In a rare act of bipartisanship , the United States Congress recently passed legislation to encourage more inward foreign direct investment .
Democrats and Republicans agree that FDI , or “ insourcing , ” is important to US jobs and competitiveness .
They are right .
But , even as they propose new measures to court foreign investors , many members of Congress in both parties harbor deep concerns about FDI from China , on both national-security and economic grounds .
These concerns are unwarranted , and discriminatory policies to restrict such investment are ill-advised .
The US government already has adequate controls in place to review and block FDI from all countries , including China , that pose anti-competitive and national-security risks .
Investments that clear these controls benefit the US economy in numerous ways and should be welcomed .
Foreign-owned firms in the US account for 5 % of private-sector employment , 17 % of manufacturing jobs , 21 % of exports , 14 % of research and development , and 17 % of corporate-income taxes .
Recognizing FDI ’ s significant contributions to the US economy , President Barack Obama ’ s Council on Jobs and Competitiveness endorsed the administration ’ s new Select USA program to coordinate government-wide efforts to promote it .
To be sure , the US remains the world ’ s leading destination for FDI , accounting for 15 % of global flows .
But its share is declining , while China , using both carrots ( like tax holidays and special enterprise zones ) and sticks ( like explicit and implicit local-content requirements ) to attract foreign companies , has become the second-largest destination .
China has remained a small source of FDI outflows , but that , too , is changing rapidly .
Chinese outward FDI soared from an average of $ 3 billion per year before 2005 to $ 60 billion in 2010 , catapulting China into the top five sources of FDI on a three-year moving-average basis .
Given the size of China ’ s economy , its growth rate , and the experience of other developing economies , FDI from China is likely to increase by $ 1-2 trillion by 2020 .
An increase in FDI outflows is a priority in China for two reasons .
First , China has an understandable interest in diversifying its substantial holdings of foreign-exchange reserves away from low-yielding US Treasuries to real productive assets with higher returns .
That is why China established its sovereign-wealth fund , China Investment Corporation , and why CIC decision-makers are seeking more FDI opportunities .
Second , China ’ s businesses have been encouraged to “ go global ” and invest abroad to find new markets , secure access to energy and raw materials , and enhance their competitiveness by acquiring new technologies , brands , and management skills .
In a recent report , the People ’ s Bank of China urged Chinese companies to acquire foreign firms as the first stage of a ten-year plan to ease China ’ s capital-market restrictions – long a goal of US policymakers .
So far , China ’ s FDI outflows have been concentrated in developing countries and a handful of resource-rich developed countries , including Australia and Canada , and have been aimed at facilitating trade and acquiring access to natural resources .
But the patterns and destinations of China ’ s outward FDI will change as rising wages , an appreciating real exchange rate , and the entry of new suppliers from other emerging countries erode Chinese companies ’ competitiveness , motivating them to invest abroad to upgrade their technology and management capabilities , find new growth opportunities , and move up the value chain .
Currently , the US receives only about 2-3 % of FDI flows from China .
But China ’ s direct investments in the US have increased rapidly , from less than $ 1 billion annually in 2003-2008 to more than $ 5 billion per year in 2010-2011 . At least 38 US states now host FDI projects from China , and competition for Chinese investment has intensified as states ’ budgets have contracted .
Of course , alongside the potential economic benefits of attracting a much larger share of Chinese FDI , legitimate competitive and national-security concerns do need to be addressed .
First , like all mergers and acquisitions involving both domestic and foreign investors , investments in or acquisitions of US companies by Chinese companies , whether state-owned or private , must be evaluated by the US Justice Department for their impact on market competition .
Investments with significant anti-competitive effects must be modified or blocked .
Second , the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States ( CFIUS ) must screen investments in or acquisitions of US companies by foreign companies , including Chinese companies , for national-security risks .
Such screening is a common and justifiable practice around the world .
In recent years , CFIUS has defined national security broadly to encompass not only defense activities and dual-use technologies , but also critical infrastructure , including telecommunications , energy , and transport – areas of particular interest to Chinese companies .
Many Chinese investors view the CFIUS screening process as protectionist and targeted at them , but there is no evidence of this .
The United Kingdom , Canada , France , and Israel accounted for more than half of all CFIUS cases reviewed in 2008-2010 , while China accounted for only about 5 % .
Only a small fraction of Chinese FDI in the US is subject to CFIUS review , and most of these projects , like most reviewed by CFIUS , are approved , sometimes with mitigation measures .
CFIUS does not review greenfield investments , which account for about 50 % of Chinese FDI in the US .
But Chinese FDI , especially in sensitive sectors like energy , does often trigger Congressional hearings , ad hoc resolutions , and calls for tougher CFIUS action .
As a result of high-profile Congressional opposition , China ’ s state-owned energy company CNOOC withdrew its bid for Unocal , an American energy company , in 2005 , before a CFIUS review that most likely would have cleared the deal on national-security grounds .
China still points to this episode as evidence that Chinese FDI is not welcome in the US .
Feeding this perception , some members of Congress are now exhorting CFIUS to block CNOOC ’ s proposed acquisition of Nexen , a Canadian energy company with holdings in the Gulf of Mexico , until China resolves ongoing disputes with the US over preferential government procurement policies and barriers to FDI by US companies in China .
Heeding these calls would be a costly mistake that would undermine the objective , non-discriminatory CFIUS process and encourage Chinese companies to look elsewhere at a time when Chinese FDI is poised to explode and the US economy sorely needs the jobs , capital , and trade benefits that it would bring .
