The Gaza Prison
GAZA CITY – It is easier to enter a maximum-security prison than it is to enter the strip of land – 45 kilometers long and maybe eight wide – that is home to Gaza ’ s 1.5 million Palestinians .
Surrounded by a forbidding wall , watchtowers , and deadly buffer zones , I entered with a hard-to-obtain visa at the Erez crossing – iron gates , an interrogation by bored young immigration officers and scanners .
On the other side is a kilometer-long caged walkway that leads into this part of Palestine , trapped between Israel , Egypt , the Mediterranean , and the general indifference of the international community .
The view walking – in sweltering heat – through that long cage is apocalyptic .
Small groups of Palestinians smash up the remains of Gaza ’ s bombed industrial infrastructure – the concrete blocks that litter the sandy landscape .
They pummel the blocks for gravel and the steel bars inside .
The result of their labor is hauled away in carts pulled by mangy horses or donkeys .
This is much of what passes for industry in Gaza .
The world periodically wakes up to the horrors of life in Gaza , and then goes back to watching the World Cup or planning summer holidays .
We were awakened , for example , by the military assault of December 2008 and January 2009 , when more than 1,300 Palestinians ( including over 300 children ) and 13 Israelis died .
We noticed the long-running horror story again when the Israeli Defense Forces attacked a Turkish flotilla , carrying relief supplies , in May , with nine civilian fatalities .
You have to be careful with language when discussing Israeli actions .
Those who argue that there is a humanitarian crisis in Gaza should not compare the situation with Ethiopia or Sudan in the middle of a drought or a war .
Conditions in Gaza are harsh and the population does suffer .
Israel ’ s government has denied that people are starving and has relaxed its import restriction regime .
But the siege was never intended to starve Gazans ; as Dov Weissglass , a former aid to Ariel Sharon , famously observed , the aim was “ to put the Palestinians on a diet . ”
The intention was collective punishment , imposed partly in response to Hamas ’ s political control of Gaza .
Hamas won the 2006 elections in the whole of occupied Palestine and formed a national unity government with Fatah .
America , Israel , and much of the international community then torpedoed that arrangement .
It was all very well having elections – until the wrong side won .
With the changes in the import controls on Gaza – there is now a list of what cannot be taken in , rather than of what can – more goods should arrive .
But the ability to buy the jams , muesli , balsamic vinegar , and pots of lemon curd that I saw in an up-market Gazan supermarket will not do much for ordinary people , 80 % of whom depend on emergency food rations .
Moreover , ordinary Gazans cannot rebuild their homes and schools , because building materials remain proscribed , or are dribbled in only for UN projects .
No raw materials , which would allow the revival of Gaza ’ s commerce and industry , are permitted .
This is a central part of Israel ’ s policy , in flat defiance of international law and customary norms of civilized behavior .
With chocolate and cardamom now allowed into Gaza , Israel is applying a “ smarter ” siege , which will keep Palestinians here isolated , poor , and aid-dependent , but not starving .
When I was in Gaza before the Second Intifada , there were many examples of entrepreneurial activity – factories and farms .
Most of that has been stamped out .
As the assault on Gaza ended in 2009 , Israeli military bulldozers flattened factories .
The imposition of a border zone has gobbled up 29 % of the strip ’ s agricultural land .
But Israel and Egypt – partners in the siege – turn a blind eye most of the time to tunnels ( perhaps as many as a thousand ) that snake under the Egyptian border at Rafah and bring in black-market goods , which Hamas then taxes .
Decent would-be Palestinian businessmen ( the potential backbone of a middle class ) are destroyed .
Racketeers flourish .
Kafkaesque politics produces “ Alice in Wonderland ” economics .
You see some of the humanitarian problems stemming from the siege most clearly when visiting hospitals , as I did with the charity Medical Aid for Palestinians , of which I am President .
Life-saving drugs are in short supply , and equipment often does not work because of power cuts or the absence of spare parts .
Seriously ill patients require permission to be treated in West Bank hospitals , and some are reportedly pressed to collaborate with Israel ’ s security services in return for being allowed out .
Doctors and students can leave Gaza only rarely to attend conferences or universities abroad .
I strongly opposed the international call a year ago to boycott Israel ’ s universities .
But the Gaza blockade means that Israel boycotts Palestinian academic life .
It is time that Israel took its boot off Gaza ’ s windpipe .
Some in Israel , such as Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman , seem to want to cut off Gaza completely from the West Bank , in contravention of the Oslo accords ( and the prospect of a two-state solution ! ) , and push it in the direction of Egypt .
But Gaza remains an integral part of Palestine – and a growing part .
With its population increasing at 3.5 % a year , the number of Gazans will double in about 15 years ( the same timeframe in which the World Health Organization estimates that Gaza will run out of water for its population ) .
What type of world will the children you see in such prodigious numbers in Gaza inherit ? Will collective punishment make them moderate , law-abiding helots ?
History is not on the side of this immorality .
I want to see Israel , a free , democratic society , live up to its original values and be at peace with its neighbors .
It will not achieve this through its appalling Gaza policy .
The world – starting with the US administration and the European Union – should tell that to Israel .
But don ’ t hold your breath .
