The Right Fight Against Terrorism
LONDON – I traveled to Paris from London last Monday .
It takes two and a half hours by train .
We are neighbors , our histories and populations intertwined .
My ten-year-old grand-daughter will go there next week with her parents as a birthday treat .
She loves everything she has learned about Paris .
So , like other Londoners , and citizens of free societies everywhere , she was horrified by the recent atrocities there .
I suppose , she said , it could have happened here .
So it could – just as it did in 2005 , and just as it could again in Madrid , or in Amsterdam , Berlin , Rome , or any other European city .
When President François Hollande announced that we are at war with the so-called Islamic State ( ISIS ) , the “ we ” included you and me .
France ’ s fight is Britain ’ s fight and Europe ’ s fight .
It involves all of us .
Globalization does not mean only mangoes at the supermarket in mid-winter , easy air travel , and the Internet .
Terror and barbarity have been globalized , too .
Men and women can be taught , trained , and armed thousands of miles away and sent to our neighborhoods to kill and maim .
International terror requires an international response .
But that response must include dialogue and diplomacy .
We must not be driven by horror and fear into forgetting our civic values .
That is precisely what the terrorists want .
We must not demonize all Muslims .
We must not burn interfaith bridges .
We must not abandon the core tenets of European civilization , including the obligation to shelter refugees from evil .
German Chancellor Angela Merkel ’ s instinctive reaction to the influx should still be applauded , not condemned .
Populist rabble-rousing against men and women of different faiths and ethnicities will divide our societies at the moment when we should be united .
It will play into the hands of the terrorists .
From Beirut to Paris , the terrorists ’ attacks are a deliberate effort to exacerbate tensions between communities .
Marine Le Pen of France ’ s far-right National Front and others like her might as well be ISIS recruiting sergeants .
Diplomacy was given a strong boost at the recently concluded G-20 meeting in Turkey .
That means , above all , obliging the Middle East ’ s main rivals , Sunni-ruled Saudi Arabia and Shia-ruled Iran , to face up to their responsibility to reduce hostilities between Sunni and Shia groups and countries in West Asia .
Western countries have been residual victims of the vicious struggles between Saudi and Iranian proxies .
We need to end the divisions among those in Syria who oppose ISIS .
That may involve giving a short-term role in a political transition to President Bashar al-Assad ( partly to save Russia ’ s face ) .
But a president who has barrel bombed his own citizens cannot conceivably be part of a longer-term peaceful settlement .
The right political goals and diplomatic priorities are crucial .
But we must also face up to the fact that we will not defeat ISIS without a bigger , more effective , and better coordinated military effort .
We must drive ISIS out of its self-proclaimed caliphate in Syria and Iraq .
Otherwise , the territory it controls will continue to be a haven and training ground for murderers .
Perhaps more robust military intervention will provoke further atrocities .
But what is certain is that the attacks on civilization will continue until we have cut off ISIS ’ s head .
As terrorists often brag , we have to succeed in stopping their assaults every time ; they only have to succeed every now and then .
Opponents of military intervention cite failure in Iraq and Afghanistan to justify inaction .
We should learn from those failures .
But appeasement is not one of the lessons .
We will not make our free societies safe by bombing ISIS with strong nouns and weak verbs rather than high explosives .
To his credit , British Prime Minister David Cameron clearly understands the importance of increasing the military pressure on ISIS ; he had been held back by a head-under-the-blanket faction in his own Conservative Party and in Parliament as a whole .
But Europe – indeed , civilization – won ’ t be kept safe by wishful thinking .
It may be that most of the boots on the ground will have to be worn by Arabs , Iranians , and Kurds , including members of the Peshmerga International Brigade .
But they need stronger support – not just in the air or with weapons and training , but also from Western special forces .
There is a strong argument , too , for NATO to recognize that one of its members , France , has been attacked , thereby activating Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty , which ensures mutual defense .
The entire Alliance should commit itself to the defeat of terrorism .
Yet this is not only Europe ’ s fight , or that of the United States .
This is about global order in a stable and prosperous world .
Russia and China should make clear in the United Nations Security Council that the destruction of ISIS is their fight as well .
All those young men and women cut down in Paris must not have been slaughtered in vain .
Their deaths should challenge us to make sure that Paris , the city of light , will help to banish the darkness that threatens to overwhelm the century ahead .
