Solidarity Takes Power
WARSAW : Ten years ago in September I was charged with forming the first non-communist government in what was still the communist world .
The Soviet Union still existed , as did the Warsaw Pact , the Red Army retained bases across Poland , Solidarity had only recently come up from underground and many of its leaders were only just out of prison .
Restoring Solidarity 's public role was essential in all that was to follow .
After martial law was imposed in 1981 , Poland 's authorities , led by General Jaruzelski , argued that they were willing to reach agreement with " society " . It was " only " Solidarity to which they objected .
For me , however , legalization of Solidarity was fundamental ; I firmly believed that the sphere of freedom that we could wrest from the government would be real only if it was protected not by small groups , but by a powerful social movement .
When the authorities indicated that they were serious about legalizing Solidarity , I concluded that political negotiations – known as the Roundtable talks – were desirable .
Still , until nearly the very end , I feared that the authorities would " trick " us in some way , and I was not personally eager to participate in the new political structures .
For I believed that the sphere of liberty offered at the Roundtable negotiations would have to coexist for a long time with " their " sphere – i.e. the sphere of Communism .
Entry into the political structures of the regime posed the risk that , in time , the process would " suck us in . "
Only when it became clear that Solidarity was going to enter the government and take the reigns of power , did I come to accept our historic new role .
Someone once compared my position in forming the first Solidarity government to that of a soldier disarming a minefield .
But I was not only disarming a minefield , I was trying to construct something on top of that disarmed minefield .
Moreover , we did not want to merely patch things up , but to change virtually the whole political and economic landscape of our country .
Half-measures would not work ; the regime had to be fundamentally reformed .
We also had to explain to the Russians that we wanted to be friendly , but that decisions now would be taken by us .
I sent a clear message to this effect , through an emissary of the Soviet Politburo , two days after I was nominated as prime minister , and I amplified it later , during my first visit to Moscow .
But even if Moscow 's reaction to the Polish reforms was very much on everyone 's mind , Moscow was not the first destination on my travels , as the ritual of all previous governments demanded .
My first official visit was to the Vatican .
Indeed , in extraordinary times like those , symbols matter , and many of my early actions as prime minister were wholly or in part symbolic .
The first one had taken place even before I formed my government , barely upon my arriving in my office at the Council of Ministers , then still staffed exclusively with officials from the old regime .
As I entered that intimidating building , I felt as if it , together with my new responsibilities , rested on my shoulders .
I sat at my desk and I said to those around me : " Let 's try to call the Pope . "
I did not seek to receive instructions ; I said only : " Holy Father , I would like you to pray for me . "
My second official act was the following : Next to my desk was a table with many telephones .
Among them was a hotline to the first secretary of the Polish Communist Party .
I asked to have that line disconnected .
" If the first secretary of the Communist Party wants to talk to me , " I said , " he can call me on the normal phone . "
It was important to make the new outlines of power clear : the State is independent from the Party .
The bureaucrats around me had to learn that .
Indeed , it took a while until they understood that they could have their party organization , but only outside the office , and that there would be no official Party " cell " in the Council of Ministers .
Those symbolic gestures spoke to the core of our entire political program .
In my inaugural speech , I said that we needed to " draw a thick line between us and the past , that we were not responsible for what we inherited but only for what we will do ourselves . "
My words were later twisted in the most bizarre ways by my critics .
But the spirit of my speech was simple .
We intended fundamental changes , but we sought to introduce them in an evolutionary , peaceful way .
Change without vengeance – which did not mean without considering the past , just without retribution .
This was what I meant by drawing a " thick line " between the past and the present .
There were then over two million members of the Communist Party in Poland .
I had to tell them whether democratic Poland was also going to be their country , or whether they would be second-class citizens .
Besides , the whole administrative apparatus of the State , which could not be changed in a month , had to serve the new Poland .
Communists controlled the security forces , the army , all the organs of the state .
They could provoke confrontations , directed not only against me , but also against their own leaders who had signed the Roundtable agreements .
After many years of conflicts , with the memories of the martial law of 1981 still fresh in the minds of most Poles , a policy of national reconciliation was a crucial element of our program .
Decommunization meant for me , above all , the decommunization of the regime , of the system itself .
Insofar as guilty individuals were concerned , on the other hand , we believed that people responsible for crimes should be judged by the courts , and the government , which stood for the independence of the judiciary , could not interfere with this .
Similarly , the moral evaluation of the past – which was certainly needed – was , in my mind , primarily a matter of a broad public debate , not one of government decree or other acts of the state .
The government 's responsibility was to put into effect political and economic reforms , far-reaching reforms – and these required social peace .
We stood before a stark alternative : either destroy that social peace by anticommunist witch-hunts or reform the old regime and move ahead to a new era of national peace and economic prosperity .
We chose reform .
