Sarkozy ’ s Secret Rupture
PARIS – A year ago , when Nicolas Sarkozy was campaigning for the French presidency , he promised a “ rupture ” with the past .
So far , few French people can see the sort of rupture that Sarkozy promised .
But they are wrong to think that nothing has changed in the first year of his presidency .
Sarkozy has , in fact , brought about a rupture , albeit in an unexpected area : the foreign policy consensus that has prevailed since the days of Charles de Gaulle .
Of course , it is impossible at this early stage to evaluate with any degree of precision the long-term strategic repercussions of Sarkozy ’ s apparent decision to return France to NATO ’ s integrated military command and strengthen the French military commitment to NATO ’ s out-of-theater engagement – its first ever – in Afghanistan .
But the implication of these decisions is clear : France under Sarkozy is now back at the heart of the Atlantic Alliance .
Although this may seem mundane outside France , Sarkozy ’ s foreign policy revolution has incited fierce opposition at home .
Indeed , all left-wing parties denounce Sarkozy ’ s rupture with the Fifth Republic ’ s military / diplomatic heritage .
Of course , the left ’ s real quarrel with Sarkozy ’ s policy has at its roots in his conception of France ’ s relationship with the United States .
Wariness of America was , to be sure , not just a leftist pose ; many Gaullists over the decades have been tinged with anti-Americanism , too .
But , although Sarkozy may not have sold his party on the merits of George Bush ’ s America , he has softened its once habitual suspicions about the US .
As a result , a left-right divide has opened in this central area of French diplomacy – a division that has not been seen in France for four decades .
The French left , not surprisingly , rejects Sarkozy ’ s Atlanticist impulses and frequently charge him with betraying General de Gaulle ’ s legacy .
The majority of French people , however , appear to favor improving ties with the US .
There is more than a little irony here . In the year that the Socialists are celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the May 1968 demonstrations against de Gaulle , they are also trying to steal his diplomatic clothes by proclaiming themselves the defenders of the independent French foreign policy that he championed .
In the 1960 ’ s , both Socialists and Centrists denounced de Gaulle ’ s “ anti-Americanism . ”
On NATO , France ’ s Middle East policy , or the constitution , Francois Mitterrand ( the Socialist leader in the 1960 ’ s ) and the opposition sharply criticized de Gaulle ’ s go-it-alone ways for shattering the Alliance consensus .
Indeed , the Socialists opposed de Gaulle ’ s decision to withdraw France from NATO ’ s unified military command , opposed the creation of an independent French nuclear arsenal ( they preferred the American nuclear guarantee ) , and were hostile to de Gaulle ’ s rupture with Israel after the Six Day War .
But the Socialists began to change their stripes in the late 1970 ’ s , rallying around the concept of nuclear dissuasion as a guarantee of national independence and beginning to distance themselves from America .
Although Mitterrand did stand firm with the US on the stationing of Pershing missiles in Europe in the early 1980 ’ s , which won him respect from President Ronald Reagan , by this point the Gaullist consensus on the fundamentals of French foreign policy had spread across all political groups .
Even the Communist Party could be said to have basically embraced its tenets .
Sarkozy has now broken with this so-called “ Gaullist- Mitterrandist ” orientation , which was based on the persistence of a belief in French “ exceptionalism ” in the field of foreign affairs . This does not mean that Sarkozy ’ s France will toe the American line on all international issues .
Far from it .
But it does mean that France will no longer oppose America just for the sake of opposing America .
