The Kremlin Two Step
Moscow – Westerners often see Russian politics in terms of a high-level struggle between liberals and conservatives : Ligachev and Yakovlev under Gorbachev ; reformers and nationalists under Yeltsin ; siloviki and economic liberals under Putin .
They also view Russia in terms of a tradition whereby every new tsar partly repudiates the legacy of his predecessor , creating a political thaw at the beginning of a new reign .
Khrushchev ’ s de-Stalinization is Exhibit A.
Both methods were used to describe the Putin-Medvedev relationship – to understand its nature and dynamic , and what it portends for Russia .
But observers remain puzzled .
To dismiss Medvedev as a mere Putin puppet , a constitutional bridge between Putin ’ s second and third presidential terms , would be both unfair and wrong .
Russia ’ s third president has a broader role and a distinct function .
Conversely , portraying Putin as “ a man from the past , ” and Medvedev as “ a hope for the future , ” exaggerates the differences between them and omits the more important factors that unite them .
A better analytical model is needed .
For all the apparent freshness of Medvedev ’ s recent pronouncements , including his now famous article “ Go Russia ! ” – which sounded a clarion call for modernization and liberalism – he is borrowing massively from Putin ’ s vocabulary of 2000 .
This suggests that the issue of modernization , which lay dormant throughout the fat years of high oil prices , is back on the Kremlin agenda .
In 2008 , Medvedev was installed in the Kremlin as part of “ Putin ’ s plan , ” the substantive part of which was known as “ Strategy 2020 , ” a blueprint for continued economic growth and diversification .
The intervening crisis only made the Kremlin modify and sharpen its plan .
And Medvedev is a key agent in its execution .
Putin chose Medvedev carefully , and not only for his unquestionable loyalty , vitally important as that is .
Putin , among other things , is a combative nationalist , and he wants Russia to succeed in a world of competing powers .
He is certainly conservative , but he is also a self-described modernizer .
As such , he might be compared to Pyotr Stolypin , another conservative prime minister who famously asked for 20 years of peace and quiet – mostly from liberals and revolutionaries – to transform Russia .
Stolypin never got the chance – a revolutionary assassinated him in 1911 – and neither did Russia , which stumbled into World War I , leading directly to the collapse of the monarchy and the Bolshevik revolution .
Putin wants to finish the job , and much works in his favor .
He is the tsar .
He has both money – the government ’ s budget and the oligarchs ’ fortunes – and the coercive power of the state firmly in his hand .
He is the arbiter at the top and the trouble-shooter in social conflicts below .
His most precious resource is his personal popularity , which a flavor of consent to his authoritarian regime .
But none of that is good enough .
The 75 % of Russians who make up the Putin majority are essentially passive , and seek only the preservation of a paternalistic state .
Putin can sit on their support , but cannot ride forward with it .
The best and brightest are not there .
His Internet-surfing , compassionate , and generally liberal image helps recruit a key constituency – those beyond the reach of Putin himself – to the Putin plan . Whether the plan succeeds is another matter .
Conservative modernization is a gamble .
To modernize Russia , one must break the stranglehold of corruption , establish accountability , and free the media .
At some point , Putin and Medvedev will have to decide .
Either they give priority to the survival of the current system and accept Russia ’ s steady marginalization , or they start opening up the system , putting its survival at risk .
Given the weight of geopolitical factors in Russian decision-making , it is difficult to foretell which path they will choose .
One thing is clear , though : he does not like raw meat and the taste of blood .
Thus , Putin ’ s governing pact with Medvedev , his trademark creation , is likely to remain in force .
Both members need each other .
So the real issue is not whether the noises that Putin and Medvedev make suggest real divergence , and a potential for rivalry , but whether there is daylight at the end of the tandem .
Or , to put it differently , whether they choose modernization or marginalization .
