The G-20 ’ s New Thinking For the Global Economy
NEW YORK – The Seoul G-20 summit was notable for the increasing political weight of the emerging economies .
Not only was it located in one , but , in many ways , it was also dominated by them .
In two crucial areas , macroeconomics and global economic development , the emerging economies ’ view prevailed .
And an excellent proposal to link the two agendas – macroeconomics and development – emerged from the summit , and should be implemented in 2011 .
A key feature of the world economy today is that it is running at two speeds .
The United States and much of Europe remain mired in the aftermath of the financial crisis that erupted in the fall of 2008 , with high unemployment , slow economic growth , and continuing bank-sector problems .
Emerging markets , however , have generally surmounted the crisis .
Whereas 2009 was a tough year for the entire global economy , emerging markets bounced back strongly in 2010 , while rich countries did not .
Recent data from the International Monetary Fund ’ s World Economic Outlook tell the story .
During 2010 , high-income countries are expected to achieve modest annual GDP growth of around 2.7 % , while the G-20 ’ s emerging economies , together with the rest of the developing world , are expected to grow at a robust 7.1 % rate .
Asia ’ s developing economies are soaring , with 9.4 % growth .
Latin America is expected to grow at 5.7 % .
Even sub-Saharan Africa , the traditional laggard , is expected to grow at 5 % in 2010 .
This two-speed global economy largely reflects the fact that the 2008 financial crisis began with over-borrowing by the rich countries themselves .
Two high-income economies got themselves into trouble .
The US , where consumers – assisted by reckless lending to non-creditworthy households – had borrowed heavily to buy houses and cars , was the main culprit .
The periphery of the European Union – Ireland , Portugal , Spain , and Greece – also began a borrowing binge a decade ago , upon joining the euro , fueling a real-estate boom that likewise went bust .
Emerging economies , for the most part , avoided this disastrous over-borrowing . One reason , certainly , was the vivid memory in Asia of the 1997 financial crisis , which underscored the need for limits on bank borrowing and capital inflows .
By and large , Asian emerging economies were more prudently managed during the past decade .
The same can be said about Brazil , which learned from its own crisis in 1999 , as well as Africa and other regions .
In the run-up to the Seoul summit , the US government put forward a proposal that the surplus regions of the world should increase their domestic demand – mainly consumption – to boost imports and thereby help the deficit regions ( including the US ) to recover .
The G-20 ’ s emerging economies were not impressed .
Their answer was straightforward : the crisis began with US over-borrowing , so it is America ’ s responsibility , not theirs , to clean up the mess .
The US should cut its budget deficit , increase its saving rate , and generally get its own house in order .
The emerging economies reacted similarly to a second US initiative , the Federal Reserve ’ s so-called “ quantitative easing . ”
Emerging economies once again spoke nearly in unison .
They told the US not to boost the money supply artificially , as this would create the risk of yet another financial bubble , this time in the emerging economies and in commodity markets .
Once again , the clear message to the US was to stop using gimmicks like fiscal stimulus or printing money and instead undertake a serious longer-term economic restructuring to boost saving , investment , and net exports .
For their part , emerging economies wanted to change the subject from short-term macroeconomic stimulus and imbalances to longer-term development issues .
The host government , South Korea , was especially dynamic here .
South Korea called on the G-20 ’ s members to focus on challenges such as meeting the United Nations ’ Millennium Development Goals , raising agricultural production , and building sustainable infrastructure in developing economies .
This was the first time that long-term development issues had been put so clearly on the G-20 agenda , and it is a sign of the growing geopolitical weight of the group ’ s emerging-market members .
The result of the deliberations is a new framework for the G-20 ’ s engagement with the rest of the developing countries , known as the Seoul Development Consensus for Shared Growth .
The G-20 rightly decided to focus on those areas of the global development agenda where the major economies have a comparative advantage : financing of infrastructure such as roads and power ; business development ; and support for agricultural upgrading in the poorer countries .
Other parts of the development agenda – for example , health and education – will not be the G-20 ’ s focus .
The new G-20 development agenda offers an excellent way to merge concerns about global imbalances with the need to accelerate the pace of development in the poorer countries .
The US has been pushing China , Germany , Japan , and others to raise consumption in order to boost demand .
But there is a better way to put these surplus countries ’ high saving rates to use .
Rather than pushing their households to consume more , the G-20 should work harder to channel these savings to the poorest countries in order to finance urgently needed investments in infrastructure .
India ’ s Prime Minister Manmohan Singh put the matter perfectly .
He noted that sub-Saharan Africa is now in a position to absorb more capital inflows to build infrastructure .
He recommended that G-20 surpluses be recycled to those countries , and to other poor countries , to finance such investments .
“ In other words , ” said Singh , “ we should leverage imbalances of one kind to redress imbalances of the other kind . ”
By channeling the savings of China , Germany , Japan , and other surplus countries into infrastructure investments in the poor countries , the world ’ s economies truly would be working in harmony .
The G-20 Seoul Summit may well have initiated that important process .
