The End of 1945
NEW YORK – On May 8 , 1945 , when World War II in Europe officially ended , much of the world lay in ruins .
But if the human capacity for destruction knows few limits , the ability to start over again is just as remarkable .
Perhaps that is why mankind has so far managed to survive .
No doubt , millions of people at the end of the war were too hungry and exhausted to do anything much beyond staying alive .
But , at the same time , a wave of idealism swept across the wreckage , a collective sense of determination to build a more equal , peaceful , and safer world .
That is why the war ’ s great hero , Winston Churchill , was voted out of office in the summer of 1945 , even before Japan surrendered .
Men and women had not risked their lives simply to return to the old days of class privilege and social deprivation .
They wanted better housing , education , and free health care for all .
Similar demands were heard all over Europe , where the anti-Nazi or anti-fascist resistance was often led by leftists , or indeed Communists , and prewar conservatives were frequently tainted by collaboration with fascist regimes .
There was talk of revolution in countries such as France , Italy , and Greece .
This did not happen , because neither the Western Allies nor the Soviet Union supported it .
Stalin was content to settle for an empire in Eastern Europe .
But even Charles de Gaulle , a resistance leader of the right , had to accept Communists in his first postwar government , and he agreed to nationalize industries and banks .
The swing to the left , to social-democratic welfare states , occurred all over Western Europe .
It was part of the 1945 consensus .
A different kind of revolution was taking place in Europe ’ s former colonies in Asia , where native peoples had no desire to be ruled once more by Western powers , which had been so ignominiously defeated by Japan .
Vietnamese , Indonesians , Filipinos , Burmese , Indians , and Malays wanted their freedom , too .
These aspirations were often voiced in the United Nations , founded in 1945 .
The UN , like the dream of European unity , was also part of the 1945 consensus .
For a short while , many prominent people – Albert Einstein , for one – believed that only a world government would be able to ensure global peace .
This dream quickly faded when the Cold War divided the world into two hostile blocs .
But in some ways the 1945 consensus , in the West , was strengthened by Cold War politics .
Communism , still wrapped in the laurel leaf of anti-fascism , had a wide intellectual and emotional appeal , not only in the so-called Third World , but also in Western Europe .
Social democracy , with its promise of greater equality and opportunities for all , served as an ideological antidote .
Most social democrats were in fact fiercely anti-communist .
Today , 70 years later , much of the 1945 consensus no longer survives .
Few people can muster great enthusiasm for the UN .
The European dream is in crisis .
And the post-war social-democratic welfare state is being eroded more and more every day .
The rot began during the 1980s , under Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher .
Neoliberals attacked the expense of entitlement programs and the vested interests of trade unions .
Citizens , it was thought , had to become more self-reliant ; government welfare programs were making everyone soft and dependent .
In Thatcher ’ s famous words , there was no such thing as “ society , ” only families and individuals who ought to be taking care of themselves .
But the 1945 consensus was dealt a much greater blow precisely when we all rejoiced at the collapse of the Soviet Empire , the other great twentieth-century tyranny .
In 1989 , it looked as if the dark legacy of World War II , the enslavement of Eastern Europe , was finally over .
And in many ways , it was .
But much else collapsed with the Soviet model .
Social democracy lost its raison d ’ être as an antidote to Communism .
All forms of leftist ideology – indeed , everything that smacked of collective idealism – came to be viewed as misguided utopianism that could lead only to the Gulag .
Neoliberalism filled the vacuum , creating vast wealth for some people , but at the expense of the ideal of equality that had emerged from World War II .
The extraordinary reception of Thomas Piketty ’ s Capital in the Twenty-First Century shows how keenly the consequences of the collapse of the left have been felt .
In recent years , other ideologies have also emerged to fill the human need for collective ideals .
The rise of right-wing populism reflects revived yearnings for pure national communities that keep immigrants and minorities out .
And , perversely , American neo-conservatives have transformed the internationalism of the old left by seeking to impose a democratic world order by US military force .
The answer to these alarming developments is not nostalgia .
We cannot simply return to the past .
Too much has changed .
But a new aspiration toward social and economic equality , and international solidarity , is badly needed .
It cannot be the same as the 1945 consensus , but we would do well , on this anniversary , to remember why that consensus was forged in the first place .
