A Separated Peace
MADRID – Back in 1996 , Binyamin Netanyahu won a general election by mobilizing large constituencies against then-Prime Minister Shimon Peres ’ s alleged intention to “ divide Jerusalem . ”
Nearly two decades later , Netanyahu remains committed to old , vacuous slogans about a “ united Jerusalem ” – a conviction that could , yet again , unravel the Israel-Palestine peace process .
As US Secretary of State John Kerry prepares to present a framework agreement for a conclusive round of Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations , Netanyahu ’ s hardline position on Jerusalem is simply a non-starter .
In a last-ditch effort to improve the proposal ’ s chances of success , US President Barack Obama – who has largely avoided taking a proactive role in the peace process during his second term – met with Netanyahu at the White House to urge him to moderate his position .
But changing Netanyahu ’ s mind will not be easy – not least because of the domestic political pressure that he faces .
Since Israel captured East Jerusalem in the 1967 Six-Day War , the country ’ s political class has championed the city as Israel ’ s “ united eternal capital ” – a vision that they remain unwilling to abandon .
The problem is that no serious negotiation with the Palestinians could accommodate this position .
Jerusalem ’ s Arab population – which already accounts for more than 40 % of the total – is growing by 3.5 % annually , compared to 1.5 % among Israelis .
Once this sizeable swath of voters begins participating in municipal elections – which they have so far avoided , lest they be viewed as legitimizing Israeli rule – control of the city council is likely to pass to a Palestinian majority .
Peres understood that a Jerusalem united under exclusively Israeli rule was not feasible , assuring Norway ’ s foreign minister in a 1993 letter – critical to the conclusion of the Oslo accords – that Israel would respect the autonomy of Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem .
Likewise , in 2000 , Prime Minister Ehud Barak endorsed the Clinton Parameters , which called for Jerusalem ’ s division into two capitals along ethnic lines .
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert followed suit in his 2008 peace proposal to Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas ; he also recommended internationalizing the Old City ’ s administration .
Yet Netanyahu and his supporters remain adamant that Jerusalem will not be split .
What they fail to grasp is that the 1980 Jerusalem Law , which declared the city – “ united in its entirety ” – to be Israel ’ s capital did not actually result in unity .
The subsequent effort to “ Israelize ” the city , by building a network of Jewish neighborhoods in Palestinian-dominated East Jerusalem , has failed to secure a solid Jewish majority , largely owing to the unwillingness of middle-class Israelis to settle there .
Indeed , not only has the settlement project turned East Jerusalem into a hub of political and social tension , but the high financial cost – more than $ 20 billion in total – forced the diversion of limited resources from growth-oriented investment in West Jerusalem .
As a result , Jerusalem has become Israel ’ s poorest city .
Unsurprisingly , the 200,000 members of Israel ’ s liberal and prosperous middle class that abandoned the city in the last 20 years find Tel Aviv – Israel ’ s economic capital , and a center of technology-driven growth – far more appealing .
Complicating the situation further is the division between secular Israelis and the fanatic Orthodox communities whose rejection of the secular state and yearning for a society based on the strictest interpretation of Halacha ( Jewish religious law ) epitomize a deep-seated fear of Arabs and an uncompromising distrust of gentiles .
Such communities , which comprise 30 % of Jerusalem ’ s population , make the notion of a united , peaceful Jerusalem farfetched , at best .
In 1966 , a year before Israeli paratroopers ostensibly united Jerusalem , the composer Naomi Shemer sang of , “ the city that sits solitary , and in its heart a wall . ”
Today , the wall dividing Jerusalem is not made of concrete or brick – but that does not make it any less real .
This enduring division is exemplified in the contrast between municipal services and infrastructure in the city ’ s Jewish and Arab neighborhoods .
Of course , to some degree , Jerusalem ’ s Palestinian residents benefit from Israel ’ s advanced social-security and health-care systems , the likes of which their brethren in the Palestinian Authority can only imagine .
Nonetheless , they continue to identify themselves as Palestinian , with only 10,000 of Jerusalem ’ s 300,000 Palestinian residents having agreed to apply for Israeli citizenship .
But the Jerusalem issue is subject to an even more fundamental confusion : What are Jerusalem ’ s actual boundaries ?
In the cavalier spirit that prevailed after 1967 , the Israeli government extended the city ’ s boundaries from 10,875 acres to more than 31,000 acres .
Netanyahu ’ s claim that this extended Jerusalem is the biblical capital of the Jewish people is a historical travesty .
A Jerusalem controlled by non-productive Orthodox Jewish communities and disenfranchised Palestinians is destined for economic and political collapse .
Kerry ’ s plan to divide the city along ethnic lines amounts to Israel ’ s last chance to avoid such an outcome and legitimize the city as its internationally recognized capital .
By agreeing to a divided Jerusalem , Netanyahu would be initiating the long-overdue departure from the hubris and megalomania that has brought the city to its current state of stagnation and isolation .
Giving up on a “ united ” Jerusalem is the only way to secure the city ’ s “ eternal ” status .
