Putin ’ s Gas Problem
HOUSTON – Russia watchers are rightly focusing on the latest brittle ceasefire in Ukraine , seeking to discern President Vladimir Putin 's intentions there .
But they would be wise not to overlook another unfolding struggle – one that will have profound long-term consequences for Europe and for Putin 's ability to exert pressure on the continent .
Last December , Russian 's giant gas firm , Gazprom , and a Turkish pipeline company signed a memorandum of understanding to construct a pipeline from Russia to Turkey under the Black Sea .
This new “ Turkish Stream " is an alternative to the “ South Stream " Black Sea pipeline from Russia to Bulgaria – a project that the Kremlin abandoned in December , in response to the sanctions imposed by the European Union after Russia 's invasion of Ukraine and annexation of Crimea .
The South Stream project failed to comply with EU competition and energy directives , and the announcement of the $ 12 billion Turkish Stream is likely to reinforce Russia 's reputation as an unreliable partner , thus accelerating Europe 's search for alternate supply sources .
Indeed , in risking his most lucrative market , Putin is exhibiting an almost suicidal disregard for the Russian economy – apparently for no other reason than to cement enmity with Ukraine .
The Kremlin intends to remove Ukraine from a gas-delivery system that has been in place since the 1980s , routing supplies instead through a new and untried network to a market that may not even exist .
Last month , Gazprom announced its intention to cease shipments through Ukraine when the contracts with the country 's gas pipeline company , Naftogaz , expire in 2019 .
Gas from the Turkish Stream will be delivered to the Greek border on a take-it-or-leave-it basis .
Gazprom expects permission to carry out design and survey work “ soon , " with its first delivery to Turkey to arrive in 2017 .
Gazprom 's erratic behavior is not a matter of minor concern for Europe .
The continent relies on Russia for some 30 % of its natural gas , 80 % of which is transported through Ukraine .
And the continent has been left out in the cold once before .
In January 2009 , Gazprom ordered cutbacks of deliveries through Ukraine , causing severe shortages in six countries in eastern and southeastern Europe .
In late 2014 , Russia cut off Ukraine completely , again signaling its readiness to use gas supplies as a weapon of foreign policy .
The EU rushed in to broker a settlement that some contend was against Ukraine 's interests .
But , contrary to what Putin seems to believe , neither Europe nor Ukraine is likely to be the biggest loser in Russia 's effort to redirect its gas exports .
Gazprom receives two-thirds of its hard-currency revenues from Europe , and a period of falling exports and domestic economic crisis is not the ideal time to play games with your best customer .
Indeed , the European market is already slipping away .
Gazprom 's European sales plummeted in the third quarter of last year and fell by 25 % in the fourth quarter .
The slump in demand is coming at a time when Russia is desperate for hard currency , owing to sanctions that exclude it from credit markets .
Its major companies are facing huge debt refinancing needs , its currency reserves are collapsing , its economy is heading toward a deep recession , and the ruble is plumbing new lows .
In redirecting its exports , Russia is in effect demanding that Europe spend billions of euros on new infrastructure to replace a perfectly good pipeline , only to satisfy Putin 's desire to cause trouble in Ukraine .
In January , Gazprom 's CEO , Alexey Miller , imperiously brushed off European concerns , stating , “ We have informed our European partners , and now it is up to them to put in place the necessary infrastructure starting from the Turkish-Greek border . "
The initial reaction in Europe was that Putin either was bluffing or had taken leave of his senses .
“ The decision makes no economic sense , " was how Maroš Šefčovič , the European Commission 's vice president for energy union , put it .
“ We 're good customers .
We 're paying a lot of money .
We 're paying on time , and we 're paying in hard currency .
So I think we should be treated accordingly . "
Putin 's erratic and economically oblivious policies are frittering away the last remnants of what was once Gazprom 's monopoly position in the European gas market .
Clearly , if Europe is to spend billions on pipelines , it would be better off doing so as part of an effort to diversify its sources of natural gas , rather than deepen its dependence on Russia .
After all , memories are long , especially when it comes to frigid winters of unheated homes and closed factories .
When one of Joseph Stalin 's chief planners was asked why he was willing to defend a series of ludicrous proposals , he famously replied , “ I 'd rather stand for unrealistic plans than sit [ in jail ] for realistic ones . "
One can imagine that Gazprom officials are thinking along the same lines .
If so , they should start thinking differently .
Russia cannot afford more economic pain and suffering .
But that is what it will get unless sober heads prevail .
