Swine Flu for Grownups
PRINCETON – No one knows how the swine flu ( H1N1 ) pandemic will evolve .
Will it keep spreading , or will it fizzle ?
Will it retreat during the northern hemisphere ’ s summer and return in the fall ?
Will it stay mild or turn more severe ?
Flu experts just don ’ t know .
What is certain is that health officials risk mishandling how they explain this new and potentially alarming threat to the public .
Although they know a lot about virology and public health , they often know next to nothing about how to talk ( and listen ! ) to people about risks .
So here ’ s a primer on the swine flu pandemic risk communication , framed in terms of what health officials shouldn ’ t do when they ’ re telling you about this new disease .
1 . Don ’ t feign confidence .
Nobody likes uncertainty ; we all wish the experts knew exactly what will happen .
But we cope better with candidly acknowledged uncertainty than with false confidence .
When health officials tell us confidently that X is going to happen , and then Y happens instead , we lose trust in their leadership .
Smart officials are planning for various swine flu pandemic scenarios , and expecting surprises that will force them to change their plans .
They should tell us so .
2 . Don ’ t over-reassure .
So far , this pandemic is mild .
But even a mild influenza virus kills a lot of people , especially those with other medical problems .
And experts worry that the novel H1N1 virus could mutate into a more severe strain .
Yet officials endlessly insist that there is , as a Scottish health official put it , “ absolutely no need for the public to be concerned . ”
This is false and it could backfire .
Even before a situation deteriorates ( if it does ) , people sense when they are being “ calmed ” rather than informed .
Not trusting that officials will be candid about alarming information , we rely more on rumors .
Not trusting official over-reassurances , we become even more alarmed .
3 . Don ’ t worry about panic .
Panic is rare in emergencies .
Although people may feel panicky , they almost always behave well .
But “ panic panic ” – leaders ’ fear that they will be unable to stop their people from panicking – is both common and harmful .
In the grip of “ panic panic , ” officials issue over-reassuring statements , suppress or delay alarming news , and speak contemptuously about how the public is “ irrational , ” “ hysterical , ” or “ panicking . ”
Such disdainful communication further reduces trust .
4 . Don ’ t obsess over accusations of fear-mongering .
Nothing officials say is likely to cause panic , but they may be accused of causing panic no matter what they say .
Even when officials over-reassure , they ’ re often accused of fear-mongering by critics who can ’ t bear any signs of public concern .
That particular criticism is inevitable , and officials should shrug it off .
Far more officials have lost their jobs for under-warning the public about risks that turned out to be serious than for over-warning about risks that didn ’ t .
5 . Don ’ t fight the adjustment reaction .
While panic is rare , it is natural for people to need some time to adjust to a new risk – and this swine flu pandemic is new to us all .
We cannot skip what risk communicators call the “ adjustment reaction ” phase , during which we may become temporarily overanxious and hypervigilant , and may even take precautions that are technically unnecessary or premature .
Adjustment reactions are brief , but useful – a cognitive , logistical , and emotional rehearsal for possible hard times ahead .
Health officials should guide people through their adjustment reactions , not demand that they skip that step .
6 . Don ’ t oversell what the government is doing .
If I could ban one phrase from official statements , my first choice would be “ Everything is under control . ”
( “ There ’ s no need to panic ” would be a close second . )
Experts agree that pandemics can be slowed , but not “ contained . ” Officials who promise – or imply – that they can keep this pandemic from their borders , or stop it once it has arrived , are setting themselves up for public outrage later .
7 . Don ’ t oversell what the public can do .
It is good risk communication to offer people things to do .
Action gives us a sense of control , and helps us bear our fear .
And if H1N1 becomes more severe , people ( and communities ) who have prepared for that possibility will probably fare better than those who have not .
But hygiene recommendations like hand-washing and cough-covering help only a little .
Flu spreads more slowly if we all do our share , but it still spreads .
“ It ’ s not much , but it ’ s all we ’ ve got ” is just as effective a message as “ It will prevent the flu ” in getting people to adopt these measures – and truth is far more sustainable than exaggeration .
8 . Don ’ t ask the impossible .
Recommending measures that the public cannot implement creates a sense of futility , not a sense of control .
Officials shouldn ’ t urge people to wash their hands where clean water isn ’ t available .
They shouldn ’ t urge urban residents with underlying health conditions to “ avoid crowds ” without acknowledging empathically that it ’ s impossible to avoid crowds entirely for the duration of the pandemic .
9 . Don ’ t neglect the teachable moment .
In the developing world , swine flu ( so far ) is much less serious than many endemic health threats , and the main risk-communication goal should be to help people get through their adjustment reaction , take precautions that are feasible , and refocus on other priorities .
But in the developed world , swine flu has two long-lasting lessons to teach : ( 1 ) Flu is a bigger deal than many people imagine . ( 2 ) Eventually , a severe pandemic will strike , whether it ’ s H1N1 or not , and we should do what we can , now , to prepare .
Health officials in North America mostly missed the teachable moment .
Instead of these lessons , many people “ learned ” ( or mislearned ) that pandemics are paper tigers , and that health officials are fear-mongers .
Let us hope that officials elsewhere will do better .
