The Great American Tea Party
NEW YORK – Who were those flag-waving , cheering , hollering , singing , and praying Americans who gathered in Washington DC on the last Saturday in August at a rally to “ restore the honor ” of the United States ?
This tax-free jamboree of patriotism was ostensibly non-partisan ( otherwise it could not have been tax-free ) .
The main organizer and speaker was Glenn Beck , the right-wing populist radio and TV personality , who promised to restore not only the nation ’ s honor , but “ American values , ” too .
The other star was Sarah Palin , the darling of the populist Tea Party crowds , who began by paying her respect to Martin Luther King , Jr . For it was here , on this very same spot and date , that he gave his “ I have a dream ” speech in 1963 .
She then quickly proceeded to give a long celebratory speech about the heroism of US soldiers “ fighting for freedom ” abroad .
It seemed an odd – and to many offensive – transition : from King ’ s great plea for civil rights to Palin ’ s sentimental clichés about the military .
But then there was something odd about the entire event , just as there is something odd about the Tea Party movement itself .
This latest surge of American populism is financed by some extremely wealthy men , including a couple of oil billionaires named David and Charles Koch , who favor cutting taxes for the super-rich and abolishing government subsidies for the poor , such as Social Security and President Barack Obama ’ s health-care plan .
This agenda might seem selfish , though understandable from the point of view of an oil billionaire .
But who are all those people wildly cheering for the billionaire ’ s dream , on of all days the anniversary of Martin Luther King ’ s speech ?
They are almost uniformly white , largely middle-aged and above , and for the most part far from wealthy .
The majority have no college degree .
Many say that they are afraid of losing their jobs .
No doubt quite a few of them would have trouble paying the astronomical costs of American health-care bills without government assistance .
In other words , they would benefit from the publicly financed programs that the Tea Party ’ s sponsors wish to abolish .
And yet , there they are , denouncing as “ socialism ” Obama ’ s health-care legislation , or a slight tax increase for the richest 1 % of the population .
To them , “ socialism ” means “ European ” , or simply “ un-American . ”
Unlike the movement ’ s sponsors , the crowds chanting “ USA !
USA ! ” do not appear to be motivated by economic self-interest .
It is possible that many Americans are still so convinced that anyone who works hard will end up rich that they will support anything that favors billionaires .
But it is more likely that the grassroots of American populism are motivated by something else .
Populism everywhere is driven by fear and resentment : fear of being powerless , without status or privilege , and resentment of those – educated liberal elites , foreigners who supposedly take our jobs , and Muslims , Jews , blacks , or illegal immigrants – who seem to enjoy undeserved benefits .
These fears and resentments exist everywhere , now more than ever .
But they are not expressed in the same way in every country .
Rural Americans , living on the vast plains , uprooted and isolated from the outside world , have a history of expressing their longing for community and mystical identity by gathering in large numbers in churches and tents , listening to the grand statements of charismatic hucksters .
Sarah Palin and Glenn Beck are heirs to a long line of preachers and politicians who made their fortunes by stirring up anxious crowds , promising them Heaven on Earth , or at least a place in Heaven .
In the case of Beck ’ s rally in Washington DC , the link with history of rural churches and religious “ revival ” meetings was overt .
America , after “ wandering in darkness … today begins to turn back to God , ” Beck declared , in the typical style of a TV evangelist .
Part of such rabble-rousers ’ stock-in-trade is to conflate patriotism , freedom , and God .
This is the myth of the US , the God-blessed land of the free .
Underlying Beck ’ s “ non-partisan ” preacher ’ s talk about restoring American honor and values was a message that everyone in the crowd understood : such un-American elements as the liberal elites in New York and Washington , Democrats , and other God-less socialists had robbed America of its honor and values .
After the event , Beck gave an interview , in which he criticized Obama – not for his tax policies , but for having the wrong religious beliefs .
Obama , he said , believes in “ liberation theology , ” which means that he must be a “ socialist , ” thus un-American .
This is also what Palin means when she tells her Tea Party crowds that they are the “ real Americans , ” implying that all Americans who disagree with her views are not .
They are aliens who have no right to govern the nation .
The success of the Tea Party movement has made many Democrats ( and some sober Republicans ) nervous .
There are calls for the Democrats to fight back .
This is not impossible .
Democratic politicians have a populist tradition , too .
Talk of God , freedom , and nation is not unique to right-wing radicals or Republicans .
Franklin D. Roosevelt knew how to inspire the patriotism of working men .
John F. Kennedy was good at selling the American dream .
Lyndon B. Johnson had the common touch of rural Texas .
Barack Obama is from urban Hawaii but has all the rhetorical gifts of an old-fashioned preacher .
Alas , he has several distinct disadvantages , too : he was educated at two elite universities , his middle name is Hussein , and his father was black .
Any one of these would be a handicap at a time of rising populism , but the combination of all three is lethal .
The Tea Party movement – an economic agenda for the rich masquerading as the salvation of God-fearing white Americans – knows that all too well .
