Sarkozy Goes to War
PARIS – In 2003 , France , under President Jacques Chirac , took the lead in opposing America ’ s planned invasion of Saddam Hussein ’ s Iraq .
French Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin ’ s flamboyant speech at the United Nations encapsulated the “ spirit of resistance ” against what proved to be a dangerous adventure .
In 2011 , under President Nicolas Sarkozy , France has again taken a highly visible stand on a question of war and peace , except that now the French , together with the British , are leading the fight to protect Libya ’ s people from their erratic , brutal leader , Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi .
Why does France seem to crave such prominence ?
In the eyes of the French , France ’ s international status remains a key ingredient in forming their own national identity .
The way we French are perceived by others affects how we perceive ourselves , and nothing is more troubling for us than to be perceived with indifference or , worse , not to be noticed at all .
Suddenly , with the Libya issue , we can tell ourselves that we are catching up with Germany , whose pusillanimity is striking ; we are showing the way to the United States ; and the French ( and British ) flags are deployed in the streets of “ liberated ” Libya , together with that country ’ s own new flag .
And , just as suddenly , the French , according to early polls , are proud again to be French .
France ’ s seemingly natural propensity to intervene is reinforced in this case by three key factors : Sarkozy , Qaddafi , and the context of a wider Arab revolution .
The Sarkozy factor is fundamental .
The French president loves crises , with their concomitant surge of adrenaline .
For him , this is what power is about : taking hard decisions under unfavorable circumstances .
Of course , domestic considerations are not absent from Sarkozy ’ s thinking .
In 2007 , when he played a key role in the liberation of Bulgarian nurses imprisoned by Qaddafi , Libya ’ s leader was rewarded with what looked like a legitimacy prize : an official visit to Paris .
He was no longer a pariah , but an eccentric partner .
Today , by contrast , it all looks as if intervention may re-legitimate Sarkozy in the eyes of French citizens , whose votes he will need in next year ’ s presidential election .
An energetic and daring gambler , Sarkozy is taking a high but legitimate risk that he can retake the moral ( and political ) high ground .
Beyond Sarkozy is Qaddafi , the ideal villain .
A caricature of a despot , he personifies the type of odious adversary whom all democrats want to see defeated .
His behavior has been abominable for decades – and not only towards his people .
The terrorist attacks on Western targets that he ordered include not only the Pan Am tragedy in Lockerbie , Scotland , but also a French UTA plane blown up over Africa .
And not only is Qaddafi truly bad , but Libya is comparatively small , and his forces appear relatively weak ( this remains to be proven on the ground ) .
Aside from these personality factors , there is the regional context .
Preventing Qaddafi from rebuilding the wall of fear that fell in Tunisia and Egypt is essential if the “ Arab spring ” is not to be succeeded by a new winter of discontent .
What is now done in the sky over Libya – sanctioned by international law and , unlike in Iraq in 2003 , with the ambivalent political support of the Arab League – is fundamental if the Arab revolutionaries are to take a positive view of the West .
The West is not trying , as it did during the Crusades or the Imperialist conquests of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries , to impose its religion or values on the Arabs .
Instead , the West is defending common values , such as freedom , respect for human life , and the rule of law .
We have a duty to protect Arab lives and values , as Arabs themselves have requested .
France has a common history and geography with the countries on the southern Mediterranean shore .
The duty to intervene – and the cost of indifference – is probably higher for France than for any other Western country .
Indeed , France has a very large immigrant population that originated in the Maghreb , and for which the “ Arab spring ” is vitally important and a source of fascination and pride .
And today , with France taking the lead in an international effort to protect the Libyan people from their leader , they can feel simultaneously proud of being French and of their Arab roots .
These positive identities constitute the best protection against the sirens of fundamentalist Islam .
Of course , an ideal scenario implies that the intervention “ goes well , ” and that it does not incite confusion or chaos in Libya or the wider region .
France , together with Great Britain , and with the more distant support of the US , is undeniably risking much , for it is easier to start a war than it is to end one .
But it is a worthwhile risk .
The cost of non-intervention , of allowing Qaddafi to crush his own people , and of thus signaling to the world ’ s despots that a campaign of domestic terror is acceptable , is far more menacing .
Sarkozy has chosen the right course .
In fact , he has chosen the only possible way forward .
