Are Humans to Blame for Global Warming ?
Global warming is an environmental , economic , scientific , and political problem of the first order , and one doubly difficult to address because its dangers lie decades in the future .
So if we are to act now to head it off , we must first scrutinize what is known about the nature of the threat .
Should we place our faith in the Kyoto Treaty , which sets firm limits on human emissions of so-called greenhouse gases ?
Or is the US administration right to reject the Kyoto Treaty , because targeting emissions is based on " bad science " ?
Circumstantial evidence does indeed point to our profligate burning of fossil fuels and perhaps also to its impact on global warming .
Since 1900 the global temperature of the Earth 's atmosphere and ocean surface waters has risen by 0.5-1 degree Celsius , and the prime suspect is atmospheric carbon dioxide , CO2 , which is second only to water vapor in its greenhouse effect .
Since 1860 , when the industrial revolution and soaring population growth led to widespread consumption of fossil fuels , the volume of atmospheric CO2 has increased by about 28 % .
The increase began slowly , rising from 290 parts per million in 1860 to 295 ppm in 1900 .
But it then accelerated rapidly , reaching 310 ppm in 1950 and 370 ppm in 2000 , with half of the total gain of 80 ppm occurring just since 1975 .
Numerical global climate models suggest that a doubling of the current atmospheric accumulation of CO2 will produce further warming of 3-5 degrees Celsius , perhaps as soon as 2050 .
The consequences of this would be devastating : inland areas desiccated , low-lying coastal regions battered and flooded as polar ice melts and sea levels rise , and possibly further warming and a runaway greenhouse effect due to an increase in atmospheric water vapor .
The only rational course of action would seem to be to curtail global consumption of fossil fuels , as the Kyoto Treaty 's proponents contend , and invest in alternative energy sources .
But while researchers created impressive global climate models in recent years , they are the first to admit that such models can include only a fraction of the many physical forces that together determine the climate and global mean temperature .
For example , studies during the past 20 years have shown that changes in solar magnetic activity cause the Sun 's brightness to vary by 0.1 % , and that the average annual temperature in the northern Temperate Zone has tracked the level of solar activity over the last 1,000 years .
Indeed , monitoring of other solar-type stars has revealed one whose brightness decreased by 0.5 % in a period of 5 years , during which its magnetic activity declined sharply , suggesting that the Sun behaves similarly .
Core samples from the Greenland ice cap , for example , show occasional sudden drops in temperature .
Contrary to what climate models focusing on greenhouse gas emissions would predict , the samples show that a decline in atmospheric CO2 followed , rather than preceded , these frigid intervals .
What , then , is responsible for global warming so far ? A safe bet is that from 1900 until 1950 , global warming was driven mainly by the solar brightening , as solar magnetic activity increased by a factor of two or three during this period .
Atmospheric CO2 could not have been a major contributor , because it had increased by only about 7 % before 1950 , when the warming leveled off for a couple of decades . After 1950 , however , solar activity showed no significant rise , while atmospheric CO2 increased by 20 % , accounting for the warming from 1970 to 2000 .
Atmospheric CO2 is therefore presumably the controlling factor for the coming century as well .
But this does not mean that human emissions are responsible for the growing accumulation of atmospheric CO2 . The atmosphere contains about 750 gigatons of CO2 , while total annual human emission is approximately 5.5 Gt , thus adding annually roughly 0.7 % of the total .
This equilibrium is , in turn , determined by the temperature of ocean surface water . So it is plausible that the solar-driven ocean warming between 1900 and 1950 started things off by shifting the equilibrium toward higher concentrations of CO2 in the atmosphere , accelerating global warming since then .
So , while our own contribution of CO2 is not helping matters , it hardly seems to be the determining factor . On the available evidence , then , skeptics of the Kyoto Treaty appear to have a powerful case .
For example , aside from solar magnetic activity , the Sun affects the Earth 's climate in several other ways , including ultraviolet warming of the upper stratosphere , the nucleation of aerosols , and cloud formation . The climate is also subject to the rate of water vapor exchange between the atmosphere and Earth 's surface , which requires taking into account ocean currents , wind , and geography .
All of these contributing effects must be understood quantitatively in order to produce an accurate model of global climate change and we remain far from that point .
So the only rational response is to research aggressively into the many unknown factors : the physics of cloud formation , the dynamic coupling of the upper stratosphere to the lower atmosphere , the accumulation of atmospheric water vapor .
If effective solutions are to be found , they must await a fuller definition of the problem .
