The Devaluation Delusion Revisited
" The dollar is our currency and your problem . " So America 's Treasury Secretary quipped before President Nixon pulled the plug on the Bretton Woods system three decades ago .
What John Connolly 's bluntness reflected was America 's ability--and willingness--to export its economic problems by driving down the dollar 's value while scapegoating countries opposed to that strategy .
President George W. Bush seems hell-bent on repeating Nixon 's misbegotten policy .
Like the Nixon / Connolly team , the Bush administration is responding to America 's massive budget and trade deficits by letting the dollar fall--and hard --while it also tries to distract attention from its responsibility by pointing an accusing finger at China as the cause for both US joblessness and deflationary pressures .
This strategy , however , is likely to prove as ineffective now as it was for Nixon , who succeeded only in ushering in an era of stagnation .
Bush 's policy is doomed to fail because , as in the 1970 's , America 's economic problems are homegrown .
They are not imported and cannot be fixed merely by changing the dollar 's value .
The world 's reliance on the US as the one source of growth in global demand buttresses America 's currency power play , but at the cost of aggravating vast global imbalances .
Since 2000 , America 's excess productive capacity has outstripped the Euro area and Japan combined , its economy growing far more slowly than its 3.5 % to 4 % annual potential , with US unemployment rising .
This pitiful performance incites angry cries that American jobs are disappearing abroad , and that low-cost exports may result in deflation .
Sadly , America is not alone in viewing devaluation as a panacea for domestic problems .
Too timid to undertake serious reforms at home , Japanese authorities fight to keep the yen 's value as low as possible against the dollar and rival Asian currencies .
Similarly , the European Union created the euro to give its members increased currency stability .
When the euro was down , wounded pride forced EU governments to try talking it up .
Now that the euro is up , those same governments are trying to talk it down .
The euro 's dizzying trade-weighted ascent over the past year is , indeed , exacerbating near-term pressures within the EU .
But the Union 's finance ministers would be better off pushing the internal reforms Europe needs , rather than following the Bush example and pressing the European Central Bank to force a strong currency down to earth .
Yet America 's currency strategy is the most reckless--another mighty error in an economic policy so wayward that it is hard to know where to begin listing the mistakes .
Perhaps the best place to start is with the speedy deterioration in America 's federal budget in the past two years .
From a surplus of 1.4 % of GDP in 2000 , the Bush administration has delivered a deficit of 4.6 % of GDP this year .
US budget deficits may have spared America and the world economy even worse performances over the past two years , but fixing what ails the US is now far more difficult .
Tightening fiscal policy would go a long way towards boosting confidence in the US .
It might also help push the rest of the world into moving away from its reliance on America as the sole engine of growth .
Growth elsewhere might help America export more .
But this won 't provide the quick fix that the Bush administration yearns for , because a declining dollar need not bring about an equivalent rise in the price of US imports .
This is partly because the final price of an imported good reflects numerous costs such as distribution and marketing , which are unaffected by the exchange rate .
Indeed , many countries that export to the US--especially Japan and China--price their goods in dollars .
Because these countries are keen to maintain their share in the world 's biggest market , they often absorb the effect of a drop in the dollar by cutting their profits rather than raise prices .
As a recent study by J.P. Morgan 's Chief Economist John Lipsky shows , the link between exchange rates and trade is weakening .
What makes US strategy reckless is that the Bush administration is attacking China at the very moment that America 's dependence on Chinese purchases of US government bonds is growing .
Without these purchases , the US might face a rise in domestic interest rates that could threaten both its economic recovery and the global economy .
Moreover , if China decided to sell its dollar holdings , the bond market would discount US government securities , raising US long-term interest rates and canceling much ( perhaps all ) of whatever stimulus has been provided by the dollar 's depreciation .
Luckily , China 's government knows that America 's advice to let the renminbi float right now is dangerous--both to China and for the world economy .
Policies intended to benefit one country 's economy at the expense of another , such as competitive devaluations , were widespread during the Great Depression of the 1930 's .
For most of the postwar era , governments appeared to have learned the lesson of that time .
So it is bizarre that , today , leaders in the world 's strongest economies are dabbling in such dangerous nonsense again .
To fix its domestic problems , America must tighten its budget , not drive down the dollar 's value .
But with presidential elections looming , no US government would cut spending or raise taxes .
So forget about the economically illiterate Bush administration daring to do either .
The silver lining here is that this failure may revive the realization that no country--not even mighty America--can devalue its way out of trouble .
