The Eternal Life of America ’ s Megabanks
WASHINGTON , DC – The world economy faces a major problem : the largest banks in the United States remain “ too big to fail , ” meaning that if one or more of them were in serious trouble , they would be saved by government action – because the consequences of inaction are just too scary .
This problem is widely acknowledged , not just by officials but by bankers themselves .
In fact , there is near unanimity that fixing it is a top policy priority .
Even Jamie Dimon , the powerful head of the very large JP Morgan Chase , emphasizes that “ too big to fail ” must end .
Unfortunately , the Obama administration ’ s proposed approach to ending “ too big to fail ” – now taken up by the US Congress – will not work .
The current center of legislative attention is Senator Christopher Dodd ’ s financial reform bill , which has passed out of the Senate Banking Committee and will presumably soon be debated on the Senate floor .
Dodd ’ s bill would create a “ resolution authority , ” meaning a government agency with the legal power to take over and close down failing financial institutions .
The bill ’ s proponents argue that this approach builds on the success of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC ) , which has a long track record of closing down small- and medium-sized banks in the US with minimal disruption and no losses for depositors .
In this context , “ resolution ” means that a bank ’ s managers are fired , shareholders are wiped out , and unsecured creditors can suffer losses .
Essentially , this is a form of bankruptcy , but with more administrative discretion ( and presumably more protection for depositors ) than would be possible in a court-supervised process .
Applying this process to large banks and to financial institutions that are not formally banks – and that do not have insured retail deposits – sounds fine on paper .
But in practice there is an insurmountable difficulty with this approach .
Think about the critical moment of decision – when a megabank , like JP Morgan Chase ( with a balance sheet of roughly $ 2 trillion ) , may be on the brink of failure .
You are a senior decision maker – perhaps the Secretary of the Treasury or a key adviser to the US president – for this is the level at which the plug must be pulled .
You have Senator Dodd ’ s Resolution Authority and you enter the decisive meeting determined not to save the troubled bank – or , at worst , to save it with a substantial “ haircut ” ( i.e. , losses ) for unsecured creditors .
Then someone reminds you that JP Morgan Chase is a complex global financial institution .
The Dodd Authority allows the US government only to determine the terms of an official takeover within the US .
In dozens of other countries where JP Morgan operates subsidiaries , branches , or other kinds of business , there would be “ plain vanilla ” bankruptcy – while some governments would jump in with various ad hoc arrangements .
The consequences of this combination of uncoordinated responses would be widespread , scary , and bordering on chaos .
This is exactly what happened when Lehman Brothers failed in September 2008 , and what happened when AIG was taken over by the US government ( actually in a resolution-type structure , with losses implied for creditors ) two days later .
The existence of a US resolution authority does not help contain the damage or limit the panic arising from a big global bank in trouble .
The failure of such a bank could be managed in a more orderly fashion by using a cross-border resolution authority .
But there is no such mechanism in place , and there is no chance that one will be created in the near future .
Responsible policymakers in other G-20 countries are very clear on this point : no one will agree ex ante to a specific way of handling the failure of any global bank .
At the moment when JP Morgan Chase – or any of America ’ s six largest banks – fails , the choice will be just like that of September 2008 : do you rescue the bank in question or do you let it fail , and face likely chaos in markets and a potential re-run of the Great Depression ?
What will the president decide ?
He or she may have promised , even in public , that creditors would face losses , but on the edge of the precipice , which way will you , the beleaguered adviser , urge the president to go ?
Will you really argue that the president should leap over the edge , thereby plunging millions of people – their jobs , their homes , and their families – into a financial abyss ?
Or will you pull back and find some ingenious way to save the bank and protect its creditors using public money or the Federal Reserve or some other emergency power ?
You will , in all likelihood , step back .
When the chips are down , it is far less scary to save a megabank than to let it go .
And of course the credit markets know this , so they lend more cheaply to JP Morgan Chase and other megabanks than to smaller banks that really can fail .
This enables the bigger banks to get bigger .
And the bigger they are , the safer creditors become – you see where this goes .
Senator Dodd ’ s bill , as currently drafted , will not end “ too big to fail . ”
As you can infer from the title of my new book , 13 Bankers : The Wall Street Takeover and the Next Financial Meltdown ( co-authored with James Kwak ) , the global consequences will be dire .
