The Fire Down Below
WARSAW : Bombing Serbia and Serb forces in Kosovo are not exactly what NATO 's new members in Central Europe expected when they joined the West 's premier security organization .
Poland , but also Hungary and the Czech Republic , believed they were joining yesterday 's NATO - an alliance to protect Europe against threats from the East .
It is this goal that made them mobilize resources and public opinion in order to join the privileged group .
Now they find themselves in an organization in the process of radical transformation .
It is said of NATO 's attack on Serbia that it is the first war of the 21st century .
Fighting in Kosovo is the first significant conflict which , for one side at least , involves no considerations of strategy , territory , population , natural resources , or even ideology .
The West is fighting a war over principles , a war , as President Clinton put it , " to end a moral tragedy . "
At issue is an attempt to stop an epidemic , the carriers of which in 20th century Europe have been nazism , communism , fascism , and now , nationalism .
NATO , for the first time , has intervened in the internal affairs of another country .
This is a significant change in NATO policy , which downgrades the idea of the sovereignty of states and elevates the status of ethical norms in international relations .
A lot seems to rest on a consensus about moral norms and about who is right and who is wrong .
While few question the immorality of Serbs ' behavior , future moral crusades may be more controversial .
In addition to moral considerations , the decision to intervene was motivated by concerns about the future of European-American relations , and of NATO after the cold war .
The fall of the Soviet Union undercut the primary source of NATO 's legitimacy .
Who is threatened by Russia today ?
It is Russia 's weakness that is a threat , and raises fears of chaos , unforseen uses of nuclear weapons , or another Chernobyl .
NATO is in the process of working out a new doctrine that is to be adopted later this month in Washington during the celebrations of NATO 's 50th anniversary .
It remains a defensive alliance , but one ready to attack to protect peace and stability or to fight terrorism and nuclear proliferation .
The new NATO raises the urgent issue of public support .
Why , people ask , should the allied countries pay the heavy price of war , and perhaps sacrifice the lives of their soldiers , when there is no danger to their national security or vital national interests ?
In the era of immediate access to information and the shock of television images , wars cannot be conducted without popular support .
Superficially , this makes morally motivated wars easier : scenes of misery on TV incite visceral emotional reactions and feelings of solidarity .
But public opinion can change when a conflict does not involve one 's own security or vital interests , especially when the allied victims are one 's sons and brothers , or the other party responds with terrorist attacks .
Fear of the fickleness of public opinion leads to reliance on technology and the doctrine of " zero victims " - the myth of war without risks that dominates today 's allied actions .
All are aware that ground troops are necessary to end the expulsions of ethnic Albanians and chase the Serbs from Kosovo .
Nevertheless Presidents Clinton and Chirac , Prime Ministers Blair and Shroeder , cling to the notion that ground troops will only enter the fray in what Clinton euphemistically calls a " permissive environment . "
Bombing is thus a compromise between activity and inactivity , between the necessity of intervention and the unwillingness to bear risks .
Declaring in advance - in defiance of the elementary rules of war making - that NATO will not use ground troops gave Milosevic the advantages of initiative and a sense of security .
While NATO conducted its air attacks , paramilitary Serbian bands , more or less controlled by Belgrade , conducted their own war against civilians .
How pathetic the reaction of NATO 's Secretary General , Javier Solana : " We may not have the means to stop it , but we have shown that we have the will to try . "
We are thus faced with a dramatic contradiction between universalist aspirations and an unwillingness to pay the price these aspirations demand .
The result is a choice of palliatives .
Here is the root of NATO 's weakness and a serious question about its future .
The Soviet threat generated a readiness to defend oneself and to bear heavy burdens .
Can one count on this readiness when the threat is real , but more diffuse , abstract , potential , and often geographically remote ?
The durability of the alliance depends on the answer to this question .
The West has lost the battle of Kosovo , but certainly not yet the war .
The stakes are high .
From the perspective of the allies , they involve more than the dramatic fate of the expelled Kosovars and Balkan stability .
At stake is NATO and the future of European-American relations .
Paradoxically , NATO 's recent actions have undermined the very credibility they were supposed establish in the new post-cold-war environment .
Prominent among those who anxiously await a solution to this paradox are the newest members of the Atlantic alliance .
