Rules for a Wired World
NEW YORK : We hear much about the " new economy " , based on networking and globalization .
Is this " new economy " really new , or just the same old thing with a few new wrinkles ?
The world has fundamentally changed .
The first thing that changed - and is still changing - is the velocity of change itself .
It took 40 years for radio to get 50 million listeners in America .
It took 13 years for television to gain a like number .
It took 4 years for the World Wide Web to get 50 million domestic users , and its use is growing 1000 % a year .
The rule that the speed and number of transistors double every 18 months is now more than matched by the expectation that total bandwidth of the world ’ s communication systems will triple every 12 months .
As bandwidth grows the cost of information transmission will move toward zero .
Although this historically unprecedented velocity of change makes generalizations more hazardous than usual , it is safe to say that one basic way in which the world has changed is the manner in which wealth is created .
When this happens the old ruling classes find it difficult to see themselves as obsolete .
Just as the landed gentry ridiculed the new industrialists who sullied farmland with huge factories , so some industrialists ridicule today ’ s knowledge workers , calling them hamburger flippers .
The more strident complain of " de-industrialization . "
It used to be thought that scarcity created value , that the more produced of a given item , the less its value .
In a network economy the reverse is true : one fax machine is worth nothing ; two fax machines something ; 1000 machines connected together create real value , and that value goes up as more machines join the network .
The same is true of networked computers .
Every day more examples appear .
In the industrial economy , if you suggested that the way to make your company rich was by pricing your product at zero and giving it away , you would earn very few promotions .
In the new economy this tactic created millionaires .
Netscape gave away the first 40 million copies of its software .
Sun gave away its Java language .
Both companies prospered by establishing a standard and then selling upgrades or enhancements .
One problem in sorting out the truth is finding words to describe it .
As the Agricultural Age faded , a whole new vocabulary was invented , and the world became familiar with terms like steam pressure , revolutions per minute , and assembly lines .
As the Industrial Age fades , new words like bits , bytes , CD ROM , and floppy disks describe the new economy ’ s workings .
Economics - which is supposed to understand changes in the way things are made - is lagging behind .
Today , economic textbooks are full of formulas , but increasingly we learn that the old paradigm is giving way to a new science of complexity .
The global market today is the very model of what scientists call a complex adaptive system , which are nonlinear and tend to resemble biological rather than mechanical systems .
While we now have the ability to rent a car at a distant airport equipped with a Global Posting System to guide us unerringly to a hotel we have never seen , we still cannot put anywhere near the same of measure of reliance on any of our common economic measures .
This shift to a complex , information-based global economy effects the way nations behave .
When natural resources dominated production , conquest and control of territory seemed a way to enhance national power .
As recently as WWII , armies fought for control of the Ruhr Basin .
Nowadays such assets may constitute a liability .
In the Industrial Age , plants became ever larger and less easy to move .
As long as capital consisted largely of factories , heavy equipment and raw materials , there was little fear that assets could or would move , so governments held all the cards .
In the new economy , intellectual capital dominates production , and it is mobile .
It can and does move when the hand of government becomes too heavy or grasping .
Money always goes where it wants , fleeing restrictions and staying where it is well treated .
This old rule applies to both old and new economies .
Nothing , however , is more portable and easy to move than intellectual capital .
Bill Gates created a company with one of the largest market capitalizations in the world yet can move with ease through customs with " nothing to declare . "
His wife , however , may be assessed duty on her ring .
Moreover , it is next to impossible to find a product that consists entirely of materials and parts produced in one country .
This extraordinary manufacturing system of value added in many countries is made possible by the fact that information moves across , over , and through national borders as if they did not exist .
Today software written in India rides the satellite to a building site in Chicago or an accounting firm in New York , or anywhere else in the world .
The writer requires no green card , no entrance visa or physical journey to earn his or her money .
This phenomenon constitutes a new kind of economic organization and changes the dynamics of how and where people earn their money .
It is possible to have full employment in some remote village even though no businesses are hiring in that neighborhood , or even in that nation .
Some old rules , of course , still apply .
Markets go up and down ; mass psychology plays its role .
Adam Smith ’ s " invisible hand " still operates , albeit electronically at near the speed of light .
Yet old rules survive because they are based , not only on economic dogma , but on human nature , which is unchanged .
What Adam Smith described as " the natural effort of every individual to better his own condition " motivates the people who drive the new economy just as it did the old .
But the manner in which one gets rich has changed dramatically .
