Tea Time in America
NEW YORK – Ever since the first “ Tea Party ” convention was held last month in Nashville , Tennessee , with Sarah Palin as one of the keynote speakers , America ’ s political and media establishments have been reacting with a combination of apprehension and disdain .
The Speaker of the US House of Representatives , Nancy Pelosi , has called the Tea Party adherents Nazis , while the mainstream media tend to portray them as ignorant and provincial , a passive rabble with raw emotion but little analytical skill , stirred up and manipulated by demagogues to advance their own agendas .
To be sure , the Tea Party ’ s brand of aggrieved populism – and its composition of mostly white , angry , middle-class voters – has deep roots in the United States , flaring up during times of change .
But observers who have drawn comparisons to the Know-Nothings , the racist , paranoid , anti-Catholic , and anti-immigrant party that surged in the 1850 ’ s , are reading the movement far too superficially .
Indeed , those who deride and dismiss this movement do so at their peril .
While some Tea Partiers may be racist or focused on eccentric themes – such as the validity of Barack Obama ’ s birth certificate – far more of them , those who were part of the original grass-roots effort , are focused on issues that have merit .
If you actually listen to them , instead of just reading accounts transmitted through the distorting mirror of the mainstream media , you hear grievances that are profound , as well as some proposals that are actually ahead of their time .
For example , Tea Party activists , using a group called End the Fed , were among the first to focus critical attention on the unelected and unaccountable US Federal Reserve Board .
Now legislation is being put forward to establish greater transparency at the Fed – surely a laudable outcome .
While those attracted to the Tea Party movement are a diverse group , some common themes emerge .
They see a struggle for the soul of the Tea Party between true libertarians , who are worried about individual liberties , and traditional conservatives .
Many who spoke to me directly in my Facebook community believe that Congress is utterly broken and regard faith in either of America ’ s major parties as naïve .
They view the Democrats and the Republicans alike as obstacles to change , drowning out the voices of the people as they kowtow to special interests .
They are concerned about concentrated Federal control , spiraling debt , and the loss of individual rights .
Are they really wrong ?
After all , the movement took shape following the US government ’ s massive – and bipartisan – bailout of Wall Street banks .
And , at a time when the Chinese government , America ’ s main creditor , has begun sending clear signals about its preferences for US domestic policy – even as it ignores American criticism of its human rights record – are the Tea Partiers merely being paranoid ?
As little as I like Sarah Palin , the fact is that entrenched lobbying and other special interests mean that a “ changing of the guard ” in Washington is too often only a change in branding .
As Barack Obama submits to the pressures of a US Department of Defense in which private contractors comprise 65 % of the staffing budget , proposes preventive detention of Guantánamo detainees , and perpetuates the status quo in myriad other ways , her question – “ So how ’ s that whole hopey-changey thing workin ’ out for ya ? ” – is not the wrong question .
Indeed , for nearly a decade , concentration of executive power has threatened America ’ s system of checks and balances and given the Federal government the authority to spy on citizens , withhold information , and aggressively arrest and even Taser protesters – or to hire private contractors to do so .
In these circumstances , the Tea Party activists ’ focus on supporting states ’ autonomy – and even on property rights and the right to bear arms – can seem like a prescient effort to constrain overweening corporate and military power in national government .
That is why the elites in general are so quick to ridicule this movement .
A movement that is genuinely populist in origin poses a threat to their own position in the power structure .
For once , a grassroots movement has arisen that is composed of people – some with Ivy League degrees , but many without – who are taking seriously the Internet-age promise that you don ’ t have to yield leadership to an established class of politicians and pundits .
This is also why the Republicans are seeking to capture the Tea Party movement ’ s energy for partisan purposes , overrunning it with well-paid operatives , particularly from former Representative Dick Armey ’ s fundraising and advocacy organization .
Moreover , Tea Party gatherings have increasingly become a platform for Republican candidates seeking the support of a highly mobilized electoral base .
I hope that the Republican establishment does not succeed in co-opting the Tea Party – and that the Democratic establishment does not , either .
And I hope that the movement captures the imagination of progressives , who are equally disgusted with the corruption of the status quo , and who can agree on many thematic goals , even if their policy proposals might be different .
At its worst , any populist movement can descend to demagoguery .
But the Tea Party movement at its best ( or in its origin ) is constitutionalist .
That is an awakening – and long overdue – sentiment in America , and one that spans the political divide .
The Tea Party movement ’ s adherents are angry – and , in many respects , justifiably so – but most of them are not crazy .
That diagnosis better suits those who prefer to ignore them .
