Soft Power and the Struggle Against Terrorism
Last year , at the World Economic Forum in Davos , Switzerland , George Carey , the former Archbishop of Canterbury , asked Secretary of State Colin Powell why the United States seemed to focus only on its hard power rather than its soft power .
Secretary Powell replied that the US had used hard power to win World War II , but he continued : " What followed immediately after hard power ?
Did the US ask for dominion over a single nation in Europe ?
No .
Soft power came in the Marshall Plan ¼ .We did the same thing in Japan . "
After the war in Iraq ended , I spoke about soft power ( a concept I developed ) to a conference co-sponsored by the US Army in Washington .
One speaker was Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld .
According to a press account , " the top military brass listened sympathetically , " but when someone asked Rumsfeld for his opinion on soft power , he replied , " I don 't know what it means . "
One of Rumsfeld 's " rules " is that " weakness is provocative . "
He is correct , up to a point .
As Osama bin Laden observed , people like a strong horse .
But power , defined as the ability to influence others , comes in many guises , and soft power is not weakness .
On the contrary , it is the failure to use soft power effectively that weakens America in the struggle against terrorism .
Soft power is the ability to get what one wants by attracting others rather than threatening or paying them .
It is based on culture , political ideals , and policies .
When you persuade others to want what you want , you do not have to spend as much on sticks and carrots to move them in your direction .
Hard power , which relies on coercion , grows out of military and economic might .
It remains crucial in a world populated by threatening states and terrorist organizations .
But soft power will become increasingly important in preventing terrorists from recruiting new supporters , and for obtaining the international cooperation necessary for countering terrorism .
The US is more powerful than any country since the Roman Empire , but like Rome , America is neither invincible nor invulnerable .
Rome did not succumb to the rise of another empire , but to the onslaught of waves of barbarians .
Modern high-tech terrorists are the new barbarians .
The US cannot alone hunt down every suspected Al Qaeda leader .
Nor can it launch a war whenever it wishes without alienating other countries .
The four-week war in Iraq was a dazzling display of America 's hard military power that removed a vicious tyrant .
But it did not remove America 's vulnerability to terrorism .
It was also costly in terms of our soft power to attract others .
In the aftermath of the war , polls showed a dramatic decline in the popularity of the US even in countries like Britain , Spain , and Italy , whose governments supported the war .
America 's standing plummeted in Islamic countries , whose support is needed to help track the flow of terrorists , tainted money , and dangerous weapons .
The war on terrorism is not a clash of civilizations - Islam versus the West - but a civil war within Islamic civilization between extremists who use violence to enforce their vision and a moderate majority who want things like jobs , education , health care , and dignity as they pursue their faith .
America will not win unless the moderates win .
American soft power will never attract Osama bin Laden and the extremists .
Only hard power can deal with them .
But soft power will play a crucial role in attracting moderates and denying the extremists new recruits .
During the Cold War , the West 's strategy of containment combined the hard power of military deterrence with the soft power of attracting people behind the Iron Curtain .
Behind the wall of military containment , the West ate away Soviet self-confidence with broadcasts , student and cultural exchanges , and the success of capitalist economics .
As a former KGB official later testified , " Exchanges were a Trojan horse for the Soviet Union .
They played a tremendous role in the erosion of the Soviet system . "
In retirement , President Dwight Eisenhower said that he should have taken money out of the defense budget to strengthen the US Information Agency .
With the Cold War 's end , Americans became more interested in budget savings than in investing in soft power .
In 2003 , a bipartisan advisory group reported that the US was spending only $ 150 million on public diplomacy in Muslim countries , an amount it called grossly inadequate .
Indeed , the combined cost for the State Department 's public diplomacy programs and all of America 's international broadcasting is just over $ 1 billion , about the same amount spent by Britain or France , countries that are one-fifth America 's size and whose military budgets are only 25 % as large .
No one would suggest that America spend as much to launch ideas as to launch bombs , but it does seem odd that the US spends 400 times as much on hard power as on soft power .
If the US spent just 1 % of the military budget on soft power , it would quadruple its current spending on this key component of the war on terrorism .
If America is to win that war , its leaders are going to have to do better at combining soft and hard power into " smart power . "
