Asia ’ s Fragile Special Relationship
NEW DELHI – “ Tzu-Ch ’ in asked Tzu-Kung a few questions ;
Tzu-Kung answered : … Our Master gets things ( done ) by being cordial , frank , courteous , temperate , deferential .
That is our … way . ”
But will Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao live up to that standard , as conveyed in the Analects of Confucius , on his current visit to India ?
The world has a variety of “ special relationships . ”
The United States ’ partnership with the United Kingdom is one forged in war – and a pillar of the West for more than a half-century .
The US-Soviet rivalry of the Cold War era was special in that relations between those two countries shaped the fate of the world until the USSR imploded .
The US and China are said to be forging a new special relationship .
But , in looking toward the future of Asia – and , indeed , the future of world diplomacy – it is the relationship between the world ’ s two most populous countries and largest emerging economies , India and China , which will increasingly set the global agenda .
Japan ’ s change of military doctrine for the first time since the start of the Cold War – a shift that implicitly makes China the greatest threat – suggests that the Chinese leadership needs to take a hard look at its regional grand strategy .
Wen ’ s priorities for his trip to India are clear : trade , security , and , far behind , the territorial disputes between the two countries .
Such an approach might make tactical diplomatic sense , as long as there is no background clatter .
But it lacks a sense of strategic urgency , which , given rising international tensions across Asia , amounts to a serious strategic blunder .
The sources of those tensions are clear : North Korea ’ s shelling of South Korea ’ s Yeonpyeong Island and its flaunting of a modern , previously unknown , nuclear plant ; the US-led armada now cruising through the South China and Yellow Sea ; and China ’ s claim that the South China Sea is an area of vital national interest akin to Tibet .
In its bilateral relations with India , China ’ s shift in focus from its claims on the Northeastern Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh to Jammu and Kashmir is enormously worrisome .
Indeed , around Gilgit in Kashmir , China ’ s People ’ s Liberation Army has greatly enhanced its troop presence .
Small wonder that , on the eve of Wen ’ s visit , China ’ s ambassador in New Delhi finds relations between the two countries to be “ very fragile , easily damaged , and difficult to repair . ”
But , despite all this diplomatic friction , Wen ’ s entourage for his visit is dominated by a large business delegation .
Currently , both countries ’ economies are thrusting confidently forward ; both are thirsty for more and bigger markets .
India is growing at an annual rate of around 9 % ;
China at around 10 % .
So the opportunities for trade between the two are certainly enormous .
But , for both countries , economic growth is not hurdle-free .
India ’ s economy is continuing to grow , but faces rising inflation , fiscal and current-account deficits , a slowdown in agricultural growth , and infrastructure bottlenecks .
China ’ s problems arise mainly from widening income disparities , which are inciting hitherto unheard of levels of labor unrest – though this should not be viewed as a precursor to change of the sort that marked the rise of the Solidarity trade union and the end of communism in Poland .
But labor unrest and the desire to maintain 10 % growth suggest that China should be taking the lead in ensuring peace on the Korean peninsula and preventing other political developments from derailing its economy .
After all , as the Chinese leadership knows , only continued strong growth will provide the government with the wriggle room it needs to begin to revalue the renminbi .
Revaluation of its currency is necessary in part because the undervalued renminbi has become yet another a source of friction in Asia , as many in the region now believe the Chinese are using their currency as a “ policy weapon . ”
To untangle the complex policy web surrounding the renminbi ’ s value will demand greater regional stability , not less .
Yet China ’ s international grand strategy does not appear to reflect this .
Instead , it remains focused on Northeast Asia , Tibet , Taiwan , and on its aspirations to move into the Indian Ocean , that great global highway of trade in the twenty-first century .
China ’ s leaders recognize that their country needs time , space , and peace for economic development .
Yet their pursuit of a dominant position on the strategic chokepoints in the Indian Ocean undermines these goals by raising tensions not only with India , but with Asia ’ s other powers and the US .
Their focus on inhibiting India seems particularly misguided , given that China ’ s core interests ( Tibet , Taiwan , and the heartland of the Chinese mainland ) are far beyond the reach of most of India ’ s military capabilities .
By contrast , India ’ s most important national security concerns – the unsettled border between the two countries , and Beijing ’ s ties with Pakistan , which often operates as a Chinese surrogate – are closely connected to China : Both factors are directly linked to China ’ s perceived threat to India ’ s Himalayan territory and its rapid development of strategic infrastructure in that region .
India ’ s concerns also focus on China ’ s ongoing supply of arms , including missiles and nuclear weapons technology , to Pakistan .
No amount of discussion over trade can obscure the true issues of vital concern between China and India .
China may take comfort in remaining focused on non-core issues , because such an approach suggests tactical cooperation with India .
That is a convenient international ploy , but it leaves the sources of bilateral discord unattended .
The idea of collaboration only in areas of interest to China while neglecting issues of substance to India is untenable , even in the short term .
Indeed , neglect of the core disputes is what has resulted in the relationship ’ s “ extreme fragility . ”
India cannot and will not abandon its territorial sovereignty , or its pursuit of secure land borders or a greater balance in trade .
These are challenges that cry out for clarity , not diplomatic fudges .
But surely two great and ancient civilizations can find their way to the type of “ cordial , frank , courteous , temperate , deferential … ” relations that would have pleased Confucius .
