The Bush in Obama
GUANTÁNAMO BAY , CUBA – Hearings are underway in the United States Senate to assess what to do with the 240 detainees still behind bars at Guantánamo Bay , and what will become of the military tribunals and detention without trial that the Bush administration and a compliant Congress put into place .
The US Congress is also debating what will happen to the detention camp itself , which was established in 2002 to house men who were allegedly “ the worst of the worst , ” in a setting deliberately framed by Bush attorneys as “ legal outer space . ”
But are those Senate hearings actually window dressing on a new reality that is just as bad as the old one – and in some ways worse ?
Military tribunals without due process are up and running again .
While President Barack Obama has released a few prisoners , notably the Chinese Uighurs , and sent another for a real trial in New York City , he is now , chillingly , signalling that he is about to begin “ preventive detention , ” which would empower him to hold forever an unspecified number of prisoners without charges or trials .
On a visit to Guantánamo , Department of Defense spokesman Joe DellaVedova told me that a series of panels are reviewing the detainees ’ files , a process that will take until this year ’ s end .
The review will sort the detainees into three categories : those who will be tried in criminal courts in the US ; those who will be released and sent to other countries ; and those who “ can ’ t be released and can ’ t be tried and so have to be held indefinitely … what is being called ‘ preventive detention . ’ ”
I was stunned .
DellaVedova ’ s comment suggested that the review process was merely political theatre .
If there is to be a genuine review of the accusations against these detainees , how can it be known in advance that the third category will be required ?
Indefinite preventive detention is , of course , the foundation of a police state .
Human rights organizations knew that Obama had prepared the way , in public-relations terms , for some criminal trials – talking up the “ supermax ” security of some US prisons , and noting that other terrorists have successfully been tried by America ’ s justice system .
( Other democracies , such as the United Kingdom and Spain , always try terrorism suspects , including alleged Al Qaida members , in ordinary criminal trials ) .
But , six months after he ordered an end to torture and CIA “ black sites , ” and promised to close Guantánamo within a year , Obama seems to be re-branding Bush ’ s worst excesses .
He has brought in planeloads of journalists to Guantánamo Bay to show them a “ safe , transparent , and humane ” facility that now offers fresh baklava and video viewing from a shackled loveseat .
But the roughly 240 detainees remain incarcerated without having been charged with any crime , and will still not get a fair trial , even under Obama ’ s proposed military commissions .
After all , the prosecutor , the judge , and the “ panel ” are all to be US government employees .
Furthermore , Obama ’ s Justice Department has invoked Bush ’ s argument that the State Secrets Act bars evidence about torture from being disclosed , which means that anyone who was tortured can never appear in court .
Moreover , Obama has sought to suppress hundreds of photographs depicting sexual assault in US-run prisons , and has done nothing to roll back the Patriot Act .
Why should Obama , a constitutional scholar , be backtracking this way ?
First , he does not dare appear to be “ soft on terror . ”
Second , perhaps he needs to be able to try the Guantánamo detainees in a rigged setting , or even keep them from trial forever : lawyers claim that torture , including sexual torture , was so endemic in the CIA and the military that Obama could be holding scores , if not hundreds , of prisoners whose bodies are crime scenes .
According to Wells Dixon , a lawyer at the Center for Constitutional Rights who represents some of the detainees , the Obama administration cannot risk calling the torture practices crimes , so it calls them “ classified sources and methods ” that cannot be revealed in court .
“ I can ’ t even tell you about the way my clients were tortured or I will be prosecuted , ” he says .
In fact , even the explanation of why this material is classified cannot be reproduced , because it is privileged .
Nor has the access of lawyers to their Guantánamo clients improved under Obama .
“ We are subject in all detainee cases to a protective order , ” Dixon says .
“ Under this order , everything the detainee says is classified , ” unless the Department of Defense “ Privilege Team ” decides otherwise .
Dixon then told me a revealing story of one of his clients , Majid Khan , a so-called “ high-value detainee ” who was held for three years in CIA “ black sites . ”
Khan was tortured , Dixon said , though “ the government would say that what happened to him is an ‘ intelligence source or method . ’ ”
Because Dixon has a security clearance , he cannot discuss those classified “ sources and methods . ”
On the other hand , Dixon continued , “ When the government does something to [ Khan ] that they say is classified , they have disclosed to him classified information .
But since he doesn ’ t have a security clearance , there is nothing that prevents him , unlike me , from saying to the outside world , ‘ This is what they did to me . ’
Nothing prevents that – except for the fact that he is physically in custody . ” ’
The “ logical conclusion , ” according to Dixon , is that Khan “ must be detained for the rest of his life – regardless of whether he is ever charged with a crime – because if he was ever released , nothing would prevent him from disclosing this information .
Majid Khan – and there are many more like him – is a classic product of the Bush administration ’ s disregard for the fundamental principles of the rule of law .
Unfortunately , Obama ’ s administration , for all its lofty rhetoric , appears too willing to perpetuate it .
