The Great American Losing Streak
JERUSALEM – The interim agreement reached in Geneva between the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council plus Germany ( the P5 + 1 ) and Iran is probably the best deal to curtail Iran ’ s nuclear program that could be reached , given current circumstances .
The United States and its Western allies were unwilling to risk a military option , and not concluding a deal would have allowed Iran to proceed unimpeded toward acquiring nuclear weapons .
In an ideal world , Iran should have been forced to scrap its nuclear program altogether and hand over all of its enriched uranium to an outside power ; but , realistically , that was unattainable .
So the outcome of the Geneva talks is that Iran has secured some international legitimation as a nuclear-threshold power , which deeply worries its regional neighbors , from Saudi Arabia and Israel to Turkey , Egypt , and the small and vulnerable Gulf states .
Western statesmen are right to congratulate themselves on averting an immediate major crisis .
But they are wrong to believe that they have resolved the Iranian nuclear threat .
Indeed , it is naïve to imagine that a final agreement with Iran will be achieved in the coming six months : Iran ’ s seasoned diplomats will make sure that that does not happen .
So , while the interim agreement may not be a replay of the Munich Agreement in 1938 , as many critics contend , it may have set the stage for an even more combustible future .
US President Barack Obama may not be in office when the fire ignites , but if things do go terribly wrong , he may be remembered as another statesman who , like Neville Chamberlain , was blind to the consequences of his peaceful intentions .
The main reason for pessimism stems from the interim agreement ’ s wider geopolitical context , which has been ignored in favor of the regional dimension .
In fact , the agreement , which alleviates much of the economic pressure on the Iranian regime , is a result of Russia ’ s success in delaying international sanctions against Iran and its stubborn refusal to tighten them further .
For the Kremlin , Iran ’ s nuclear program is only one chapter in a campaign to reassert Russia ’ s role as a great power .
Indeed , the interim agreement should be viewed as another in a string of recent Russian diplomatic victories over the US .
The current US administration lacks the type of grand strategy that animates Russian President Vladimir Putin .
Instead , it considers every issue separately , unsure about how to balance its role as a global power with its commitment to liberal values , and led by a president who apparently believes that soaring rhetoric is a substitute for strategic thinking .
There should be no illusion : The interim agreement with Iran is a resounding triumph for Putin , not for Obama and US Secretary of State John Kerry .
That victory was quickly followed by another – Ukraine ’ s decision to reject an association agreement with the European Union , opting instead to join Putin ’ s pet project , a Eurasian customs union designed to reconstitute much of the Soviet Union as a single economic zone .
Meanwhile , the Syrian crisis also is going the Kremlin ’ s way , with President Bashar al-Assad remaining in power , despite Obama ’ s insistence that he leave .
Obama ’ s threat last summer to use limited force in Syria was empty rhetoric .
It might have convinced Assad to give up his chemical weapons , but Russia ’ s threat to veto any muscular Security Council resolution against Syria guaranteed that his murderous regime would retain control .
Even if a Geneva II meeting on Syria is convened in January , Russia will ensure that Assad remains on the throne .
America ’ s strategic vacuum can also be seen in Egypt in the wake of the military ’ s overthrow of President Mohamed Morsi ’ s Muslim Brotherhood government .
Obama ’ s uncertainty about how to deal with the coup has created an absurd situation in which most Western-oriented groups in Egypt – the military and secular elites who underpinned Mubarak ’ s alliance with the US – have now turned , in desperation , to Russia as a source of future military supplies .
Decades of American strategic thinking and diplomacy , initiated by Henry Kissinger in the 1970 ’ s , aimed at weaning Egypt from its Russian alliance , now appear in danger of going down the drain because of Obama ’ s inability to make up his mind about Morsi ’ s overthrow .
Of course , it is not easy to support a military coup against a democratically elected president ( even one who , like Morsi , undermines the democratic values and institutions that brought him to power ) .
But one wonders how Obama would have reacted in 1933 had the German military toppled Hitler ( who , after all , was appointed Chancellor after winning an election ) .
One does not have to demonize Russia – or Putin – to be worried by these developments .
Russia is entitled to its place as a leading power .
And the US should shun a domineering policy .
But , confronted with a resolute Russian policy of imperial re-assertion , now also visible in the Caucasus , the US seems unable to see how global developments are linked .
Is anyone in Washington asking how the Geneva agreements on Syria and Iran are connected to Ukraine ’ s refusal to move closer to the EU , much less developing a strategic response ?
The choice facing the US is not former President George W. Bush ’ s megalomaniacal swashbuckling or global withdrawal .
Russia ’ s resurgence calls for a reasoned American response , combining its preponderant power and recognition of the inherent limits on the use of that power .
The current US administration seems incapable of this , and Tea Party isolationism certainly is not the answer .
A rudderless US foreign policy is no response to a resurgent and neo-authoritarian Russia flexing its geopolitical muscle .
Nostalgia for a Metternich , or a Kissinger , may not be out of order .
