Stability in Kosovo Demands Development of the Bal
In attending the Southeastern Europe Stability Pact Summit in Sarajevo this weekend , President Clinton highlights the importance for the United States as well as Europe of the future of this troubled region .
What is at stake is more than the reconstruction of Kosovo .
It is the effort to build relations of cooperation and exchange to replace a centuries-old legacy of conflict ; it is the economic growth and political development of an entire region whose potential has been blocked by the last remaining vestiges in Europe of National Communism .
As important as all this is , rebuilding Kosovo alone will not suffice .
On strictly economic grounds , Kosovo itself is not viable other than as an integrated part of a prospering region .
The rebuilding of Bosnia-Hercegovina stands as a vivid example of a flawed reconstruction .
Roads and public buildings have been completed , but there are no jobs .
Roughly half of the urban labor force in Bosnia is on the payroll of international organizations and NGOs , and the other half is unemployed .
Limited on all sides by embargoes and conflict , the country 's few private businesses do not have sufficient markets to survive .
Moreover , even if Kosovo could survive economically in isolation from its neighbors , such survival would do little to break the barriers of hatred and distrust , which have repeatedly threatened the political stability of the region .
What is needed is an Economic Development Plan that is truly regional in scope .
Its thrust must be to integrate the 53 million people in the various political entities of the Balkan peninsula into a dynamic regional economy that is open and prosperous .
It must aim at fostering communication and exchange between all of the elements of the former Republic of Yugoslavia , and Albania , Bulgaria and Romania .
Such a regional plan requires the promotion of trade between these countries .
To do this , the infrastructure for trade needs to be developed .
The Balkans are , physically , the most segmented region of Europe .
Even where customs are no obstacle , as between Albania and Macedonia , very few goods are exchanged .
There is no direct rail link between Zagreb and Belgrade .
The war has added immensely to this segmentation and fragmentation by blocking traffic on the Danube and by destroying international road and bridge links .
Major investments are required to restore and rebuild the transportation network of the region .
Because this war time destruction was concentrated , some of the reconstruction aid will also be concentrated .
In order to ensure that this aid brings benefits to the region as a whole , and that its impact is therefore multiplied throughout all the economies of the region , half of the construction projects should be set aside for businesses based in Southeast Europe .
In order to be successful , such a regional development plan must enlist the participation and cooperation of the authorities of the region .
It is natural that it has fallen upon the European Union to be the motor of the development of Southeast Europe . But the implementation should not be exclusively dictated from Brussels .
The EU would do well , in this regard , to copy a page from the history of the reconstruction of Western Europe after World War II .
In that case , the United States gave the aid .
But the nations of Western Europe allocated it .
In fact , the aid was conditional on their willingness to cooperate and foster exchange amongst themselves .
The European Union should act in a similar manner towards Southeast Europe today .
The governments of the region must take the lead and assume real responsibility .
The first place to start is with the Agency for the Reconstruction of Kosovo , based in Pristina .
At present , all fifteen member nations of the European Union are represented on its Board .
But the nations of the region are not .
In as much as the integration of Kosovo into the regional economy is the eventual objective , it would be well to allow now for regional authorities to participate in the reconstruction plans .
The disparity in political conditions of the entities in Southeast Europe today argues for an eclectic and practical approach - as apolitical as possible -- towards cooperation .
A number of specific , interlocking organizations are called for , rather than one single Organization for Economic Cooperation .
The focus of one should be the restoration of traffic on the Danube and the extension of the transportation networks of the region .
The focus of another should be energy infrastructure .
In each case , however , a substantial portion of the decision making should be entrusted to specialized authorities of the region , with the proviso that the aid will be given on condition that they cooperate .
For example , the future shape of the transportation network for Southeast Europe should not be exclusively planned from Brussels .
Authorities from the region should participate in decisions about where to rebuild bridges and highways .
Working together , the United States , the European Union , and the people of Southeast Europe have the opportunity to transform an area of conflict into an area of cooperation and development .
In order to succeed , they must look beyond the reconstruction of any single province , and plan , in concrete , practical steps , for the development of the region as a whole .
The stability of the region and the credibility of the Western paradigm of markets and liberal democracy are at stake .
