The Elusive Legacy of 1968
“ Dany , you have been so successful .
But don ’ t let yourself be manipulated by those far-left forces that would lead you to destroy everything that could arise from what you are creating . ”
Forty years later , those words on March 22 , 1968 , by Jean Baudrillard – then an assistant professor at Nanterre University – still sound right .
I may disappoint my supporters and those enticed by “ The Revolution , ” but I ’ m not the leader of a revolution that allegedly occurred in 1968 .
Forget it : “ ’ 68 ” is over – buried under cobblestones , even if those cobblestones made history and triggered radical change in our societies !
At first it seems baffling .
But , as I made clear at the time in my interview with Jean-Paul Sartre in Le Nouvel Observateur , I was only the loudspeaker for a rebellion .
Thus , “ ’ 68 ” symbolized the end of revolutionary myths – to the benefit of liberation movements extending from the 1970 ’ s until now .
After all , the world of the 1960 ’ s – the first global movement broadcast live on radio and TV – was defined by a variety of inter-connected revolts .
The change wrought by “ ’ 68 ” affected , above all , traditional culture , hidebound moralism , and the principle of hierarchical authority .
It altered social life , ways of being , ways of talking , ways of loving , and so on .
But , despite its scope , the movement steered clear of violence in order to create a new mode of rebellion .
Students , workers , and families – all had their legitimate demands , and all nonetheless converged on the same desire for emancipation .
The revolt was a form of political expression , but its aim was not to seize political power as such .
Indeed , its existential essence rendered it “ politically untranslatable . ”
The desire for freedom that carried the movement forward necessarily eluded archaic modes of thinking .
As a result , the sterile categories of political tradition could gain no purchase on events .
In France , conservatism was so entrenched on both the left and the right that both missed the movement ’ s meaning and could only fall back on stereotyped revolutionary interpretations .
As for the anarchists , their utopia of widespread self-management – tied to outdated historical references – appeared entirely unsuitable .
Starting from an initial rejection of political institutions and parliamentarism , we understood only later that the democratic challenge lies in occupying a politically “ normalized ” space .
Faced with the anarchists , with their confining minimalist political grammar – reflected in the famous slogan elections , piege à cons ( “ elections , a trap for idiots ” ) – and with the Communist Party , whose revolutionary ideal was eventually linked to totalitarian types of society , the future of May 1968 could only shift to the right with the election victory of General de Gaulle .
It was , undeniably , a political failure .
But just as undeniable was the huge tremor that shook our antediluvian conceptions of society , morals , and the state .
Challenging authoritarianism , the revolt triggered an explosion at the heart of the typically French two-headed power structure , which combined a dominant Gaullism and a Communist Party managing the working class .
Thus , the radicalism of the upheaval eventually liberated the pleasure to live .
With a new generation emerges a new political imagination and poetic mottos written on walls .
The surrealist essence of the rebellion was somehow symbolized by Gilles Caron ’ s famous photograph , in which an insolent smile at a riot policeman subverts the frozen , established order to the point of making it ridiculous .
Of course , some people have never overcome the end of the ecstasy of those five weeks of craziness and joy , while others still wait for “ ’ 68 ” to culminate in God only knows what kind of “ D-Day . ”
For my part , I accepted the “ principle of reality ” long ago , without nostalgia – and without minimizing the importance of what happened .
For “ ’ 68 ” was , indeed , a rebellion joining two eras .
It cracked the yoke of conservatism and totalitarian thought , enabling the desire for personal and collective autonomy and freedom to express itself .
From the cultural point of view , we won .
So , revisit “ ’ 68 ” ?
Yes , but only in order to understand it , grasp its scope , and retain what still makes sense today .
Knowing , for example , that 23 years after World War II , a multicolored France demonstrated against my deportation by claiming “ We are all German Jews ” provides food for thought .
But this does not justify the hasty comparison – and even less the identification – of every protest today with “ ’ 68 . ”
After 40 years , the context has changed radically .
The world of the Cold War is gone , as are schools and factories organized like barracks , authoritarian trade unions , gay bashing , and women ’ s obligation to receive permission from their husbands before being able to work or open a bank account .
That world has been replaced by a multilateral world , which includes AIDS , unemployment , energy and climate crises , and so on .
So let ’ s permit new generations to define their own battles and desires .
Demystifying “ ’ 68 ” also exposes the pretense of those who would blame it for all the wrongs of today ’ s world .
Because the “ ’ 68 generation ” wrote on the walls “ It is forbidden to forbid , ” some hold it responsible for urban violence , extreme individualism , the crisis in education , executives ’ “ golden parachutes , ” the decline of authority , and – why not ? – climate change .
In this way , such people hope that they can evade their duty to explain today ’ s problems .
But how can one not interpret this as a political trick aimed at sabotaging the modernization of expression , thereby closing off any space for rational debate ?
