The Evita Syndrome
On the day last month that Argentina commemorated the 50th anniversary of the death of Eva Perón , patron saint of the descamisados and of jobs for everyone , the worst unemployment rate in the country 's history , 24 % , was announced .
Four years of recession and devaluation of the peso , has seen Argentina descend into a veritable economic hell .
Only a head of household--one third of the population--may draw monthly government assistance equal to $ 1.30 per day .
This amount cannot begin to cover basic needs .
More than 19 million people , 53 % of the population , live in poverty .
The middle class continues to cling to the hope that their savings can be salvaged , but these funds , which are now frozen in the nation 's banks , are unlikely ever to be at anyone 's disposal .
Under the rule of President Carlos Menem , who rid the country of inflation and opened the economy to the world , Argentina became the darling of international investors and institutions .
After half a century of stagnation , Menem looked good .
But Argentina , a society that historically lacked the means to defend itself against authoritarianism , has long been the agreeable victim of populist and autocratic rulers .
So it was not hard to convince such a nation that " menemismo " was the price that had to be paid to become a member of the " first world . "
Shopping sprees by the rich and famous became synonymous with popular approval for the corruption , legal impunity , and frivolity that surrounded Menem 's cronies and his sales of state assets .
The country 's already thin social fabric frayed .
In the end , shopping sprees could not keep reality at bay .
After Menem handed over the presidential sash to Fernando De la Rua , Argentina began to unravel : President de la Rua resigned his office well before the official end of his term .
Four temporary heads of state later , Eduardo Duhalde , a senator and powerful peronista chieftain , is now trying to hold the country together .
To the three constitutionally established branches of government ( executive , legislative , and judicial ) , a fourth power has been added : the provincial governors , the " barons of peronismo . "
Determined to carry on as they always have , no matter what , the governors turn a deaf ear to the IMF and resist instituting fiscal reforms .
Many have their sights set on the presidency .
The real title-holders of internal power , the governors owe their long incumbencies to the generosity with which they hand out state jobs .
At times charming , at times eccentric , and often behaving like bandits , these provincial chieftains share several attributes : high rates of poverty in their provinces , comfortable lifestyles for themselves , and a disdain for democratic institutions .
Their misrule has made Argentina into a kind of global pariah .
Because of them , we won 't pay our debts or reform the financial system .
Poverty grows and the indecisive Peronista government ( governors included ) inspires little trust .
Argentina cannot hope to reach an accommodation with the IMF so long as these officials retain a virtual veto .
The call to schedule elections for March of next year , although demanded by most Argentines , has failed to calm nerves .
Everyone knows that lacking a true opposition to the current government , the presidential candidate will emerge from today 's divided and fragmented brand of peronismo .
But the only remaining vestige of Perón 's rule is embodied in the worst habits of his heirs , who , with the least provocation , demonstrate their propensity for authoritarianism , demagoguery , and a mentality always favorable to corruption .
Indeed , today 's peronismo , known officially as the " Partido Justicialista , " unites individuals only in a desire to perpetuate their power .
Everything they do turns on this , including the hatred between Menem and Duhalde .
In November the party will hold open internal talks , an occasion that will increase competition between each governor .
Their differences are slight .
There is the " progressive feudalism " of the governor of the depopulated Patagonian province of Santa Cruz ; the " feudal populism " of Adolfo Rodríguez Sáa , briefly the country 's president during last December 's saga of successive presidential resignations .
Rodríguez Sáa is also the ex-governor of San Luis , where he governed with a sure despotic hand for 19 years--a reign the poor endured because he bribed them as well .
There is also the " liberalism " of José Manuel de la Sota , who steered the indebted province of Córdoba and who is President Eduardo Duhalde 's dauphin .
Finally , casting a long shadow over everything , is Menem .
Although hectored by criminal accusations and the discovery of a Swiss bank account in his name , he is trying to rise above scandal to recapture the presidency .
One newspaper refers to this political infighting as " the peronista carnage . "
First to fall victim was Carlos Reuteman , the ex-backer of Formula 1 auto racing who is now governor of Santa Fe .
The first anointed dauphin of President Duhalde , Reuteman 's joy at this prospect was short-lived .
He declined to put himself forward , his exit speech reviving memories of Argentina 's " dirty war " and " disappeared " : " I have seen something that I cannot discuss , and may never be able to discuss . "
Argentines are left to endure wretched hours languishing in economic and political chaos .
People in the streets increasingly fear that they will never get to cast their ballot or have their say .
