Tea Party Victory , Global Defeat
CANBERRA – You wouldn ’ t expect much interest beyond the United States , or even beyond his own state , when an 80-year-old conservative legislator , who has already served six terms , loses his party ’ s endorsement to run yet again .
But the crushing defeat of Senator Richard Lugar in the recent Indiana Republican primary , in a Tea Party-supported campaign of shocking mindlessness , has reverberated in capitals around the world , including my own .
On most issues , Lugar is and always has been a natural conservative .
In recent times , he opposed all of President Barack Obama ’ s major domestic legislation , including the economic stimulus package , health-care reform , and financial-services regulation , and has consistently supported anti-abortion legislation .
With his 36-year record in the US Senate , national stature , and essentially conservative constituency , he would certainly have won again in November .
But none of this was persuasive enough for Indiana primary voters , who backed his rival , State Treasurer Richard Mourdock , by an astonishing 20-point margin .
The problem for Lugar was two-fold .
First , he was of the old school that instinctively embraced compromise across party lines in the Senate on crucial issues , in order to avoid the kind of gridlock that is always potentially endemic in a presidential system ( unlike a parliamentary one ) , where the elected executive has no guaranteed majority in the legislature .
If party lines are strictly maintained , US presidents may be unable to pass any legislation at all , or to make any judicial or other senior appointments .
Lugar , for example , had voted to confirm Obama ’ s Supreme Court nominations .
Mourdock ’ s position , by contrast , was that , “ Bipartisanship ought to consist of Democrats coming to the Republican point of view . ”
Second , and most alarmingly for those around the world who crave decent and intelligent international leadership from the US , Lugar was mocked by his opponents for his foreign-policy expertise and reputation as an outstanding statesman , who for decades had played an absolutely central role on arms control and disarmament issues .
His signature achievement was joint authorship with then-Democratic Senator Sam Nunn of the 1992 Cooperative Threat Reduction program ( universally known as “ Nunn-Lugar ” ) , which successfully secured and dismantled nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction in former Soviet states .
Beyond that , Lugar had fully supported Obama ’ s vision , like that of Ronald Reagan before him , of a world without nuclear weapons , and his endorsement of the New START treaty with Russia , reducing the number of deployed strategic weapons , was crucial in securing its narrow ratification by the Senate last year .
But , for Mourdock and his supporters , “ The time for being collegial is past – it ’ s time for confrontation . ”
One television advertisement said it all about the low-rent cynicism of the Tea Party-driven campaign .
It featured two clips of Obama saying , “ I ’ ve worked with Republican Senator Dick Lugar to pass a law , ” and , “ What I did was reach out to Senator Dick Lugar . ”
The context was not explained , but what Obama said in full was this : “ I ’ ve worked with Republican Senator Dick Lugar to pass a law that will secure and destroy some of the world ’ s deadliest , unguarded weapons , ” and , “ What I did was reach out to Senator Dick Lugar , a Republican , to help lock down loose nuclear weapons . ”
With the defeat of Lugar , and the simultaneous exit of the last Republican moderates , like Senator Olympia Snowe of Maine , who were prepared to put national interests ahead of partisanship , the Senate is unlikely to produce the 60 votes needed to ratify further US-Russia arms-control treaties , should they be negotiated .
Moreover , the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty , which would replace a fragile international moratorium , cannot come into force without US Senate ratification .
At a personal level , I am also afraid that Lugar ’ s defeat may be the end of an era of enormously attractive and distinctive civility in the way that America ’ s most senior legislators conducted themselves .
As Australia ’ s foreign minister , and a global NGO head , I met Lugar many times , and , whether or not we agreed on issues , he was always a model of gentle courtesy .
I can ’ t help but compare that to the occasion , not so long ago , when I accompanied my then co-chair of the International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament , former Japanese Foreign Minister Yoriko Kawaguchi , in a call on Jon Kyl , the most ideologically fierce Senate opponent of Obama-style arms control .
On my arrival in his office , a senior Kyl staffer , after consulting the senator , said brusquely : “ We only agreed to talk to the Japanese , not you .
Would you please leave ? ”
There was nothing like a perfectly understandable , “ Sorry , we misunderstood , and are only prepared now for a bilateral session .
Can we see if we can possibly reschedule a joint meeting later ? ”
I suppose that I should be grateful that he said “ please . ”
But it ’ s the kind of experience that I had never had before in Washington , and I fear that it ’ s not unique .
In the past , anguish at home and abroad about the quality of US governance – its apparent arrogance , mindless parochialism , and incapacity to deliver coherent , credible , and decent policy outcomes – has for the most part proved short-lived .
Maybe that will be the case again .
But the passing from the national stage of Richard Lugar has properly rung new alarm bells not only among concerned Americans , but also among policymakers far removed from the US and its partisan battles .
