Crowdfunding or Crowdphishing ?
NEW HAVEN – If one were seeking a perfect example of why it ’ s so hard to make financial markets work well , one would not have to look further than the difficulties and controversies surrounding crowdfunding in the United States .
After deliberating for more than three years , the US Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) last month issued a final rule that will allow true crowdfunding ; and yet the new regulatory framework still falls far short of what ’ s needed to boost crowdfunding worldwide .
True crowdfunding , or equity crowdfunding , refers to the activities of online platforms that sell shares of startup companies directly to large numbers of small investors , bypassing traditional venture capital or investment banking .
The concept is analogous to that of online auctions .
But , unlike allowing individuals to offer their furniture to the whole world , crowdfunding is supposed to raise money fast , from those in the know , for businesses that bankers might not understand .
It certainly sounds exciting .
Regulators outside the US have often been more accommodating , and some crowdfunding platforms are already operating .
For example , Symbid in the Netherlands and Crowdcube in the United Kingdom were both founded in 2011 .
But crowdfunding is still not a major factor in world markets .
And that will not change without adequate – and innovative – financial regulation .
There is a conceptual barrier to understanding the problems that officials might face in regulating crowdfunding , owing to the failure of prevailing economic models to account for the manipulative and devious aspects of human behavior .
Economists typically describe people ’ s rational , honest side , but ignore their duplicity .
As a result , they underestimate the downside risks of crowdsourcing .
The risks consist not so much in outright fraud – big lies that would be jailable offenses – as in more subtle forms of deception .
It may well be open deception , with promoters steering gullible amateurs around a business plan ’ s fatal flaw , or disclosing it only grudgingly or in the fine print .
It is not that people are completely dishonest .
On the contrary , they typically pride themselves on integrity .
It ’ s just that their integrity suffers little lapses here and there – and not always so little in aggregate .
In my new book with George Akerlof , Phishing for Phools : The Economics of Manipulation and Deception , we argue that unscrupulous behavior has to be factored into economic theory in a fundamental way .
The economic equilibrium we live should be regarded , above all , as a phishing equilibrium , in which small-time individual dishonesty can morph into something more systemically important when it is carried on by business organizations under intense competitive pressure .
Yes , competition rewards the sharp and hardworking .
But it also often compels them to keep the frontiers of subtle deception in view .
The SEC ’ s new rules for crowdfunding are complex , because they address a complicated problem .
The concept underlying crowdfunding is the dispersal of information across millions of people .
Most people , even the cleverest , cannot grasp the next breakthrough business opportunity .
Those who can are dispersed .
The economist Friedrich Hayek put it well in 1945 :
“ [ T ] here is beyond question a body of very important but unorganized knowledge which cannot possibly be called scientific in the sense of knowledge of general rules : the knowledge of particular circumstances and place .
It is with respect to this that practically every individual has some advantage over all others in that he possesses unique information of which beneficial use might be made , but of which use can be made only if the decisions depending on it are left to him or are made with his active cooperation . ”
The problem is that the promise of genuine “ unique information ” comes with the reality of vulnerability to deception .
That ’ s why channeling dispersed knowledge into new businesses requires a regulatory framework that favors the genuinely enlightened and honest .
Unfortunately , the SEC ’ s new crowdsourcing rules don ’ t go as far as they should .
The 2012 US legislation that tasked the SEC with rulemaking for crowdfunding platforms specified that no startup can use them to raise more than $ 1 million a year .
This is practically worthless in terms of limiting the scope for deception .
In fact , including this provision was a serious mistake , and needs to be corrected with new legislation .
A million dollars is not enough , and the cap will tend to limit crowdfunding to small ideas .
Some of the SEC rules do work against deception .
Notably , crowdfunding platforms must provide communication channels “ through which investors can communicate with one another and with representatives of the issuer about offerings made available . ”
That is a good rule , fundamental to the entire idea of crowdfunding .
But the SEC could do more than just avow its belief in “ uncensored and transparent crowd discussions . ”
It should require that the intermediary sponsoring a platform install a surveillance system to guard against interference and shills offering phony comments .
The SEC and other regulators could go even further .
They could nudge intermediaries to create a platform that summarizes commenters ’ record and reputation .
Indeed , why not pay commenters who accumulate “ likes ” or whose comments on issuers turn out to be valuable in light of evidence of those enterprises ’ subsequent success ?
For the financial system as a whole , success ultimately depends on trust and confidence , both of which , like suspicion and fear , are highly contagious .
That ’ s why , if crowdfunding is to reach its global potential , crowdphishing must be prevented from the outset .
Regulators need to get the rules right ( and it would help if they hurried up about it ) .
