Sentries
The notion that people have inalienable rights – the right to free speech and association , or the right not to be tortured – simply by virtue of their existence as human beings : that notion is , of course , a fiction .
Actually people are merely sacks of meat on sticks .
Such , it seems , is the ironclad certainty that grounds most tyrannies all over the world – anything their subjects are or have , they sustain or retain at the whim of the regime .
Indeed , the notion of absolute rights inhering in human beings by virtue of their humanity initially arises as a wild assertion in the face of eons of stark evidence to the contrary .
But it is a magical assertion .
" We hold these truths to be self-evident , that all men are created equal , that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights , that among these are Life , Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness .... "
The truly revolutionary realization in that passage from America ’ s Declaration of Independence is contained not so much in the words " truths " or " self-evident " or " created equal " or any of the rest : rather , it 's in the calm self-certainty of those first two words : " We hold .... "
Note how the text doesn ’ t launch out with " It is manifestly self-evident that ... , " or any similar construction , as logic might dictate .
In fact , the self-evidence of the assertion remains fugitive , immanent until some people insist upon it , mutually pledging their Lives , Fortunes , and Sacred Honor , in the process .
It is holding such truths to be self-evident that first makes them so – and more specifically , doing so in concert , alongside others .
Over fifty years ago , the UN ’ s General Assembly proclaimed a " Universal Declaration of Human Rights . "
Most UN member states , however , instantly dismissed the document ’ s assertions as so much dead letter .
It was left to individual citizens , often through public stances of preposterous courage , to realize that document ’ s basic premises .
Theirs is a labor , of course , that remains far short of completion .
But fundamental to that work has been the simple , endlessly repeated act of bearing witness , of compiling accurate , reliable information about the victims of renegade regimes .
Such monitoring has usually takes place on the ground , in the midst of depredations , and it can be very dangerous .
Take the case of Maria Victoria Fallon , a lawyer in Medellin , capital of Colombia ’ s most violent state .
Her group monitors and documents the often murderous collusion of right-wing paramilitaries and Colombia ’ s army .
Since its formation in 1987 , five of her group ’ s presidents have been gunned down .
In the last three years over thirty Colombian rights monitors have been assassinated or disappeared .
A couple of months ago , Vicky ( as she is known to friends ) received her own first death threat .
The voice on the end of the line was calm , educated , even polite .
Unless she left Medellin within 24 hours , it told her , she too would be killed .
" Please pay attention , " the voice continued .
" This is no joke . "
Maria Victoria left Medellin the next day , though for only a few weeks .
She is now back in Medellin , at work , despite increasing threats .
In Tunisia , the regime polishes a reputation for moderation .
In fact , its human rights record is shockingly retrograde .
Torture , grossly unfair trials and denial of basic rights are commonplace .
Anyone attempting to draw attention to such facts is routinely suppressed .
Several weeks ago , Dr. Moncef Marzouki , a professor of community medicine at the University of Sousse and veteran of an earlier prison term for helping to found the Tunisian League for Human Rights in 1994 as the Arab World ’ s first independent human rights organization , was once again tried on trumped-up charges .
Once again , he was sentenced to prison , this time for yet a year ’ s term , though the conviction is under appeal ( the prosecutors are seeking a longer sentence ) .
Jeanine Mukanirwa , deputy director of PAIF ( Promotion and Support for Women ’ s Initiatives ) , the leading women ’ s organization in her native Goma , Eastern Congo , recently ran afoul of insurgent rebels , in part owing to her group ’ s work documenting violence aimed at women by all the region ’ s warring parties .
Fleeing west to the country ’ s capital , Kinshasa , early in 2000 , she joined a group coordinating the peace efforts of a variety of civil organizations , apparently offending the country ’ s rulers .
She was arrested last December and remains detained under frightening conditions .
Bearing witness in such a manner ought not to work .
How can it ?
How can mere vigilance , insistence on the rule of law in the face of armored , entrenched tyrannies , ever make a difference ?
We hold these truths ... these truths and nothing else : aside from them we are naked before power .
But holding such truths is magical .
It 's smoke and mirrors , of course : nothing is there except the bold insistence that something is there : this ineffable yet essential thing called human rights .
But if enough people insist upon those rights insistently enough , over time a light begins to shine .
Not only does it shine , it illumines ; it actually begins to melt tyrannies .
It 's uncanny .
But let ’ s be clear about the nature of that light .
The old proverb notwithstanding , “ Truth ” alone never set anyone free .
It 's always been people telling the truth that accomplishes that miracle .
