The Chaotic Birth of South Sudan
MADRID – The Comprehensive Peace Agreement ( CPA ) that was reached in 2005 between mostly Christian southern Sudan and the country ’ s Muslim North , ended one of the bloodiest civil wars in modern times .
Lasting 22 years , that war left more than two million dead .
Now the CPA is poised to face its most vital test : the South ’ s referendum on independence , scheduled for January 9 .
Whether or not a new state is born in one of the most strategically sensitive areas of the world is of utmost concern to Sudan ’ s neighbors and others .
Vital issues are at stake : the scramble for oil ; China ’ s robust presence in Sudan ; the West ’ s desire to see a mostly Christian state break the contiguity of Muslim regimes – and the consequent threat of Islamic radicalism – in the region ; the regional distribution of the Nile ’ s waters ; and the possibility that independence for the South might lead to Sudan ’ s total dismemberment along ethnic and religious lines .
The fact that Omar al-Bashir , Sudan ’ s president , is not especially keen to agree to the United Nations ’ plan to beef up its peacekeeping force in the country ahead of the referendum raises concern about his intentions .
He would certainly be happy to delay the vote – and , if it is held , to dispute its legitimacy .
He might not find that very difficult .
Preparations for the referendum are lagging and inadequate .
Brinkmanship and broken agreements threaten to turn the referendum ’ s technical and political difficulties into yet another disaster for the country .
The 2.5 million Southern Sudanese known to live in the North are under explicit instructions by the South ’ s Sudan People ’ s Liberation Army to boycott the referendum , as the SPLA has grounds to believe that Bashir would use their registration to rig the results in favor of unity .
Indeed , if not convincingly deterred by the international community , it is extremely difficult to believe that Bashir would let the South secede without a fight .
A crucial bone of contention that might ignite a new war is the future of the country ’ s oil industry and the North-South border demarcation .
So far , the good offices of the Norwegian government have failed to produce an agreement on the key question of the post-independence distribution of oil revenues between North and South .
Given that most of Sudan ’ s oil wealth is concentrated in the South , the management of the oil industry and its revenues after secession is an existential problem for Bashir ’ s regime and its capacity to control his vast and ethnically diverse country .
It is in the oil-rich border areas that a new war might erupt .
As one of the poorest and neediest countries in the world , for which oil revenues would be the only source of income for years to come , an independent South Sudan could not be expected to rescue the debt-ridden North .
Its own challenge lies in reforming the entire oil industry , which for years has been brutally and irresponsibly exploited by Chinese and Malaysian companies , with devastating environmental consequences .
Conspicuously , Bashir ’ s regime has been disqualified in the eyes of its neighbors in Africa and the Arab world to a degree that makes the South ’ s secession a more acceptable option to the main regional stakeholders than ever before .
Indeed , the Arab world as a whole seems to have given up on Bashir .
Some Arab leaders still toy with the idea that overthrowing him might yet salvage a united Sudan , but it is probably too late for that .
After failing to moderate Bashir into accepting a secular decentralized or confederate Sudan , Egypt , a key Arab player concerned about the stability of its southern border , has come to accept the inevitability of secession – so long as the new state lines up with it on the issue of the Nile ’ s waters .
Egypt ’ s fears are mainly of Sudan ’ s disintegration into a chaotic tapestry of mini-states controlled by warlords and plunged into lawlessness and bloody tribal feuds .
In that case , what remains of “ Sudan ” – Khartoum , Gezira , and the two northern states – might degenerate even further , probably turning into a base for global Islamic terrorism .
Black Africa , particularly the East African Community , cannot think of any solution other than secession .
To EAC members , this is a matter of de-colonization , for southern Sudan ’ s people have been enslaved , dehumanized , and humiliated for centuries by the Arabs .
Hence , as the Kenyans put it , the border between northern and southern Sudan should become the border between Black Africa and the Arab World .
Concerned by Bashir ’ s delaying tactics , both Kenya and Uganda have advised their southern Sudanese friends not to make demarcation of the border a pre-condition for the referendum , as doing so would only play into Bashir ’ s hands .
United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton rightly defined the upcoming referendum as a “ ticking time bomb . ”
She also made it clear , however , that the outcome , independence for the South , is “ inevitable . ”
But , to avoid a cataclysm , the US and its allies must defuse the bomb by enforcing the provisions of the 2005 CPA , which they all endorsed .
They would have virtually all of the regional stakeholders on their side as well .
