Smiles on the Rhine
On February 23 , a day after addressing America ’ s allies in Brussels , President George W. Bush will meet German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder in the old city of Mainz on the Rhine .
After the falling-out over Bush ’ s Iraq adventure , the two countries – so central to the transatlantic relationship in the past – are once again on speaking terms .
But , however welcome the return to cordiality may be , it is no more than that .
If Bush and Schroeder are now showing the world how well they get along together , it is not because they are off to a new start , but because it suits their tactical interests .
Had the American people chosen John F. Kerry over George W. Bush last November , the reunion would be seen by both sides as a new beginning , resonant with personal warmth .
But both continue to doubt that past substantive divisions can really be overcome .
Thus , the meeting in Mainz will be one of those diplomatic courtesy calls that gloss over important bilateral differences .
There will be no meeting of minds between Bush and Schroeder , because , on most key issues , their minds hold opposite views .
Consider what is potentially the most contentious issue , how to cope with Iran ’ s nuclear program .
Germany has been determined , together with France and Britain , to get Iran to stop uranium enrichment through incentives and negotiation .
While the US has now explicitly welcomed the European initiative , it remains openly skeptical and unwilling to join , thus weakening the chances of success .
Failure would lead America to seek the UN Security Council ’ s formal condemnation of Iran , coupled with sanctions .
Indeed , the US is already trying to soften up Iranian resistance by hinting at a possible use of force .
But there is no support in Europe for military action , and little backing for sanctions .
If the negotiations should fail , the transatlantic cleavage could once again become glaringly wide .
The divisions are no less marked in another transatlantic quarrel , this one over whether to lift the European Union ’ s embargo on arms exports to China , imposed following the Tiananmen Square massacre 15 years ago .
Schroeder has been pushing the EU to lift the embargo , a move that now appears imminent .
But for the US , the step is seen , not without reason , as an encouragement to China in its conflict with Taiwan .
It will be interpreted as a stab in the back of US efforts to maintain stability in the region .
Nor will there be much progress on a matter dear to Berlin , namely Germany ’ s application to enter the UN Security Council as a permanent member .
The prospect is uncertain enough as it stands that Bush may be spared the need to veto it .
But it would make an immense difference for Germany ’ s chances if the US actively supported what is , after all , a reasonable objective of one of its most important allies .
But the Mainz meeting will not bring the two sides closer to working out a common position on any of these issues , or even to seeing the other side ’ s point of view .
Instead , they will dwell on what is by now uncontroversial : welcoming the recent , if still fragile , progress in Israel-Palestine relations , supporting stability in post-election Iraq and Afghanistan , and extolling the transatlantic link .
The drafters of the farewell communiqué are , no doubt , already at work listing all the issues on which the two governments see eye to eye .
Bush and Schroeder will make up for the paucity of substance with a good deal of friendly banter and bonhomie before the press assembled in Mainz .
That is , of course , better than nothing .
But it amounts merely to a temporary papering over of differences , not their resolution .
Worse , there is no sign that either man is willing to speak his mind in order to signal to the other side what he will expect when the next crisis looms .
Future misunderstandings and misgivings are thus inevitable .
The welcome return to civility is not , therefore , a return to mutual trust .
After all , the test of alliance does not lie in praising agreements , but in thrashing out disagreements in a spirit of cooperation .
Neither Bush nor Schroeder seem ready for this .
If nothing else happens , the chief transatlantic partners will be no better prepared for the next crisis than they were for the last .
As Leslie Gelb , the former president of The Council on Foreign Relations in New York , recently remarked , leaders in Europe and the US have lost the habit of serious cooperation .
What could revive that habit ?
Perhaps only a miracle : real progress in the Israel-Palestine conflict , which both the US and the Europeans could then claim to have helped bring about .
Common success could make both sides realize that they still have a common cause .
But that miracle will not materialize in Mainz .
