The Decline and Fall of America ’ s Decline and Fall
CAMBRIDGE – The United States is going through difficult times .
Its post-2008 recovery has slowed , and some observers fear that Europe ’ s financial problems could tip the American and world economy into a second recession .
American politics , moreover , remains gridlocked over budgetary issues , and compromise will be even more difficult on the eve of the 2012 election , when Republicans hope that economic problems will help them unseat President Barack Obama .
In these circumstances , many are predicting America ’ s decline , especially relative to China .
And it ’ s not just pundits who think so .
A recent Pew poll found that in 15 of 22 countries surveyed , most people believe that China either will replace or has replaced America as “ the world ’ s leading superpower . ”
In Britain , those putting China on top rose to 47 % , from 34 % in 2009 .
Similar trends are evident in Germany , Spain , and France .
Indeed , the poll found more pessimistic views of the US among our oldest and closest allies than in Latin America , Japan , Turkey , and Eastern Europe .
But even Americans are divided equally about whether China will replace the US as a global superpower .
Such sentiments reflect the slow growth and fiscal problems that followed the 2008 financial crisis , but they are not historically unprecedented .
Americans have a long history of incorrectly estimating their power .
In the 1950 ’ s and 1960 ’ s , after Sputnik , many thought that the Soviets might get the better of America ; in the 1980 ’ s , it was the Japanese .
Now it is the Chinese .
But , with America ’ s debt on a path to equaling its national income in a decade , and a fumbling political system that cannot seem to address the country ’ s fundamental challenges , are the “ declinists ” finally right ?
Much will depend on the uncertainties – often underestimated – brought about by future political change in China .
Economic growth will bring China closer to the US in power resources , but that doesn 't necessarily mean that China will surpass the US as the most powerful country .
China ’ s GDP will almost certainly surpass that of the US within a decade , owing to the size of its population and its impressive economic-growth rate .
But , measured by per capita income , China will not equal the US for decades , if then .
Moreover , even if China suffers no major domestic political setback , many current projections are based simply on GDP growth .
They ignore US military and soft-power advantages , as well as China ’ s geopolitical disadvantages . As Japan , India , and others try to balance Chinese power , they welcome an American presence .
It is as if Mexico and Canada sought a Chinese alliance to balance the US in North America .
As for absolute decline , the US has very real problems , but the American economy remains highly productive .
America remains first in total R & amp ; D expenditure , first in university rankings , first in Nobel prizes , and first on indices of entrepreneurship .
According to the World Economic Forum , which released its annual report on economic competitiveness last month , the US is the fifth most competitive economy in the world ( behind the small economies of Switzerland , Sweden , Finland , and Singapore ) .
China ranks only 26th .
Moreover , the US remains at the forefront of such cutting-edge technologies as biotech and nanotechnology .
This is hardly a picture of absolute economic decline .
Some observers worry that American society will become sclerotic , like Britain at the peak of its power a century ago .
But American culture is far more entrepreneurial and decentralized than was that of Britain , where industrialists ’ sons sought aristocratic titles and honors in London .
And despite recurrent bouts of concern throughout its history , America reaps huge benefits from immigration .
In 2005 , foreign-born immigrants had participated in 25 % of technology start-ups in the previous decade .
As Singapore ’ s Lee Kuan Yew once told me , China can draw on a talent pool of 1.3 billion people , but the US can draw on the world ’ s seven billion , and can recombine them in a diverse culture that enhances creativity in a way that ethnic Han nationalism cannot .
Many commentators worry about America ’ s inefficient political system .
True , America ’ s founding fathers created a system of checks and balances designed to preserve liberty at the price of efficiency .
Moreover , the US is now experiencing a period of intense partisan polarization .
But nasty politics is nothing new to the US : its founding era was hardly an idyll of dispassionate deliberation .
American government and politics have always experienced such episodes , and , though overshadowed by current melodramas , they were sometimes worse than today ’ s .
The US faces serious problems : public debt , weak secondary education , and political gridlock , to name just a few .
But one should remember that these problems are & # 160 ; only part of the picture – and , in principle , they can be solved over the long term .
It is important to distinguish such problems from those that cannot , in principle , be solved .
Of course , whether America can implement the available solutions is uncertain ; several commissions have proposed feasible plans to change America ’ s debt trajectory by raising taxes and cutting expenditures , but feasibility is no guarantee that they will be adopted .
Still , Lee Kuan Yew is probably right to say that China “ will give the US a run for its money , ” but not surpass it in overall power in the first half of this century .
If so , the gloomy predictions of absolute American decline will turn out to be as misleading as similar predictions in decades past .
And , in relative terms , while the “ rise of the rest ” means that America will be less dominant than it once was , this does not mean that China will necessarily replace the US as the world ’ s leading power .
