Step in , Prodi !
COPENHAGEN : The " joint reaction " of 14 European Union governments against their partner – Austria – threatens to weaken the Union at the moment when it faces its greatest challenge : opening its membership to the new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe .
For the political boycott implemented by the 14 against Austria undermines the Treaty on European Union , and raises serious doubts about the functioning of EU-institutions .
If the present deadlock is not broken soon , serious damage will be done to European integration .
The intentions of the 14 were the noblest imaginable : that the Union should be safeguarded against the xenophobia manifested in the rhetoric of the leader of the Austrian Freedom Party , Mr. Jörg Haider .
When Austrian conservatives in January started negotiations with Haider ’ s party on a new coalition to take power after many years of complacent conservative / socialist governments , alarm bells rang across Europe .
Suddenly , 14 members of the European Council of state and government leaders found themselves able to take a quick decision .
Too quick , alas .
They decided to establish political boycotts against Austria , should the new coalition become a reality .
When Austria ’ s new coalition government was sworn in , the boycotts ensued .
The problem is that the Treaty on European Union sets out clear rules for how member governments shall treat each other if the fundamental principles common to them are endangered :
* Article Six of the Treaty describes these common values : " … principles of liberty , democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , and the rule of law … "
* Article Seven states that the European Council " may determine the existence of a serious and persistent breach by a Member State of … ( these ) principles after inviting the government of the Member State in question to submit its observations .
Where such a determination has been made , the Council , acting by a qualified majority , may decide to suspend certain of the rights deriving from the application of this Treaty to the Member State in question , including the voting rights of the representatives of that Member State in the Council . "
So far , so clear .
Now 14 heads of state and government deem it appropriate to invent their own new rules .
They tried to camouflage their joint action as something that had nothing to do with the EU .
They talked about a " joint reaction " by 14 governments , as if they accidentally happened to put their heads together , as such Orwellian ‘ newspeak ’ would fool anybody .
I am definitely no admirer of Mr. Haider and his so-called " Freedom " Party .
His attitudes toward opening Europe to the new postcommunist democracies are worrying ; his lack of sensitivity in regards to the shadier sides of Europe ’ s history is disgusting .
These are just two reasons why we kicked him and his party out of the European Liberal and Democrat Party ( ELDR ) some years ago .
But a democratically elected government should be judged on its politics , not on the rhetoric of a populist politician , however vulgar and repulsive .
The action against Austria causes anxiety all over Europe , not least among the new democracies applying for membership .
The new Austrian government was judged by its European partners without being able to " submit its observations " as stated in the Treaty .
Everybody is confused : which set of common values have been broken by the Austrians ?
Why act , for example , against the Austrian Freedom Party when no action was taken in other European countries ( like Italy ) when parties from the extreme right took part in government ?
Does Europe have one set of rules for small countries and another for big ones ?
What if communists suddenly appear in government coalitions ?
Will that also lead to political boycotts from other EU-governments ?
If not , is that because 11 out of the 14 governments today are socialist / social-democrats , and jumped to help out when fellow Austrian socialists were poised to lose power ?
Do we have one set of rules for the extreme right and one for the extreme left ?
These nagging questions threaten to undermine the authority of the European Council .
This institution has grown in influence over the last 10-15 years .
Heads of state and government meet more frequently than before and are increasingly active in EU decision making .
They have developed what sometimes looks like an old-boys-network .
They have often given a welcome boost to European integration , when snap decisions needed to be taken and red tape cut .
But when they act as in this case – without consultations with their diplomats and the Commission ( " guardian of the Treaty " ) – it begins to look like the sort of arrogance of power that makes European integration seem so frightening to a lot of people .
The 14 government leaders have painted themselves into a corner .
Nowadays it is not a pretty sight to watch the proceedings of the Councils of Ministers : some ministers behave like small children in a kindergarten .
I don ’ t want to shake your hand ;
I don ’ t want to sit beside you ;
I won ’ t listen when you talk … .
This is not a dignified way to act .
The big question is : can this situation be reversed ?
In their wisdom the 14 forgot to tell the Austrians what to do in order to be accepted again as playmates by their colleagues .
Perhaps the president of the European Commission should try to cut this Gordian knot .
After all , it is his responsibility , and of those of his colleagues in the Commission , to safeguard the Treaty .
He cannot remain a passive spectator when one member state is being mugged by the others in clear conflict with the Treaty ’ s rules .
Step in , Signor Prodi !
Save what is left of everyone ’ s faces .
