The Conundrum of Scientific Fraud
Science , and the behavior of scientists , has never been perfect .
Consider the Korean scientist Hwang Woo-suk , whose claim to have extracted stem cells from human embryos that he cloned turned out to be based on phony research .
Hwang has just been fired by Seoul National University , and six of his co-workers have been suspended or had their pay cut .
Hwang and his colleagues are hardly alone .
In response to the recurrence of well-publicized and highly damaging scandals in recent years , many universities and some entire national research funding agencies now convene “ institutional review boards ” to deal with breaches of what has come to be known as “ research ethics . ”
But are such boards necessary ?
If so , in what spirit should they conduct their work ?
From artists to scientists , all intellectual workers are preoccupied with the giving and taking of credit .
Hiring , promoting , and rewarding academic staff is increasingly based on “ citation counts ” – the number of times someone receives credit in peer-approved publications .
Even if someone ’ s work is criticized , it must be credited properly .
Credit is often given simply because someone has produced a creditable work .
But , increasingly , the fixation on credit reflects the work ’ s potential monetary value .
And , however one defines the creditworthiness of intellectual work , one thing is clear : reported cases of fraud are on the rise .
Sometimes fraud consists in plagiarism : the culprit takes credit for someone else ’ s work .
However , especially in the most competitive scientific fields , fraud often takes the form of forgery : the culprit fabricates data .
Plagiarism is the sin of the classroom ; forgery is the sin of the laboratory .
But in neither case has a standard method emerged for ensuring the integrity of research – or of the scientists who carry it out .
A useful simplification in addressing the potential work of research ethics panels is to consider two models of review : “ inquisitorial ” and “ accusatorial . ”
Whereas the inquisitorial model presumes that fraud is rampant , but often undetected , the accusatorial model adopts a less paranoid stance , presuming that researchers are innocent until proven otherwise .
The natural context for an inquisitorial system is a field where scientific integrity is regularly under threat because research is entangled with political or financial interests .
Often , these entanglements are unavoidable , especially in the case of biomedical research .
Here the inquisitors are part cost accountant , part thought police .
They conduct spot-checks on labs to ensure that the various constituencies for scientific research are getting their money ’ s worth .
Inquisitors must be invested with the power to cut off funding to transgressors , perhaps even excommunicating them , by barring a scientist from practicing or publishing in the future .
Hwang , for example , has lost his research license and has been banned from assuming another public post for five years .
However , the credibility of such a system relies on the inquisitors ’ ability to uphold standards of science that are genuinely independent from special interests both inside and outside the research community .
Otherwise , inquisitorial ethics reviews could come to be regarded as nothing more than intellectual vigilantism .
Consider the Danish Research Council ’ s ominously named “ Committee on Scientific Dishonesty , ” which was convened in 2002 following complaints raised against the political scientist Bjørn Lomborg , whose book The Skeptical Environmentalist purported to demonstrate that ecologists systematically biased their interpretation of data to support their political objectives .
The Committee initially found Lomborg guilty of much the same error that he had alleged of the ecologists .
However , the Committee refused to comment on whether his behavior was normal or deviant for the field in question .
This enabled Lomborg to appeal the verdict , successfully , claiming that the Committee had victimized him for political reasons , given his recent appointment as director of a major national institute for environmental research .
In the end , the Committee on Scientific Dishonesty was itself reorganized .
In retrospect , the Committee probably should have refused the case , given that Lomborg ’ s book was subject to intense public scrutiny , often by experts writing ( favorably ) in The Economist and ( unfavorably ) in Scientific American .
His was a genuine case in which intellectual work was given a fair trial in the proverbial “ court of public opinion ” and required no further oversight .
Indeed , Lomborg ’ s case would seem to support the accusatorial model of ethics review , which assumes that scientists adequately regulate their own affairs through normal peer-review procedures .
Here , scientific integrity is understood not as a duty to stakeholders — funders , companies , or , as with Hwang , politicians concerned about national prestige — but as a collective responsibility that is upheld by identifying and correcting errors before they cause substantial harm .
The accusatorial system is designed for those relatively rare cases when error slips through the peer-review net , resulting in some concrete damage to health or the environment , or causing the corruption of later research that assumes the validity of fraudulent work .
To lodge an accusation , the accuser must establish that some harm has been committed , which is then shown to have been the fault of the accused .
The countervailing assumptions of the inquisitorial and accusatorial systems reflect the ambiguity of the concept of scientific fraud .
Many so-called frauds are cases in which researchers claimed credit for work they have not really carried out , but that pointed in the right direction and was eventually completed by others .
Strictly speaking , they are guilty more of confusing the potential and the actual than the true and the false .
Indeed , by today ’ s standards , Galileo and Mendel committed fraud , since they likely massaged their data to fit a neat mathematical formula .
However , they remain scientific visionaries because others built so effectively on their “ work . ”
Of course , in their cases , no money changed hands and no one ’ s life was jeopardized .
Perhaps , from the point of view of research ethics , that makes all the difference .
