The Great Denial
CAMBRIDGE : Social security is the great cash cow of irresponsible governments .
At their beginning , when governments introduce a traditional social security system they gain quite a few decades to collect taxes before the first sizeable payouts to retirees show up .
But then , yet a few decades later and reinforced by longer life expectancy and sharply lower birth rates , the system goes bust : tax inflows are insufficient to balance the outflows in the form of payments to retirees .
What was attractive as a way of financing government in the second half of the 20th century becomes a formidable headache 20 years from now .
The size of the problem , the fact that it hits so many countries at the same time , and the great difficulty of doing something about it all call for confronting it as soon as possible .
Yet , the Great Denial is practiced by governments and international institutions alike .
This is as true in Japan as it is in Europe even though their problems are by far the worst in the world .
In the past decade attention has focused on bringing down budget deficits , establishing the EU convergence targets and the like .
But these targets have been organized around the explicit public debt already on the books with absolutely no provision for the implicit debt implied by social security liabilities .
Yet , these liabilities are just as real as the existing public debt and , in quite a few cases , their present value is as high or higher than the public debt numbers .
In Japan , for example , existing public debt is near 100 % , but there is an extra 150 % of GDP in net pension liabilities .
The sum is stunningly large and presumably unpayable .
Moreover , the prospect is not a distant one , but something knocking at the door : population ( hence the number of taxpayers ) is already declining , the social security accounts are already turning to deficits and 15 years hence the debt mountain will be crushing capital markets .
In such a situation one needs urgent reforms that create more taxpayers , not fewer as is now the case as a result of partial restructuring without deregulation , good budgets and lots of growth .
Japan has none of these .
But Japan is no exception .
China has its problems .
But , unlike Japan , it responds dramatically : the 1-child-per-family rule has just been junked .
Why , because 20 or 30 years from now China needs a lot of taxpayers to fund a wave of retirees ; opening up the rules on births now provides taxpayers down the road .
That long horizon is entirely appropriate ; the view that the problem can be solved once we get there does not work because demographics is a slow process which now is on a very adverse trend .
In Europe the trend is dramatically unfavorable , more so in all the transition economies .
A simple number to watch is this : what is the growth rate of the population group of 1 to 14 yearsCthe taxpayers of 2030 ?
In Poland that number is B1.9 % , -2.3 % in Hungary , -2.5 % in the Czech Republic , -2.3 % in Romania and so on .
Here is a crisis in the making because giving the old nothing means a huge poverty problem , giving them something means huge tax burdens on a shrinking labor force .
In Western Europe , with substantial differences across countries , the situation is not much better .
Spain , Italy , Germany all have negative growth rates for young population groups .
They all have very large net social security liabilities ; they all have excessive entitlements and too few future taxpayers to shoulder the burden .
Those born now will live in a richer economy , but they will get less of it because they will be paying through their nose to look after the large group of retirees who will vote the taxes .
Are there exceptions to the gloomy outlook ?
Yes , of course .
In Britain , the Thatcher government decoupled entitlements from current wages .
The result is that net social security liabilities are essentially zero .
In the US , an effective social security system and sound public finance with surpluses at full employment increasingly funds for future retirees .
What to do at this stage , with the problem as yet distant but the lead-time for heading off catastrophe very long ?
The right policies focus on three fronts .
First , workers need to be encouraged to provide for their own retirement .
In part this is accomplished by explicitly reducing entitlements and raising retirement age from absurdly low levels .
But it is also accomplished by privatization of social security such that the mandatory contributions are taken out of the hands of government and invested for the future rather than dissipated in current spending .
Second , governments have to start running budget surpluses and use privatization to set aside revenues that can be invested to meet future claims .
Third , governments need to focus on policies that create employment and taxpayers .
Paying people not to work , as is common in Western Europe , is scandalous and ultimately undermines public finance .
Regulatory reform is essential so that as large firms increasingly restructure and shed labor , workers can easily move into newly created jobs rather than winding up on the unemployment rolls .
It is time to stop denying the problem .
Radically different strategies of reform and restructuring on a broad front , in the market and in public finance , need to be phased in rapidly to create a prospect for dealing with the problem .
Adverse demographic trends combined with bad welfare state policies have created a time bomb that cannot be defused once it is about to go off .
