The EU and the War Machine
BRUSSELS : For many years , the most glaring weakness in the European Union has been its inability to mobilise a common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) .
NATO 's bombing of Serbia and Kosovo has highlighted these problems again .
Structural factors go a long way to explain this deficiency .
Essentially , a CFSP cannot be put together by the slow and careful negotiations which characterise the normal EU process .
War is different from economic integration , largely because it cannot be waged collectively by the assembling of cautious legislative procedures .
Such factors of inertia are systemic : they cannot be overcome internally by some ingenious system of majority voting .
And yet it begins to look as though they may nevertheless be in the process of being overcome by the irresistible imperatives of the Kosovo crisis .
As so often in the EU , the French have a neat word for this : éngrenage ( machinery ) , suggesting the image of someone getting caught up in the cogs of a machine , by which they mean the process of being drawn involuntarily along by the machinery of integration .
One striking example of such éngrenage is Economic and Monetary Union .
Few member states would spontaneously have gone for a Single Currency ; but they found that this was the almost unavoidable consequence of the Single Market which they had already set in train .
The analogy with the two-phase tragedy in the Balkans may turn out to be rather close , though in negative terms .
In the first phase , the three-sided civil war in Bosnia , some European leaders trumpeted that this was a European problem .
But in practice European governments were absolutely determined not to get involved in the war ; the furthest they would go in risking their troops was , at first , for humanitarian aid , and later ( after some American bombing ) for peace-keeping .
The 1995 Dayton agreement restored some semblance of calm to Bosnia .
But the preceding savagery of Serbian , Croatian and Bosnian ethnic cleansing , in that first phase of the Balkan tragedy , and the lily-livered impotence of the EU , had been so shocking and so shameful for the Europeans , that when they saw President Slobodan Milosevic embarking on an even more outrageous process of ethnic cleansing in Kosovo , with the prospective death or displacement of tens or hundreds of thousands of Albanian Kosovars , they were compelled , almost willy nilly , to intervene more forcefully this time round .
At first the Europeans , and their American allies in NATO , believed or hoped that they could , by negotiation , persuade President Milosevic to back down from his policy of repression and massacre in Kosovo .
But when they found that Milosevic was resistant to moral pressure , the NATO allies were forced to raise the ante by threatening the use of military force .
When they found that he was stone deaf to their threats , NATO was forced to raise the ante again , by actually bombing military targets in Yugoslavia .
That bombing has been going on for over three weeks now , but there is still no sign that the NATO allies are succeeding in bending Milosevic to their will .
It is here that they have got caught up in the process of éngrenage :
* First , the stakes have been raised much higher than anyone thought six months ago .
It does not at the moment seem likely that NATO can count on winning this battle of wills by only a continuation of the bombing .
And since bombing is liable to produce rising casualties among civilians , even the simple continuation of the bombing may be difficult to sustain .
Yet if NATO were to give up the struggle and leave Milosevic in control of the field , the consequences of such a defeat would be horrific for the NATO alliance , for the US , and particularly for the European Union .
It is hard to believe that any of the allies is prepared to contemplate that kind of defeat .
* Secondly , if defeat is unacceptable , the NATO allies may be forced to raise the ante even higher .
From the beginning , they have repeatedly declared ( foolishly ) that they would never send in troops on the ground .
This may have been intended to reassure voters at home , but in fact it only encouraged Milosevic .
So the time may be coming where the only option , if NATO wants to avert defeat , is to send in troops .
Yet it is most unlikely that all NATO members would agree to such a change of policy ; and even more unlikely that all would be prepared to provide a national contingent .
In other words , NATO 's unity , and perhaps its future , could be imperilled , both by a decision to send troops , and by a decision not to send troops .
The third part of the Balkan éngrenage , is that NATO 's strategic objectives have started to change out of all recognition .
Before the bombing , NATO 's aim was to broker a new deal in Kosovo , in which Milosevic would abandon ethnic cleansing , and the Kosovars would get limited autonomy within Yugoslavia , but not independence .
The option of such a compromise seems by now to have been ruled out by the savagery of Milosevic 's repression of the ethnic Albanians .
Even if he were to sign a deal , it is very hard to believe he would stick to it .
As a result , Western objectives have shifted in the direction of some kind of protectorate for Kosovo , quite independent of Milosevic .
It is difficult to overstate what is now at stake for the Western allies , to say nothing of the interests of the people of Kosovo .
If the Europeans back away from the costs of victory , they will give dramatic proof of their reluctance to develop a European CFSP : the systemic obstacles coupled with cowardice will have proved stronger than the éngrenage .
If the Europeans help defeat Milosevic , they will have been carried far further towards a CFSP than any of them expected - or wanted .
