The “ Impact ” Illusion in Science
STANFORD – Government-funded scientific research runs the gamut from studies of basic physical and biological processes to the development of applications to meet immediate needs .
Given limited resources , grant-making authorities are always tempted to channel a higher proportion of funds toward the latter .
And , faced with today ’ s tight budget constraints , the inclination to favor projects that have demonstrable short-term returns is arguably stronger now than in the past .
But to succumb to it is a mistake .
Some of science ’ s most useful breakthroughs have come as a result of sustained investment in basic research or as by-products of unrelated efforts .
Indeed , evaluating the impact of any research project is difficult .
As Marc Kirschner , a professor at Harvard Medical School , pointed out in a thoughtful editorial in the journal Science : “ One may be able to recognize good science as it happens , but significant science can only be viewed in the rear-view mirror . ”
Even preeminent researchers may underestimate the significance of their findings at the time they obtain them .
When Salvador Luria , my university microbiology professor , received the 1969 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine , he made the point eloquently , sending a humorous cartoon to all who had congratulated him on the award .
It depicted an elderly couple at the breakfast table .
The husband , reading the morning newspaper , exclaims , “ Great Scott !
I ’ ve been awarded the Nobel Prize for something I seem to have said , or done , or thought , in 1934 ! ”
Discoveries can come from unforeseen directions , as seemingly unrelated and obscure research areas intersect unexpectedly .
In a 2011 editorial , the French biologist François Jacob described the research that led to his 1965 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine .
His lab had been working on the mechanism that under certain circumstances causes the bacterium E. coli suddenly to produce bacterial viruses .
At the same time , another research group was analyzing , also in E. coli , how the synthesis of a certain enzyme is induced in the presence of a specific sugar .
As Jacob put it , “ The two systems appeared mechanistically miles apart . But their juxtaposition would produce a critical breakthrough for our understanding of life . ”
Thus was born the concept of an “ operon , ” a cluster of genes whose expression is regulated by an adjacent regulatory gene .
Another quintessential example of both the synergy and serendipity of basic research is the origin of recombinant DNA technology , the prototypical technique of modern genetic engineering ( sometimes called “ genetic modification , ” or GM ) .
It resulted from a combination of findings in several esoteric , largely unrelated areas of basic research in the early 1970s .
Research in enzymology and nucleic acid chemistry led to techniques for cutting and rejoining segments of DNA .
Advances in fractionation procedures permitted the rapid detection , identification , and separation of DNA and proteins .
And the accumulated knowledge of microbial physiology and genetics allowed foreign DNA to be introduced into a cell and made to function there .
The result was the birth of modern biotechnology .
Over the last 40 years , recombinant DNA technology has revolutionized numerous industrial sectors , including agriculture and pharmaceuticals .
It has enabled the development of vaccines against infectious diseases and drugs that treat non-infectious illnesses like diabetes , cancer , cystic fibrosis , psoriasis , rheumatoid arthritis , and some genetic disorders .
Another example is the creation of hybridomas , hybrid cells created in the laboratory by fusing normal white blood cells that produce antibodies with a cancer cell .
Researchers wanted to combine the cancer cells ’ rapid growth and the normal cells ’ ability to dictate the production of a single specific “ monoclonal ” antibody .
Their goal was to learn more about the rates of cellular mutation and the generation of antibody diversity .
But , as it turned out , these immortal , antibody-producing cells were useful not only for scientific inquiry , but also as a novel technological instrument for a variety of medical and industrial applications .
Indeed , the technology has led to the development of highly specific diagnostic tests ; blockbuster anti-cancer drugs such as Rituxan ( rituximab ) , Erbitux ( cetuximab ) , and Herceptin ( trastuzumab ) ; and Avastin ( bevacizumab ) , which is widely used to treat both cancer and diseases of the retina that commonly cause blindness .
In his editorial , Kirschner bemoaned the “ tendency to equate significance to any form of medical relevance , ” noting that it caused research into non-mammalian systems to be treated “ as intrinsically less valuable than studies on human cells . ”
As a result , simple but informative model systems can be overlooked , and an important link between basic science and human medicine can be lost .
The past century of research on various non-mammalian model systems makes this point persuasively .
For example , studies of Caenorhabditis elegans , a tiny roundworm , have provided a wealth of information on cellular differentiation , neural networks , meiosis , and programmed cell death .
Studies of the fruit fly , Drosophila melanogaster , have significantly advanced our understanding of the mechanisms underlying Mendelian genetics .
The amount of money funneled by governments into research is large .
In the United States , the National Institutes of Health spends roughly $ 30 billion a year , and the National Science Foundation adds another $ 7 billion . As officials decide how that money is to be spent , they would be wise to glance in the rear-view mirror and fund the basic research that keeps science moving forward .
