The Fear Profiteers
OXFORD – Just when it seemed that America ’ s “ Homeland Security state ” could not get more surreal , the United States Transportation Security Administration has rolled out a costly Scylla and Charybdis at major airports : either you accept dangerous doses of radiation and high-resolution imaging of your naked body , or , worried about the health risks of cumulative radiation , you opt out of the new full-body x-ray machines ( rapidly dubbed “ porno-scanners ” ) .
But if you opt out , you are now subjected , as I was last week , to an extraordinarily sexualized and invasive “ pat-down ” by TSA officials .
“ I will now touch your private parts , ” a very uncomfortable female TSA official said to me when I flew out of New York ’ s Kennedy Airport .
And , sure enough , I experienced the invasive touching of genitals and breasts that is now standard policy for US travelers .
Men report handling of their testicles and penises , TSA officials are instructed to open and peer down waistbands , and YouTube is now rife with videos of frightened children being – to describe it accurately – sexually molested , though this is the last thing most TSA officials wish to do .
Are we free not to be radiated or groped ?
We are not .
Passengers who have refused to be patted down on their genitals have been handcuffed to chairs .
Each new terror alert or high-tech innovation , it seems , makes new demands on our liberty in the name of security .
But travelers ’ recent experiences in the US should give security officials elsewhere good reason to avoid implementing similar policies .
In fact , America ’ s bizarre new policy is likely to remain unique among airports in the industrialized countries , if not the entire world .
Israeli security officials , for example , scoff at genital pat-downs , which they say accomplish nothing .
That is not exactly true .
Twenty-four per cent of women have been sexually assaulted , or molested by a trusted adult in childhood or adolescence – as have 17 % of men .
Many of these survivors will be re-traumatized when strangers grope their genitals .
And children will be placed most at risk of profound negative effects .
Years of sensitive educational outreach have finally made it the norm for American children to understand that their bodies are their own , that adults should not touch them intimately or in ways that make them uncomfortable , and that they can expect to be protected from such violation .
By desensitizing children to sexually inappropriate touching , the pat-downs are destroying those hard-won gains .
It gets worse .
TSA officials have been advised to tell small children that the sexual pat-downs are a game .
To anyone who has ever counseled survivors of childhood sexual abuse , this should set off alarm bells : the most common ploy of sexual predators is to portray the abuse as a “ game . ”
As Ken Wooden of the organization Child Lures Prevention puts it , the TSA ’ s “ incredibly misinformed and misguided ” advice “ is completely contrary to what we in the sexual-abuse prevention field have been trying to accomplish for the past 30 years . ”
Americans , for once , are fighting back against this latest violation of their rights .
Two states , New Jersey and Idaho , recently introduced legislation to seek to opt out of the new policy .
Questions about the change in practice have reached US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton – who admitted that she herself would resist a sexual pat-down – and President Barack Obama .
So what led to a policy that is appalling to citizens , damaging to children , and ineffective for improving our security ?
Welcome to America ’ s current reality , in which threats are hyped so that a handful of insiders can make a killing .
Shortly after former Secretary of Homeland Security Michael Chertoff made the rounds of TV shows arguing in favor of such measures to thwart “ bad guys , ” one of his consulting firm ’ s clients , Rapiscan , won the $ 350 million contract to provide the full-body x-ray machines .
As one TSA supervisor said to me after my own sexualized pat-down , “ This is about bureaucracy – people trying to cover their asses – and there is a ton of money involved as well . ”
Meanwhile , the supervisor confirmed – as has online discussion by TSA employees – that workers ordered to molest travelers are traumatized , too .
One army veteran said that he cries every day from the resistance and outcry he now faces from passengers , and that the stress is worse than being on active military deployment .
Others say they feel degraded and ashamed .
Indeed , TSA workers are now working in a sexually hostile environment , which is illegal .
Finally , one must ask : is there a psychological element to the US requirement of submission to genital groping by uniformed officials ?
It is impossible to forget the many strange sexual twists of Bush administration policies , from forced nudity of prisoners – which post-Abu Ghraib records show was systemic , not an aberration – to the sexual threats and sexual assaults against such prisoners , the sexualized hazing rituals and accounts of rape practiced with impunity by contractors , and so on .
I am not suggesting that sexually degrading practices are a conscious part of the TSA ’ s new policy .
But the history of closing societies shows that nudity and forced or degrading sexualized practices become , consciously or unconsciously , part of the state 's consolidation of power .
It is not too extreme to put this into context : billions of dollars in profit now depend on insiders like Chertoff maintaining US society in a state of overhyped alert that demands increasingly costly technology .
Maintaining these profits requires a population conditioned by this theater of fear to submit to anything – even the sexual quasi-abuse of themselves and their children .
