Romania \ u0027s Hysteria
BUCHAREST : Across Eastern Europe throughout this year , people have celebrated their peaceful , victorious revolutions against communism .
In Romania , however , there was nothing “ velvet ” about communism 's end .
Ten years ago this December the center of Bucharest was ravaged by tank and sniper fire , leaving many people dead , as the part of the Romanian army that sided with those who wanted liberation fought street by street with loyalists of Ceausescu 's Securitate .
Today , our so-called revolution is still viewed differently than those that took place in other former communist countries .
Elsewhere , people know that a real revolution took place ; they have been building truly new societies .
Our revolution of 1989 now seems more like a coup , with one part of the communist elite simply replacing that part which had become utterly discredited .
As a member of the “ Group for Social Dialogue ” that sought to give direction to the forces of change during the fighting that December , I can say that we were never certain as to what forces were fighting with us and against us , nor for what reasons .
The National Salvation Front that ruled Romania 's first half-decade of transition , headed by Ion Iliescu , simply emerged triumphant from the bloodshed of 1989 as a fait accompli .
It never really declared communism over , merely that the Ceausescu dictatorship was finished .
Indeed , the only thing that I know for certain about those days is a strange curiosity : that Ceausescu endured his kangaroo court trial and execution with far more dignity than I would ever have imagined .
Uncertainty about our “ revolution ” still has debilitating effects today .
As then , people remain passive and uncommitted .
Market-oriented reforms , long postponed by the Iliescu government , appear to have failed to raise living standards .
As in Russia , they failed to bring about a legal free-market economy .
On the contrary , the share of the black market economy has been increasing by such a speed that , according to some economists , the real economy ( composed of both the " white " and the " black " economy ) actually grew over the last two years , notwithstanding an official decline in GDP .
Nevertheless , people complain that they are far worse off now than ten years ago .
In November , several unions organized rallies where demonstrators cursed the ruling centre-right government and invoked the Ceausescu era as one relatively good and secure .
Yet , as workers and unions step up their protests against privatization , market reforms , inflation , corruption or unemployment they seem to forget the taxes they withhold daily from state or local councils .
They ask their government to provide viable jobs for them , to control crime and inflation , and to care for their health , while at the same time they do all they can to evade the taxes needed to pay for these things .
In Romania , the gap between what people say and what people do remains a chasm .
Private hypocrisy breeds public hypocrisy and crime .
The less money the state has , the lower the salaries of civil servants and the value of pensions .
So , in order to feed their families , many teachers , judges or policemen will quite naturally accept bribes .
Because of lousy salaries in the state administration , many young and gifted people avoid government service , preferring to look for better-paid jobs in the private sector , or to emigrate .
Those in business try to shrink their declared income to the smallest amount possible , or not declare any income at all .
Thus the black market grows ever bigger and the state 's ability to carry out its most basic services continues to diminish .
As the state plunges into chronic weakness , a growing number of people yearn for it to be made stronger , even if our new liberties need to be sacrificed here and there .
They want the state to provide for their welfare , to tackle crime , unemployment and inflation and to fight corruption , all of which the state is less and less capable of doing .
Because most people confuse strength with efficiency , they believe that the state must again acquire sufficient power to enforce its will .
The result of this vicious circle is obvious : an ever growing dissatisfaction with the democratic ( even if imperfect ) state founded in the aftermath of Ceausescu 's fall .
What Romania ( and some other East-European countries , like Ukraine , Russia , Albania ) is experiencing is not merely an economic or a political crisis ; rather , it is a crisis of alienation .
The gap between the rulers and the ruled widens everyday .
Not only does each mistrust the other , but each tries to deceive each other as much as they can .
Ten years ago our revolution was mere sleight of hand ; now our politics is simply deception , too .
This week , President Constantinescu sacked the prime minister , who in turn refused to leave office .
Chaos , once again , seems at hand .
Romania , indeed , seems almost ripe for any bold demagogue to offer to replace this so-called " weak and rotten state " with a " strong and sound " dictatorship .
The only thing that seems to be holding us back from the brink is that dictatorships are out of fashion nowadays in Europe .
But in deceiving ourselves into thinking that it is a moral imperative that the state impose order , we are joining the fashionable madmen , which is when the thin whine of hysteria can be heard .
When that happens , a country is in trouble , and I think Romania already is there .
