The Visual Politics of Terror
NEW YORK – The British artist Damien Hirst once referred to the 2001 attack on New York ’ s World Trade Center as “ kind of an artwork in its own right .
It was wicked , but it was devised in this way for this kind of impact .
It was devised visually . ”
Now , 13 years later , Western governments , while able to describe in strategic terms the threat of the Islamic State to the Middle East , are still struggling to come to terms with its visual assault in the global media .
Like Osama bin Laden and Al Qaeda , the Islamic State appears to understand the impact that lurid images of violence can have on the public imagination .
The irony , of course , is that the Islamic State ’ s exploitation of images of “ pornographic ” violence is at odds with the Islamists ’ own condemnations of visual stimulation in other areas of life .
Indeed , their videos take sensory titillation to its limit .
Like an algorithm designed to access an adversary ’ s digital network , the Islamic State ’ s carefully staged videos , featuring the beheadings of American and British journalists and aid workers , have penetrated the Western psyche .
That psyche has long been primed to receive shocking imagery .
Now , the electronic media ’ s weakness for graphic violence has become the Islamic State ’ s strength .
The visual politics of terror may seem primitive , but its practice can be as sophisticated as its effects are profound .
Like ancient conquerors , who erected new temples on the sites where the vanquished had their own , the destroyers of New York ’ s Twin Towers used visual terror to strike at the heart of their enemy ’ s value system .
That is what terror aims to do : destabilize the foe ’ s normative reality .
Once the security of the familiar world is challenged , and its inner sanctums have been invaded and shaken , a space may be cleared for occupation .
Consider , for example , how Indonesia ’ s Suharto regime , from 1966 to 1998 , depicted alleged Communist insurgent savagery , and compelled citizens to watch it on television and in theaters .
The horrifying images were intended to foment terror .
In the face of a grotesquely violent enemy , an even more terrifying state apparatus of organized violence emerged .
In effect , Suharto ’ s visual politics of atrocity and terror created a new reality from the violence and terror associated with the demise of the old .
The same perverse logic is at work in the Islamic State ’ s viral spectacles .
Though the need to confront evil remains as pressing as ever , Western societies ’ motivation for doing so may lose clarity .
After all , it is one thing to deliberate on the pros and cons of confronting external forces of irrational violence ; it is something else to lash out against the producers of brutal , politically charged , and upsetting imagery .
We must therefore ask ourselves what exactly is driving our response to the threats that the Islamic State presents .
Distinguishing between information about real national-security concerns and images strategically designed to shock and titillate us will not be easy .
But given the stakes , it is undoubtedly worthwhile .
The visual politics of atrocity and terror is only as strong as we imagine it .
That is why exorcising its demons will require more than military might .
It also will require us to think deeply about the strategic use of violent images in the digital age .
