South America \ u0027s Growing Financial Storm
CAMBRIDGE : The international financial crisis continues , with South America feeling the brunt of the storm .
Deep economic emergencies have hit Brazil , Peru , Colombia , Ecuador , and Venezuela .
Brazil 's crisis will cause a recession in neighboring Argentina .
Even Chile , the outstanding performer of the region , will have very slow growth in 1999 .
South America 's unfolding crisis points out , once again , three major problems in today 's international financial system : pegged exchange rates , volatile international capital movements , and the International Monetary Fund itself .
South America was bound to experience some pain in the wake of East Asia 's financial crisis of 1997-8 .
Most South American countries are heavy commodity exporters , and the Asian crisis drove down world market prices for a wide range of commodities , including oil , copper , and agricultural products .
Ecuador , Colombia , and Venezuela are hard hit by falling oil prices .
Chile has been hit by the remarkable decline in copper prices , with prices falling from around $ 1.30 per pound to the current $ 0.61 per pound .
Brazil suffers from declining agricultural prices , though it benefits from falling oil prices .
Pain was compounded in three ways .
First , much of the region pegged its exchange rates to the U.S. dollar .
After the start of the Asian crisis , and with the fall in commodities prices , markets began to anticipate currency devaluations in the region .
In a flexible exchange rate system , currencies would have gradually depreciated , as happened in some other commodity exporting countries ( such as Canada , Australia , and New Zealand ) .
Instead , many Latin American countries tried to defend the exchange rates by raising interest rates sharply .
This was a mistake : high interest rates helped to push their economies into deep recession .
Second , international banks that had been lending to South America abruptly withdrew their funding in the second half of 1998 .
This has become a familiar story .
Big international banks pour in lots of short term capital into a region , and then suddenly pull the plug , demanding immediate repayments , and being unwilling to roll over the credits .
In the five main crisis countries of East Asia ( Indonesia , Korea , Malaysia , the Philippines , and Thailand ) , for example , international banks lent $ 65.3 billion in net flows in 1996 , only to withdraw $ 25.6 billion in 1997 and $ 35.0 billion in 1998 .
In South America , it seems to be the same story , though we don 't have the data yet .
In South America , the big crunch came after Russia 's default of August 18 , 1998 .
When Russia announced its suspension of payments on debt servicing , banks drew in their credits from other emerging markets around the world , especially countries with overvalued currencies and large bank debts .
Brazil was hard hit , and eventually thrown into recession .
The same occurred in most of Andean countries -- Venezuela , Colombia , Ecuador and Peru .
These countries were vulnerable because of the falling commodities prices and the overvalued currencies .
Sudden withdrawal of credits was enough to push them to the edge of recession .
The third stage of the crisis involves the International Monetary Fund .
This institution , supposedly in place to service its members , is a mix of incompetence and bias towards creditor interests .
In the Fall of 1998 , the IMF called the Latin American Finance Ministers to Washington for a crisis-prevention meeting .
But the IMF 's advice actually deepened the crisis .
The IMF told all of the countries to raise interest rates to restore international investor confidence .
In the case of Brazil , the IMF also told the government to prevent a depreciation of its highly overvalued exchange rate .
This high-interest rate strategy helped push the region into a sharp decline in the first half of 1999 .
Brazil 's defense of its currency backfired .
Brazil spent $ 45 billion in foreign exchange reserves in a failed attempt to defend the currency , which ended up collapsing anyway in January 1999 .
Even with all of these mistakes , the IMF keeps its iron-grip on the fates of South America .
If it rejects a country 's policies , the country faces virtual destruction by market panic , as has now occurred in Ecuador .
The Managing Director , Mr. Michel Camdessus , thinks he is the economic czar of the region , overriding his own staff as he dispenses commands to sovereign governments .
The developing world should not wait for a " new financial architecture " to save itself .
Four steps should be considered :
* countries should allow for flexibility in exchange rates , rather than trying to defend fixed exchange rates with crushingly high interest rates ;
* regional groups of countries -- in Central America , South America , and elsewhere -- might consider steps towards monetary union within the region .
Regional currencies , flexible against the dollar and Euro , might be a better defense against financial panic than individual national currencies ;
* countries should limit short-term borrowing from international banks .
Short-term bank lending from abroad is unstable and therefore dangerous ;
* developing countries should raise their collective voices against the excessive power of the International Monetary Fund .
