Syria ’ s Hijacked Struggle
LONDON – As Syria ’ s civil war has progressed , the West ’ s views on arming the opposition have become increasingly confused , which reflects the growing muddle on the ground .
While President Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime remains vicious and tyrannical , and some of its opponents ’ motives remain altruistic , the conflict can no longer be defined simply as one of good versus evil .
No unified , patriotic Syrian opposition has existed since extremists hijacked the peaceful protests in 2011 .
Indeed , some opposition tactics are as brutal as those of the Syrian regime .
The United Nations estimates that security forces have suffered 15,000 fatalities , and the opposition 10,000 , and that 45,000 civilians have died in the last two years of fighting .
And the UN has condemned militant groups – which now form the majority of fighters in Syria – for murder , kidnap , torture , assault , corruption , and reliance on child soldiers .
With Syria engulfed by chaos , the world does not know what to think .
Martin Dempsey , Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff , has admitted that the United States lacks a clear picture of the situation in Syria .
Moreover , Lakhdar Brahimi , the UN and Arab League special envoy for Syria , reports that opposition forces include 38 nationalities .
Jihadi fighters connected to Al Qaeda are now in the majority .
The United Kingdom ’ s Home Office has warned that hundreds of British and other European Muslims fighting in Syria alongside Al Qaeda-linked rebel groups could return home to carry out terrorist attacks .
In February , Syria ’ s state news agency accused jihadi rebels of firing a rocket containing chemical materials in Khan al-Assal – an allegation that the British television outlet Channel Four backs .
The rebels , however , blame the government for the attack ( which neither side has been able to prove involved chemical weapons ) .
The Free Syrian Army ( FSA ) , which the US , the UK , and France support , has denied involvement in the alleged chemical attacks , but has not condemned the rebels ’ brutal campaigns .
Puzzlingly , US Secretary of State John Kerry , justifying plans to provide the FSA ’ s Supreme Military Council with additional assistance , has cited the danger of “ letting this country , the heart of the Middle East … [ become ] hijacked by extremists . ”
But to oppose extremism and support the FSA is a blatant contradiction .
Even the US Department of Justice has stated categorically that most of the FSA adhere to Al Qaeda ’ s ideology .
The Supreme Military Council is overwhelmingly Islamist , with rebel-controlled areas of Syria already practicing sharia ( Islamic law ) .
Salim Idris , the council ’ s chief of staff , has expressed a willingness to fight alongside extremist groups that refuse to accept the unified command .
He has labeled only the Al Qaeda-linked Jabhat al-Nusra as extremist ( though he rejects America ’ s branding of the group as a “ foreign terrorist organization . ” )
In this context , the West ’ s belief that it can channel assistance to certain elements of the opposition is absurd , as is the concept of “ non-lethal ” aid , such as night-vision goggles , medical equipment , and armor , given the conventionally “ lethal ” aid that is already pouring in from the Gulf states .
The Guardianrecently reported that Jordan is accepting Saudi money to supply arms directly to Syrian rebels .
Western proponents of such aid , such as Kerry and UK Foreign Minister William Hague , must recognize that these supply channels do not discriminate between opposition groups .
More important , Western leaders must comprehend the danger of picking sides .
And that means that they must stop ignoring the lessons of the campaign in Afghanistan in the 1980 ’ s , which facilitated the Taliban ’ s rise to power , and the intervention in Libya in 2011 , which produced a weak and divided government that remains locked in a power struggle with Islamist militias .
France , the US , the UK , and Turkey have recognized the Syrian National Coalition as Syria ’ s future interim government , despite reports that two-thirds of the SNC ’ s 263 founders are linked to the Muslim Brotherhood .
The SNC ’ s outgoing leader , Moaz Al-Khatib , has publicly criticized America ’ s decision to blacklist Jabhat al-Nusra – as has the SNC ’ s key backer , Turkey .
It is ironic , to say the least , that the West ’ s democratically elected governments happily engage with members of the Muslim Brotherhood , but refuse to work with more liberal groups .
Our views are much too liberal for the SNC , and its key backer , Turkey , whose foreign minister has said that jihad in Syria is not related to terrorism .
They disregard the warnings of people like Alain Chouet , the former chief officer of the French General Directorate for External Security in Damascus , who recently denounced France ’ s provision of weapons to the rebels as “ completely illegal ” and described how “ the jihadi militias have taken precedence over the others . ”
The repercussions of mishandling Syria will extend far beyond the country ’ s borders .
After all , Syria is situated on a national , sectarian , regional , and geopolitical fault line , where the strategic interests of Russia , China , Iran , Iraq , and Lebanon confront those of NATO , Turkey , Saudi Arabia , Qatar , Kuwait , and Jordan .
And regional tensions are running high .
Improving Syria ’ s prospects for peace and democracy must begin with diplomacy .
Democracy is about representation , and that should cover the full mosaic of Syria ’ s people .
Every group with an interest in the country ’ s future – including the government , domestic opposition groups , and those in exile – should be invited to participate in official talks .
And , in order to create a level playing field , it is essential to recognize that the Arab League ( which has already given Syria ’ s seat to the Muslim Brotherhood-controlled SNC ) represents the autocratic states that are encouraging sectarianism and extremism in Syria .
During this process , Western governments must stop providing money or other kinds of aid to opposition groups in Syria , and put pressure on Turkey and the Gulf countries to stop supporting extremists .
Any financial aid should be channeled through organizations like the Red Cross and UNICEF to supply medical care to civilians , or allocated to a fund for post-war reconstruction .
Some leaders may be starting to recognize the need for a new narrative .
The UN Security Council has condemned the opposition ’ s recent attack on a mosque in Damascus , which killed a senior pro-government Muslim cleric .
US President Barack Obama recently expressed concern about Syria “ becoming an enclave for extremism , because extremists thrive in chaos . ”
But , in reality , Syria has already become an enclave for extremism .
Responding with military aid will simply turn a catastrophe into an apocalypse .
