Russia \ u0027s TV Wars
Pulling the plug on TV-6 was a sad day for Vladimir Putin 's Russia .
Not only did this event hurt the cause of freedom of speech , but the rule of law here has been deeply wounded and President Putin has squandered the goodwill of the very people in the West he seeks to emulate .
Closing TV-6 in many ways reflects what has gone wrong in Russia since 1991 .
Many people share the blame for the failures that have occurred since communism 's collapses .
Indeed , the types of characters involved in TV-6 's closure have been with us since then .
Greed , power , position , and egos have beset the electronic media as they have everything else in the postcommunist era .
The heavy-handed closures of NTV and TV-6 are merely two of the best examples of this country 's halting leap toward normality , and both closures reveal Putin 's selective approach to restructuring Russia .
Emotions about this event , however , are more in evidence than reasoned thoughts .
The idea of " freedom of speech " has indeed suffered a set back , but a return to Soviet era thought control is not in the offing .
For both Russia 's government and its market place of ideas are continuing to discover what a free media actually means .
Some in government think that a " free media " should only champion and praise the ruling elite .
Some rich " New Russians " see the media as a means for pushing their personal agendas at the expense of society 's interests , making themselves even wealthier .
Much of the TV-6 affair , indeed , was about money .
Whoever secures the stations 's license when it is opened for renewal in late March can , if he or she puts in a professional management , look forward to big revenues from advertising .
This golden nest egg may have been part of the Kremlin 's thinking about the station and its ownership all along .
Only days ago President Putin and Premier Mihail Kasyanov claimed that their actions were designed to protect the people of TV-6 .
Putin 's magnanimous words about the channel were , as usual , made while he was abroad .
( Sometimes I wonder if it would be better for Russia if its president ruled from a more idealistic Western environment ) .
But in reality his words were empty , and merely shrouded another episode in his personal vendetta against the oligarch Boris Berezovsky ( TV-6 's owner ) , one that is unbecoming in a statesman .
It is , of course , valid to require Boris Berezovsky to obey the law but , as so often in Russian history , the cost has become higher than the aim .
For Putin 's Kremlin and his Media Minister have mocked the rule of law by twisting the rules to achieve their aim : to end Berezovsky 's control of the station .
Still , the so-called victims of the government 's moves against TV-6 are not blameless .
Many members of TV-6 merely carried over the war of words they had been waging against Putin when they worked at NTV , the channel Putin and his ministers took aim at in an earlier media struggle .
NTV and TV-6 may be more truthful than state TV about the war in Chechnya , and both upstaged their rivals in exposing government corruption .
Each however , espoused a journalism in the service of a personal agenda , which is little different than the subservient journalism practiced under state ownership .
The " dictatorship of law " that President Puting speaks about so often now appears to be more about arbitrary political preferences than establishing a society that plays by the rules .
Indeed , so far , all that the " dictatorship of law " amounts to is the triumph of might over right .
The weak retain no recourse .
TV-6 was exhausted , by legal assaults , into submission .
But Putin 's victory over Berezovsky is as empty as it is meaningless .
The threat of force , not neutral enforcement of the law , remains the trump card .
Here TV-6 and its managers miscalculated grievously . They thought that , in the end , Russia 's legal code would protect them .
Instead , serving the center of power , it crushed them .
Russia 's public is outraged , not because the loss of TV-6 appears as a triumph of politics as usual , but because it leaves one less broadcaster to entertain .
Very few Russians I spoke to about TV-6 mentioned the issue of freedom of speech ; they spoke , rather , about who is now stealing from whom .
Putin is not seen as the bad guy , he is seen as a Russian ruler disciplining a dubious business-political interest .
Nothing more , nothing less .
Despite all that has happened , I continue to hope that Russia is not slouching back into its Soviet past .
The mistakes that have been made tell us that Russia 's ruling elite has yet to take the meaning of democratization seriously .
Disagreement with the government , it must begin to see , is not sedition .
Disagreement with government policy can often help rulers fine-tune or correct misdirected policies .
On the other hand , would-be media magnets have yet to learn that the electronic media is not a personalized soapbox .
Both sides have yet to realize that TV is more than a cash cow for advertising revenue .
All the same , those in the West should not see the struggle over TV-6 as a defining moment .
Putin and Russia are not evil .
Reform continues , but it is occurring in ways much more painful than we hoped .
