South Korea ’ s G-20 Challenge
BERKELEY – On January 1 , South Korea takes over the G-20 chairmanship from the United Kingdom .
Korea is not the first emerging market to chair the G-20 , but it is the first to do so since the global financial crisis .
And it is the first to do so since the G-20 emerged as the steering committee for the world economy .
G-20 chairs can have considerable influence .
They coordinate the group ’ s work .
They organize its meetings .
Like most committee chairs , they have significant agenda-setting power .
During the UK ’ s year chairing the G-20 , Gordon Brown had a clear agenda .
He saw the G-20 as a vehicle for building consensus on coordinated monetary and fiscal stimulus and financial regulation .
He also viewed it as a forum to address the problems created for the poorest countries by the global financial crisis .
And he used the chairmanship to elicit commitments to resist protectionism .
In retrospect , Brown ’ s agenda-setting problem was easy .
Given the nature and gravity of the crisis , it was brutally obvious what the priorities for the G-20 should be .
The priorities for President Lee Myung-bak are less obvious .
Some will say that he should get G-20 countries to coordinate an orderly exit from their expansionary monetary and fiscal policies .
But growth in the advanced economies will almost certainly remain weak in 2010 .
With the United States , Europe , and Japan still suffering post-crisis hangovers , this issue can be safely left to the country that chairs the G-20 in 2011 .
Others will say that a priority should be agreement on slowing climate change .
But this is best addressed in Copenhagen , in the presence of all world leaders , not in the cozy confines of the G-20 .
Small countries – think of Mauritius – are often the ones affected most dramatically by global warming .
They are excluded from the G-20 , which is supposed to be made up of the 20 largest economies as a matter of design .
Instead , President Lee should give priority to four issues , starting with financial reform , a problem that Brown targeted but did not solve .
Progress here has been inadequate , despite much talk .
In particular , there has been little action on issues like creating a cross-border resolution authority to deal with the failure of a large financial group , something that can only be done at the international level .
The window of opportunity for financial reform is now closing , and business-as-usual will only result in more crises and more bailouts .
South Korea must therefore do everything it can to reinvigorate the debate .
The second priority should be more progress on global rebalancing .
Asian countries need to do even more to stimulate spending , and they need to move together .
China is incapable of solving this problem on its own , because its economy is still only one-third the size of America ’ s .
But if Asian countries move together , China will be more willing to let its exchange rate against the dollar become unstuck .
The second factor contributing to the crisis could then be addressed once and for all .
Third , the G-20 must address its own legitimacy deficit .
After all , no one anointed these 20 countries as the designated representatives of the world .
Who speaks for the other 173 internationally recognized countries ?
Why should there be so many European G-20 members – other than the fact that they were incumbent members of the earlier “ G ’ s ” – and not more African members ?
Here , South Korea can propose an obvious solution .
Align G-20 membership with the composition of the International Monetary Fund ’ s Executive Board .
Twenty-four countries sit there .
Big ones have their own seats , while smaller ones represent groups of countries , known as “ constituencies . ”
In many cases , the constituencies rotate the chair among their members .
Everyone is represented .
Finally , the G-20 needs an emerging-markets caucus .
The US and the Europeans are in constant contact , doing their best to agree on positions and table common proposals .
Emerging markets , failing to do the same , have punched below their weight .
They have allowed the advanced countries to drive the G-20 process .
This is the most delicate issue of all for South Korea .
As chair , it needs to act as an “ honest broker . ”
It can ’ t be seen as giving emerging markets special encouragement .
And , given its location , South Korea would be torn between encouraging an emerging-market caucus and encouraging an Asian caucus – for Asia , too , needs to organize itself better in order to represent its interests in the G-20 .
Thus , the initiative here might best come from another G-20 country – maybe Brazil , South Africa , or even Russia .
But South Korea could usefully drop a hint .
