The Beginning of the End for Guantánamo
The “ war on terror ” has forced democracies to grapple with the extent to which they can afford to protect the civil rights and liberties of both their citizens and foreigners .
The debate has been most intense in the United States , where the refrain that the Constitution is not a “ suicide pact ” and that national security can justify extraordinary measures is heard repeatedly .
Some measures – unauthorized searches of bank records and wiretapping of telephone calls – compromise the liberty of all .
Others – most notoriously , the confinement of roughly 450 alleged Muslim fighters in Guantánamo Bay – impinge on people thought to be the enemy .
Amid rising allegations of abuse , President George W. Bush ’ s government realized some time ago that it could not maintain its Guantánamo detention camp forever .
Yet it did not want to repeat the experience of the Zacharias Moussaoui trial , in which , after many propagandistic appeals from the dock , the alleged twentieth September 11 , 2001 , hijacker was finally convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment .
So the Bush administration proposed a middle way : a military commission under military judges , which would recognize fewer rights for the accused and bar appeals to civilian courts .
In its recent decision in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld , the US Supreme Court said “ no ” : Bush ’ s exercise of executive power went too far .
As a result , the decision will have a lasting impact on America ’ s constitutional structure .
Salim Ahmad Hamdan served as Osama bin Laden ’ s personal driver .
Other than drive his boss around and attend meetings , he did nothing more to promote the terrorist attacks of September 2001 .
Yet his driving and his knowledge of Al Qaeda ’ s purposes struck the military as sufficient to charge him with entering a conspiracy to kill civilians and engage in terrorists acts .
When his trial began , the prosecution tried to exclude Hamdan from the room during the testimony of a witness against him .
The government wanted to protect its sources .
But this unusual procedure , permitted in the military commissions , runs afoul of accepted canons of federal , Constitutional , and international law .
The defense immediately sought an injunction in federal court to prevent the trial from continuing .
The federal court ruled that under the Geneva Conventions , Hamdan , as a prisoner of war , was entitled to a court hearing that followed the same procedures as one judging soldiers of the detaining power , that is , an American court martial .
The Supreme Court , however , sidestepped the question of whether Hamdan was a prisoner of war , arguing instead that the conflict was governed by common Article III in all the Geneva Conventions , which regulates armed conflict ” not of an international character . ”
In such cases , there is a duty to guarantee that all sentences are passed “ by a regularly constituted court affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples . ”
Bush ’ s military commissions were found to fall below this standard .
While the discussion of the Geneva Conventions and procedural rights is important , the more profound portion of Justice John Paul Stevens ’ majority opinion addresses the boundaries of the law of war , and specifically whether the conspiracy charge against Hamdan constitutes a violation of this body of customary international law .
Everyone agrees that , under US law , the jurisdiction of military tribunals is limited to violations of the laws of war , so if conspiracy cannot be charged , Hamdan and others like him cannot be tried in any military courts , not just the ad hoc commissions .
In order to resolve the question of whether conspiracy constitutes a crime under the laws of war , Justice Stevens followed the arguments made in the brief that I submitted on behalf of Experts on Conspiracy and the Law of War .
The law of war , the Court reasoned , must reflect the consensus of all legal systems .
But conspiracy , as a stand-alone offense , is particular to Anglo-American common law .
This argument has been well known since the Nuremberg trials , which rejected charges of conspiracy to commit war crimes and crimes against humanity .
Justice Stevens cited Telford Taylor , the chief prosecutor in Nuremberg , who made the same point about the oddity of conspiracy charges in international tribunals .
Moreover , arguments about international law in the post-WWII period have quietly dropped all references to conspiracy charges .
This admittedly has not been an explicit process , but the pattern is undeniable .
As Justice Stevens wrote , “ The crime of ‘ conspiracy ’ . . . does not appear in either the Geneva Conventions or the Hague Conventions – the major treaties on the law of war . ”
He could have added the Rome Statute and UN resolutions establishing the ad hoc tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda .
The international community ’ s rejection of conspiracy charges is correct , I believe , because international criminal proceedings are oriented to post hoc justice – to judging those who are alleged to have already brought about massacres and other major crimes that concern the international community .
Conspiracy , by contrast , is suited to a legal system that emphasizes early police intervention , before criminal plans are carried out .
Early intervention is possible in a domestic legal system , but there is no international police force that could fulfill a similar function .
The Bush administration is now left in an embarrassing position .
It does not want to prosecute the Guantánamo detainees in federal courts , but it is unlikely that it can prosecute them under the law of war as interpreted in the Hamdan decision .
Although Hamdan recognizes the legitimacy of confining enemy combatants until the end of hostilities , doing so is untenable .
The international community will not accept this form of massive preventive detention , with continuing allegations of abuse and torture .
Sooner or later , Bush will have to decide between prosecutions in federal court or closing the camp .
