The IMF versus the World Bank
CAMBRIDGE : The IMF ’ s search for a new managing director will be attracting all the attention over the coming weeks and months , but the policies it follows are what matter most .
A catfight is now underway about which institution has been right over the past few years , the IMF with its tough treatments or the World Bank and its alternative cures .
This debate has raged underground ever since Mexico ’ s collapse in 1995 .
Are IMF policies too tough , even perverse , pushing economies into bankruptcy ?
Are they to blame for the disastrous social fallout of the financial crises of recent years ?
That latter view was promoted across Asia , where governments , including that of Japan , called for an Asian IMF with alternative ( softer ) policies .
They gained extraordinary and unexpected support from Joseph Stiglitz , the World Bank ’ s chief economist and senior vice president , who recently advised that China should practice competitive devaluation and beggar-thy neighbor policies .
For beleaguered governments , Stiglitz ’ s proposed cures were rose petals , fragrances and scented candles along with soothing sounds .
Hard budget cuts and sky-high interest rates could be avoided .
Stiglitz ’ s pronouncements offered formidable support to those who opposed IMF rigor , indeed , and at the very least they confused the public and policymakers alike .
But this was music to a Japan trying to pursue its own agenda in Asia as well as to Dr. Mahatir , Malaysia ’ s ruler , who is on an anti-establishment kick .
In the firing line , orthodoxy was defended by IMF chief surgeon Stanley Fischer , the first deputy director and an economist with as formidable an academic reputation as Stiglitz .
That debate has gone on , right to a recent conference in Singapore which gave the Mahatir / Stiglitz team a resounding victory capped by a standing ovation from a crowd of top Asian top businessmen .
Once again , Japanese officials made their case for an Asian IMF , an alternative strategy without the pain of IMF austerity and the unaccustomed transparency .
Who is right ?
Is it unreasonable to claim , as the saying goes , that the proof is in the pudding ?
Asia today is in the midst of a powerful recovery ; crisis countries have already , or are poised to , recover their pre-crisis levels of GDP .
Currencies that nose-dived in 1997 / 98 have strengthened substantially ; markets that collapsed have turned up .
Investors are flooding back everywhere .
Korea , the last Asian economy to collapse is now doing best with double-digit growth and interest rates not much above American levels .
Yes there was a crisis , yes debris is still lies around .
But stabilization has been nothing short of astounding .
The V-shaped recovery that Mexico experienced three years ago came off bigger and faster than expected .
The same pattern has held true in Brazil , where the crisis ended shortly after it happened .
Why ?
IMF policies worked .
Asia , Mexico and Brazil adopted and applied IMF strategies ; they raised interest rates to the sky to bring about stable currencies ; only with stability did they bring down rates as investor confidence returned .
Asia ’ s economies also paid attention to their budgets at a time when huge bailouts made it imperative to demonstrate a glimmer of fiscal conservatism .
Money started to come back , pushing exchange rates nearly up to pre-crisis levels .
What at first sight seemed a meltdown , gradually came to seem just a very bad situation and soon a surprisingly rapid turnaround .
But why give IMF strategies credit ?
Every country followed much the same strategy ( including Malaysia , Dr. Mahatir ’ s rhetoric notwithstanding ) .
The exception was Indonesia .
Every time the resolve of its government weakened , the currency collapsed ; every time Indonesia returned to the IMF way , the currency strengthened .
Of course , everyone should have recognized that Asia was experiencing the same cycle Mexico had recently completed .
Unfortunately , the IMF failed to point out its success in Mexico ; unfortunately Asia ’ s economies were allowed to think that their experience was unique even if , on the way down and on the way up , it really was a replay of what Mexico had been through .
Buy the time it came to Brazil , at the end of 1998 and , again , early this year , everyone knew the script : new elections , a barely averted currency collapse , embarking on the IMF program , and a rapid rebound .
So , what are the lessons ?
The IMF is terrible at anticipating crises ; it is awful at surveillance ; but it is right and successful once it comes to post-trauma treatment .
The World Bank ’ s alternative treatments and Japan ’ s Asian IMF are , despite lip service , not drawing too many clients .
Crisis countries know better .
When economies collapse in ways never expected , they reach for true religion and hard cures .
They have no illusion that in the midst of a financial crisis and a speculative exodus , vast deficit spending and easy money are not the answer .
Such a strategy simply defies common sense .
Cheers for the IMF ; cheers for its tough medicine ; don ’ t leave home without it .
