The Libya Option In Iran
LOS ANGELES – International efforts to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons will be given a new lease on life this month , because France has assumed the presidency of the United Nations Security Council .
As Council president , France , which shares America ’ s views about the need to strengthen sanctions on Iran ’ s government , can raise the matter , something that China eschewed during its tenure in January as Council leader .
But , even were a revived Franco-American effort to succeed in getting the UN organ to endorse targeted penalties to hamstring the financial underpinnings of the Revolutionary Guards and other Iranian elites , the proposed measures appear to be too modest . They arguably add little to three prior sanction resolutions that ban the export of nuclear and ballistic-missile technology and conventional arms , and that freeze the assets and travel of a handful of Iranian officials .
Moreover , despite the pain they impose , economic sanctions historically have a poor record of prompting countries to change fundamental policy .
But there is a notable exception to this pattern : Libya ’ s decision in December 2003 to abandon its nuclear weapons program .
The country ’ s dramatic shift from the nearly quarter-century effort to get the bomb marks a remarkable proliferation reversal – and sanctions played a key role .
How those sanctions worked in tandem with other forms of pressure provides hope that they may yet help turn Iran around .
If nothing else , Muammar Qadaffi ’ s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons were far more audacious than Iran ’ s . The saga began within a year of Qadaffi ’ s 1969 overthrow of King Idris . With no wherewithal to manufacture a nuclear bomb , Qadaffi sought to buy one .
During the 1970 ’ s , he approached China , India , and Pakistan . Fortunately , despite the fact that India and Pakistan lay outside the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) – and thus were not subject to its prohibition on disseminating arsenals – they , along with China , rebuffed Qadaffi ’ s requests . Undaunted , he sought to acquire technologies to produce the weapons .
Here , the non-proliferation dikes failed .
Qadaffi exploited a network of opportunity . French-controlled mines in Niger provided uranium ore . An undisclosed country conveyed a pilot uranium conversion facility .
And the Soviet Union followed with a research reactor from which Libyan scientists extracted small amounts of plutonium .
But it was the father of Pakistan ’ s nuclear program , A. Q. Khan – and his network – that furnished the technological linchpin : the rudiments for a nuclear centrifuge program . And the Pakistanis added a nuclear weapon design as well .
As Libya mounted its effort , the International Atomic Energy Agency remained clueless . Despite published speculation about the country ’ s nuclear intentions , the IAEA considered Libya to be NPT-compliant . The absence of international resistance normally would have allowed Libya a clear field to realize its ambition . But Qadaffi ’ s hubris and revolutionary zeal blunted the goal by stimulating the imposition of international sanctions that ultimately brought down his nuclear program .
By 1988 , Libya ’ s clash with the West reached its apex with the bombing of Pan Am 103 over Lockerbie , Scotland . Until then , the United States had led a lonely battle to isolate Libya by severing diplomatic relations and imposing economic sanctions and embargos on oil imports and arms exports . But not even the Reagan administration ’ s 1986 military strike would move Libya away from its confrontational ways .
Prompted by the Lockerbie tragedy , Security Council sanctions adopted in 1992 and 1993 changed the dynamic . To force Libya to hand over the plotters , compensate victims ’ families , and cease terrorism , the Council froze all air commerce in an out of the country , all aircraft maintenance , and all arms shipments , as well as reducing diplomatic representation .
In addition , a freeze on Libya ’ s financial assets abroad and exports of oil equipment cost the country an estimated $ 33 billion in revenue , exacerbating already high unemployment and inflation rates .
As a result , the government ’ s confidence and hold on power were shaken .
Military coup makers and Islamists felt encouraged to contest the regime .
They were brutally suppressed , but the sanctions nonetheless provoked an internal battle within Qadaffi ’ s coterie that pitted hard liners committed to the anti-Western crusade against pragmatists who promoted integration into the global economy .
Confronting continued , albeit fraying sanctions , Qadaffi threw his weight behind the pragmatists , turning the Lockerbie bombers over to face trial , renouncing the terrorism that he had promoted , and expelling the foreign terrorists who made Libya their home . In 1999 , the Security Council responded by suspending sanctions .
But the nuclear program remained a laggard . Qadaffi continued to import nuclear technology secretly , even as his diplomats privately negotiated a modus vivendi with the US and Britain .
In October 2003 , Italian inspectors of a German ship moored in Taranto , Italy , uncovered a stash of centrifuges bound for Libya .
Faced with re-imposition of harsher measures , and with the pragmatists continuing their push to steer the country in a new direction , Qadaffi relented , trading the nuclear program for political normalization . On May 31 , 2006 , the US reopened its embassy in Tripoli , ending the quarter-century hiatus in diplomatic relations .
The demise of Libya ’ s nuclear venture offers a template for dealing with Iran .
It suggests that seriously challenging the nuclear venture will come not from more timid sanctions now , but from measures that encourage the pragmatists who populate the fractious Iranian government to promote normalization .
The time to implement such a strategy is long overdue .
