The Health of American Politics
CAMBRIDGE – When the United States Congress approved President Barack Obama ’ s plan to extend health-care coverage to nearly all Americans , it marked the most important social legislation the country had seen since the 1960 ’ s .
While Republican opposition remains strong , the law was a major domestic political victory for Obama .
Its enactment also has broader implications , because , like Obama ’ s election in 2008 , it addresses questions about the health of America ’ s political system .
After all , it was once widely asserted that an African-American without a political machine could not become president .
Recently , many observers argued that America ’ s gridlocked political system would prevent the country from translating its abundant power resources into leadership .
As one perceptive journalist recently argued , “ America still has the means to address nearly any of its structural weaknesses … energy use , medical costs , the right educational and occupational mix to rebuild a robust middle class .
That is the American tragedy of the early 21st century : a vital and self-renewing culture that attracts the world ’ s talent and a governing system that increasingly looks like a joke . ”
Power conversion – translating power resources into effective influence – is a long-standing problem for the US .
The Constitution is based on an eighteenth-century liberal view that power is best controlled by fragmentation and countervailing checks and balances .
In foreign policy , the US Constitution has always invited the president and Congress to struggle for control .
Strong economic and ethnic pressure groups fight for their self-interested definitions of the national interest .
Congress always pays attention to squeaky wheels , and special interests press it to legislate foreign-policy tactics , codes of conduct , and sanctions for other countries .
As Henry Kissinger once noted , “ what is presented by foreign critics as America ’ s quest for domination is very frequently a response to domestic pressure groups . ”
The cumulative effect , Kissinger continued , “ drives American foreign policy toward unilateral and bullying conduct .
For , unlike diplomatic communications , which are generally an invitation to dialogue , legislation translates into a take-it-or-leave-it prescription , the operational equivalent of an ultimatum . ”
There is also a concern about the decline of public confidence in US institutions .
In 2010 , only one-fifth of Americans said that they trusted the government to do what is right all or most of the time .
As former Clinton administration official William Galston put it , “ trust is never more important than when citizens are asked to make sacrifices for a brighter future .
Mistrust of the government making this request could be the harbinger – even the cause – of national decline . ”
The US was founded in part on mistrust of government , and a long tradition traceable to Thomas Jefferson holds that Americans should not worry too much about low levels of confidence in government .
When asked not about day-to-day governance but about the underlying constitutional framework , the public is positive .
Indeed , if you ask Americans where the best place to live is , 80 % say the US .
If asked whether they like their democratic system of government , 90 % say yes .
Few people believe that the system is rotten and must be overthrown .
Some aspects of the current mood are probably cyclical , while others represent discontent with political bickering and deadlock .
True , when compared to the recent past , party politics has become more polarized .
But nasty politics is nothing new , and much of the evidence for loss of trust in government comes from polling data , which weighs responses that are sensitive to the way questions are asked .
Moreover , the sharpest decline occurred more than four decades ago , in the late 1960 ’ s and early 1970 ’ s .
This does not imply that expressions of declining confidence in government are not problematic .
Whatever the reasons for the decline , if the public becomes unwilling to provide such crucial resources as tax dollars , or to comply voluntarily with laws , or if bright young people refuse to go into government service , governmental capacity will be impaired and people will become more dissatisfied with it .
A climate of distrust can also trigger extreme actions by deviant members of the population , such as the bombing of a federal office building in Oklahoma City in 1995 .
So far , such behavioral results do not seem to have materialized .
The Internal Revenue Service sees no increase in tax cheating .
By many accounts , government officials have become less corrupt than in earlier decades , and the World Bank gives the US a high score ( above the 90th percentile ) on “ control of corruption . ”
Moreover , after a 40-year drop in voting rates in presidential elections , from 62 % to 50 % , the decline stopped in 2000 , and returned to 58 % in 2008 .
Citizens ’ behavior does not seem to have changed as dramatically as have their responses to poll questions .
Three-quarters of Americans feel connected to their communities , and say the quality of life there is excellent or good ; 40 % say working with others in their community is the most important thing that they can do .
In recent years , American politics and political institutions have become more polarized than the distribution of opinions in the American public would suggest .
The situation was exacerbated by the economic downturn after 2008 .
As an editorial in The Economist recently concluded , “ America ’ s political system was designed to make legislation at the federal level difficult , not easy .
Its founders believed that a country the size of America is best governed locally , not nationally … .So the basic system works ; but that is no excuse for ignoring areas where it could be reformed , ” such as the gerrymandered safe seats in the House of Representatives and the blocking procedures of Senate rules and filibusters .
Whether the American political system can reform itself and cope with such problems remains to be seen .
Obama ’ s health-care victory , like his 2008 election , suggests that America ’ s political system is not as broken as critics who draw analogies to the fall of Rome or other empires would have us believe .
