Strasbourg ’ s Trial of Strength
LONDON : The withdrawal of the censure vote in the European Parliament in Strasbourg on January 14th , which would have forced the resignation of all of the members of the Council of Ministers , should not be judged simply on whether such a vote was won or lost , but mainly as a fundamental turning point in the relationship between the European Parliament and the Commission .
The threat of censure marks a vital turning point in the relationship between the Parliament and the Member States in the Council of Ministers .
For no matter which way the vote went , and even with its withdrawal , the European Parliament , by flexing its muscles as it did , would still have emerged strengthened .
Ostensibly , the purpose of the Parliament ’ s censure motion was to sanction the Commission for what was alleged to be the maladministration of the European Union ’ s 1996 budget ; and there were ( and remain ) accusations in the air of fraud and corruption .
The paradox of the situation , however , is that , in political terms , the very holding of a vote of censure will be more important than whether it was successful or not .
In order to succeed , the Commission ’ s critics in Parliament needed to muster a very large majority in order to carry a vote of censure : two thirds of the votes cast , and over half of all the members of the Parliament .
Auditors have undoubtedly revealed some maladministration of parts of the budget .
Yet if the detailed accusations are justified , the blame probably lies more , either with the previous Commission of Jacques Delors ( now long out of office ) , rather than the present Commission presided by Jacques Santer , or else with the Member States , who spend 80 % of the Union budget .
Even though the vote of censure did not take place , it seems almost inevitable that the very fact of threatening such a vote will , at least temporarily , weaken the position of the Commission , as one of the European Union ’ s key institutions , and that it will correspondingly strengthen the position of the European Parliament .
One of the central dilemmas of the European Union ’ s institutional structure is that a comprehensive vote of censure is the only instrument allowed under the Treaty by which the European Parliament can sanction the Commission .
There is no provision for the Parliament to register even a moderate protest or a targeted sanction against detailed elements of the record of the European executive .
If a vote of censure is carried , however , with the necessary majority , all 20 Commissioners would be required to resign .
Since the Commission is an essential part of the administration and policy-making of the Union , the mass resignation of the Commissioners would inevitably plunge the Union into a state of confusion and paralysis , or worse .
That is why a Parliamentary censure motion of the sort just attempted is often described as a " nuclear weapon " .
And since , in addition , the Commission and the Parliament have traditionally tended to regard each other as essential allies ( on the side of European integration ) , against the Council of Ministers ( representing the nation states ) , it is not surprising that a censure vote has only been tried four times in the past 20 years , and never carried .
If there is one thing that is clear about the European Union ’ s institutional arrangements , it is that it is insufficiently democratic for the degree of integration that is now underway or planned .
There is , of course , no agreement on what in detail should be done about this .
But at a time when the European Union is making large integrationist strides forward , in the shape of the single currency and the negotiations that will begin on expansion eastward , it must in principle be obvious to any democrat that there must be some counterbalancing strengthening of the democratic factor .
This is why this week ’ s attempted censure vote in the European Parliament should not be deplored as a reckless act of irresponsibility , but should rather be recognised for what it is , and therefore welcomed , as a necessary and unavoidable act in support of the democratic principle .
Reckless and undisciplined ?
Yes , of course ; but that is the only way that Parliaments have , over the centuries , ever pushed forward the frontiers of democratic power against the executive .
If the democratic principle is not strengthened , it is most unlikely that the European Union will be able to deal satisfactorily with any of the massive challenges lying immediately ahead : making a success of the Single Currency , revising the Union ’ s spending policies , and reforming the Union ’ s existing policies and institutions .
And if the Union does not master these problems in short order , there will be no enlargement to Central and Eastern Europe : it is as simple as that .
The immediate consequence of this week ’ s trial of strength is that the Member States will be compelled to offer the Parliament a more moderate alternative to the use of the " nuclear weapon " .
Which means that they will be compelled to recognise that the Parliament should have the right to a more extensive , a more flexible , and a more democratic , power of sanction .
For had a censure vote been carried , the entire Commission would have been forced to resign , and the Union would likely have been paralysed for months , which is manifestly over the top .
Even in defeat , with the current Commission remaining in office , its credibility may be fatally weakened for the last 11 months of its term in office .
This is not to say that the Commission will be permanently wounded , for the Union desperately needs a vigorous Commission .
But the Commission cannot in the long run be vigorous unless the Union ’ s democratic principle is strengthened .
