The Lasting Damage of Iraq
MADRID – The folding of the American flag in Iraq amid a collapse of public security and a severe crisis in the country ’ s fragile political order seals a tragic chapter in the history of the United States .
It marked the denouement of one of the clearest cases ever of the imperial overreach that former US Senator William Fulbright called the “ arrogance of power . ”
Violently torn by religious and ethnic rivalries , Iraq is in no condition to play its part in America ’ s vision of an Arab wall of containment of Iran .
Unless the Iranian regime is terminally humbled in the course of its showdown with the West over its nuclear program , the more plausible scenario is that Shia-dominated Iraq moves closer to Iran ’ s strategic orbit rather than become part of America 's regional designs .
After ten years of war , more than a hundred thousand casualties , mostly Iraqis , and an astronomical cost of almost $ 1 trillion , the US leaves behind an Iraq that is neither more secure nor especially democratic .
It is , however , one of the most corrupt countries ( 175th out of 178 , according to Transparency International ) .
The war that was supposed to be a central pillar in a drive to restructure the Middle East under America ’ s guidance ended up marking the decline of its influence there .
The Middle East sucked America ’ s resources and energies , but the results are desperately meager .
Turkey , with its “ dangerous foreign minister ” ( as Ahmet Davutoğlu was portrayed in a US cable released by WikiLeaks ) , is defining its regional policies in a way that frequently clashes with US designs .
Israel rebuffed US President Barack Obama ’ s peace initiatives , and even refused to extend a freeze on settlement construction for a mere three months , despite a lavish offer of strategic compensation .
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas defiantly disregards the US threat to stop aid if Palestine persists in its bid for United Nations membership .
And Arab leaders ridicule Obama ’ s naïve trust in negotiations as a way to cut short Iran ’ s nuclear ambitions .
The “ Arab awakening ” is about homegrown democratic change ; it is therefore a repudiation of both US complicity with local autocrats and the American paradigm , so evident in Iraq , of “ democracy ” imported on the wings of F-16s .
The future remains uncertain , but the assumption that Arabs ’ demands for fair governments and civil dignity can still be repressed , like a genie squeezed back into the bottle , is a self-serving fantasy of irremediable autocrats – & # 160 ; and of some in the West .
Arab governments ’ policies will become more reflective of their peoples ’ wishes , even when these are represented , as we now see , by Islamist majorities .
America was taught the hard way that it can live with Islamists ; after all , it leaves behind a Shia-led government in Baghdad that has close ties to Iran , and is engaging the Taliban in Afghanistan as a last-resort strategy to exit an unwinnable war .
The Muslim Brotherhood and the Salafis in Egypt , al-Nahda in Tunisia , and the Party of Justice and Development in Morocco are now the West ’ s interlocutors .
Israel ’ s diplomacy , however , is a particularly startling example of cognitive dissonance .
It persists in ruling out Hamas as an interlocutor while engaging Egypt ’ s Islamist democratic majority .
Neither dominating the politics of the region nor truly leading it , the US is a spectator in the unfolding Arab drama .
The integrity of Iraqi statehood remains uncertain , as is the outcome of the Egyptian revolution .
Saudi power and US acquiescence managed to stifle democratic agitation in the Gulf , but the region ’ s dynasties cannot expect to slip history ’ s noose once and for all .
Meanwhile , US weakness has opened the door to Russia ’ s resumption of Cold War practices in the region .
Russia ’ s diplomatic protection of Syria ’ s brutal regime from the ire of the international community , and of Iran from the West ’ s drive to cripple its economy , stems from its conviction that ten years of costly and inconclusive wars have seriously diminished America ’ s global standing .
The Kremlin ’ s defiance of the US extends to southwest Asia as well .
Russia 's ambassador to NATO , Dmitry Rogozin , threatened recently that his country might shut down the US supply line to Afghanistan .
America , in short , faces a time of reckoning that should usher in a period of comprehensive strategic rebalancing .
The legacy of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , like that of the Vietnam War before them , is bound to teach the US caution in the use of military might .
It should also counsel a greater emphasis on international legitimacy and multilateral alliances in dealing with hostile regimes .
Most fundamentally , America ’ s excessive focus on the Middle East will now need to be tempered by a shift to other regions of vital national interest .
This should lead to healthy economic competition with a rising China , alongside protection of US interests in the Pacific Rim now threatened by China ’ s expanding influence .
It might also mean engaging Russia in the hope that its emerging civil society will give rise to a more truly democratic regime , one that might be ready to supersede the traumas of the Cold War and be drawn to closer cooperation with the West .
At the same time , the dismissive attitude towards Europe that one senses in America is unjustified and self-defeating .
Intimate ties with a revitalized European Union remain vital to the global projection of Western values and interests .
Sterile isolationism runs counter to America ’ s self-conception as a nation with a global mission .
But the dire legacy of its two recent wars calls for a focus on internal improvement .
Enhancing America ’ s soft power , safeguarding its supremacy as a hub of unparalleled innovation , upgrading its decaying infrastructure and faltering educational system , and ridding itself of its addiction to foreign credit might do more to secure America ’ s global leadership than the most successful of wars .
