The Indian Tortoise and the Chinese Hare
“ India everywhere ” was the theme at this year ’ s World Economic Forum .
In the West , there is so much focus on China that India ’ s achievements are often acknowledged only as an afterthought .
As if to underscore the point that political stability must triumph in the long run , the Indians plastered Swiss buses with the banner : “ India : The World ’ s Fastest Growing Democracy . ”
The India media blitz was a huge success .
In Davos , speaker after speaker touted the idea that even if China is ahead now , over the longer run , the race between Asia ’ s two giants is a toss-up .
For a few days at least , India ’ s emergence as a superpower on par with China was taken as a fait accompli .
But what is the reality in the race between economies with more than a billion people each ?
On the surface , China has opened up quite a lead on India .
Twenty-five years ago , at the start of the contemporary wave of globalization , national output in India and China was about the same .
Now , by any measure , China is more than twice as rich .
But the real difference is not so much that successful Chinese are doing better than successful Indians .
After all , the Indian elite are world-beaters , as Lakshmi Mittal ’ s bold $ 22 billion bid for French steelmaker Arcelor shows .
No , the real difference – whether we like to admit it or not – is that China ’ s communist government has succeeded in globalizing a much larger share of its population than India ’ s democratic government has managed to do .
Not that China is exactly egalitarian .
It is only along the coast , home to roughly one in three Chinese citizens , that most people can be said to have really joined the twenty-first century .
Much of rural China is still miserable , with 150 million people effectively unemployed and health and education standards often befitting an earlier century .
But caste-bound India ’ s record of exclusion is worse .
Perhaps only one in five persons are integrated into the global economy .
For every call center employee , there are many more people still eking out a subsistence living on the land .
Whereas China probably has about 450 million people in its globalized economy , India has at most 200-250 million .
It is this difference , more than anything else , that sets the two economies apart .
What can India do to close the gap ?
Its biggest shortcoming is its lack of roads , bridges , ports , and other infrastructure , where the contrast with China is just stunning .
If your products can ’ t get to the global economy , you cannot conquer it .
Over the past five years , China has multiplied its highway system five-fold .
Its 50,000 kilometers of new roads are built to handle even large aircraft , which is more than one can say about some of the runways at India ’ s shambolic airports .
It is not just a matter of money – India ’ s central bank is rolling in cash , which it has mainly invested in low-yield foreign treasury bills .
The real problem is that China ’ s authoritarian system faces little opposition when it decides to bulldoze a shantytown that stands in the way of a new airport .
India ’ s government , by contrast , has neither the power nor the inclination to trample over poor people to make rich people richer .
Unfortunately , without infrastructure , the 800 million-plus Indians who have not yet “ made it ” don ’ t have a chance .
India will never be able to create enough jobs in services alone ; it must be able to compete in low-end manufacturing areas as well .
Without better infrastructure , the majority of India ’ s citizens will remain frozen out of globalization .
So , is the idea that India ’ s economy could overtake China ’ s hopeless romanticism ?
Not necessarily , if only because the areas where India excels , notably services , have far higher potential margins than manufacturing .
Here , the Chinese , hampered by a vastly inferior legal system , will not be able to compete easily .
Western companies are far more inclined to trust Indian firms with sensitive financial information or patents than they are in the case of China .
Foreign companies know that if they outsource any high-tech process to China , they might as well publish their blueprints on the Internet .
India also has a much better developed financial system than China , an advantage that will be increasingly important as the two countries develop .
Command and control financing ( “ directed lending , ” as economists call it ) works well when it comes to building bridges ; it is a lot less effective when it comes to choosing what companies deserve to survive .
The challenge for the Indians , and , indeed , for other emerging markets like Brazil , Russia , and Mexico , is that they need to find ways to broaden the successful sectors of their economies without strangling them .
If India is to ever catch up with China , it must globalize more of its citizens , through better provision of health , education and infrastructure .
Only then will we truly start seeing “ India everywhere . ”
