That Stalling Feeling
NEW YORK – Despite the series of low-probability , high-impact events that have hit the global economy in 2011 , financial markets continued to rise happily until a month or so ago .
The year began with rising food , oil , and commodity prices , giving rise to the specter of high inflation .
Then massive turmoil erupted in the Middle East , further ratcheting up oil prices .
Then came Japan ’ s terrible earthquake , which severely damaged both its economy and global supply chains .
And then Greece , Ireland , and Portugal lost access to credit markets , requiring bailout packages from the International Monetary Fund and the European Union .
But that was not the end of it .
Although Greece was bailed out a year ago , Plan A has now clearly failed .
Greece will require another official bailout – or a bail-in of private creditors , an option that is fueling heated disagreement among European policymakers .
Lately , concerns about America ’ s unsustainable fiscal deficits have , likewise , resulted in ugly political infighting , almost leading to a government shutdown .
A similar battle is now brewing about America ’ s “ debt ceiling , ” which , if unresolved , introduces the risk of a “ technical ” default on US public debt .
Until recently , markets seemed to discount these shocks ; apart from a few days when panic about Japan or the Middle East caused a correction , they continued their upward march .
But , since the end of April , a more persistent correction in global equity markets has set in , driven by worries that economic growth in the United States and worldwide may be slowing sharply .
Data from the US , the United Kingdom , the periphery of the eurozone , Japan , and even emerging-market economies is signaling that part of the global economy – especially advanced economies – may be stalling , if not dropping into a double-dip recession .
Global risk-aversion has also increased , as the option of further “ extend and pretend ” or “ delay and pray ” on Greece is becoming less desirable , and the specter of a disorderly workout is becoming more likely .
Optimists argue that the global economy has merely hit a “ soft patch . ”
Firms and consumers reacted to this year ’ s shocks by “ temporarily ” slowing consumption , capital spending , and job creation .
As long as the shocks don ’ t worsen ( and as some become less acute ) , confidence and growth will recover in the second half of the year , and stock markets will rally again .
But there are good reasons to believe that we are experiencing a more persistent slump .
First , the problems of the eurozone periphery are in some cases problems of actual insolvency , not illiquidity : large and rising public and private deficits and debt ; damaged financial systems that need to be cleaned up and recapitalized ; massive loss of competitiveness ; lack of economic growth ; and rising unemployment .
It is no longer possible to deny that public and / or private debts in Greece , Ireland , and Portugal will need to be restructured .
Second , the factors slowing US growth are chronic .
These include slow but persistent private and public-sector deleveraging ; rising oil prices ; weak job creation ; another downturn in the housing market ; severe fiscal problems at the state and local level ; and an unsustainable deficit and debt burden at the federal level .
Third , economic growth has been flat on average in the UK over the last couple of quarters , with front-loaded fiscal austerity coming at a time when rising inflation is preventing the Bank of England from easing monetary policy .
Indeed , inflation may even force the Bank to raise interest rates by the fall .
And Japan is already slipping back into recession because of the earthquake .
All of these economies were already growing anemically and below trend , as the ongoing process of deleveraging required a slowdown of public and private spending in order to increase saving rates and reduce debts .
And now , in addition to the string of “ black swan ” events that advanced economies have faced this year , monetary and fiscal stimulus has been removed in most of them , or soon will be .
If what is happening now turns out to be something worse than a temporary soft patch , the market correction will continue further , thus weakening growth as the negative wealth effects of falling equity markets reduce private spending .
And , unlike in 2007-2010 , when every negative shock and market downturn was countered by more policy action by governments , this time around policymakers are running out of ammunition , and thus may be unable to trigger more asset reflation and jump-start the real economy .
This lack of policy bullets is reflected in most advanced economies ’ embrace of some form of austerity , in order to avoid a fiscal train wreck down the line .
Public debt is already high , and many sovereigns are near distress , so governments ’ ability to backstop their banks via more bailouts , guarantees , and ring-fencing of questionable assets is severely constrained .
Another round of so-called “ quantitative easing ” by monetary authorities may not occur as inflation is rising – albeit slowly – in most advanced economies .
If the latest global economic data reflect something more serious than a hiccup , and markets and economies continue to slow , policymakers could well find themselves empty-handed .
If that happens , the risk of stall speed or an outright double-dip recession would rise sharply in many advanced economies .
