Putin ’ s Imperial Road to Economic Ruin
PARIS – The debate around Crimea is no longer centered on international law : Russian President Vladimir Putin has publicly recognized that he does not feel bound by it and does not care if the rest of the world deems Russia ’ s actions illegal .
What is not clear is whether Russia ’ s economy can bear the burden of Putin ’ s objectives in Ukraine .
First , there are the direct costs of military operations and of supporting the Crimean regime and its woefully inefficient economy ( which has been heavily subsidized by Ukraine ’ s government for years . ) Given the uncertainty surrounding Crimea ’ s future status , these costs are difficult to estimate , though they are most likely to total several billion dollars per year .
A direct cost of this magnitude amounts to less than 0.5 % of Russia ’ s GDP . While not trivial , Russia can afford it .
Russia just spent $ 50 billion dollars on the Sochi Olympics and plans to spend even more for the 2018 World Cup . It was prepared to lend $ 15 billion to former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych ’ s government and to provide $ 8 billion annually in gas subsidies .
Then there are the costs related to the impact of sanctions on trade and investment .
Though the scope of the sanctions remains uncertain , the effect could be enormous . Annual inward foreign direct investment is estimated to have reached $ 80 billion in 2013 .
A significant decline in FDI – which brings not only money but also modern technology and managerial skills – would hit Russia ’ s long-term economic growth hard . And denying Russian banks and firms access to the US ( and possibly European ) banking system – the harshest sanction applied to Iran – would have a devastating impact .
In the short run , however , it is trade that matters much more than investment .
Russia ’ s annual exports ( mostly oil , gas , and other commodities ) are worth almost $ 600 billion , while annual imports total almost $ 500 billion .
Any non-trivial trade sanctions ( including sanctions on Russian financial institutions ) would be much more painful than the direct cost of subsidizing Crimea .
Of course , sanctions would hurt Russia ’ s trading partners , too . But Russia ’ s dependence on trade with the West is certainly much larger than vice versa .
Moreover , the most important source of potential damage to Russia ’ s economy lies elsewhere .
Russian and foreign businesses have always been worried about the unpredictability of the country ’ s political leadership .
Lack of confidence in Russian policymaking is the main reason for capital flight , low domestic asset prices , declining investment , and an economic slowdown that the Crimea crisis will almost certainly cause to accelerate .
Indeed , Russia ’ s response to events in Ukraine has exceeded the worst expectations of those who were already questioning whether Putin is , as German Chancellor Angela Merkel put it , “ in touch with reality . ”
The move to annex Crimea has reversed any soft-power benefit that Putin might have gained from the Sochi Olympics and the pardons he granted ( as recently as December ) to imprisoned opponents like Mikhail Khodorkovsky and the members of Pussy Riot .
The sacrifice of these gains suggests that the Crimea adventure was not part of long-considered plan . On the contrary , since the crisis began , Russia ’ s leaders have repeatedly contradicted their previous statements , backtracked , reversed decisions , and denied easily verifiable facts .
All of this indicates that Russian political leaders have no strategy and do not foresee the consequences of their decisions . Even the Kremlin ’ s own supporters acknowledge that Putin “ is improvising . ”
It is also clear that the decisions to violate international law , despite the risk of economic isolation , were made in an ad hoc fashion by Putin ’ s innermost circle .
For example , Valentina Matviyenko , the chairwoman of the Federation Council ( the parliament ’ s upper house ) , announced that Russia would not send troops to Ukraine – just two days before she and the Council voted unanimously to authorize Putin to do precisely that .
And Matviyenko is one of the 12 permanent members of Russia ’ s National Security Council , the supreme decision-making authority on such matters .
Regardless of whether the Kremlin is irrational or simply uninformed , its policy in Crimea sends an unmistakable signal to investors : Russia ’ s political leaders are impossible to predict .
This will further undermine Russian and foreign investors ’ confidence and increase capital flight , which could not come at a worse time .
With credit-fueled consumer spending – the engine driving GDP growth since 2010 – now running out of steam , the economy is stagnating .
Meanwhile , investment is still below its 2008 peak .
Despite a wealth of opportunities across the Russian economy , the country ’ s hostile business climate – including bloated bureaucracies , widespread corruption , and the expansion of state-owned companies – has weakened Russian and foreign investors ’ incentive to start new projects or expand existing ones .
The realization that Putin has entered , to quote Merkel again , “ another world ” will only make matters worse .
Of course , equity ownership in Russia is narrow ; most Russians do not even follow market indices . But increased capital flight will also affect something that ordinary Russians know and care about : the ruble ’ s exchange rate .
On the Monday after Putin ’ s Crimea adventure began , the Central Bank of Russia reportedly spent $ 11.3 billion to prop up the ruble .
Such support is clearly unsustainable ; in fact , the CBR recently announced that it will allow the ruble to float , implying an exchange rate that reflects the market ’ s expectations concerning oil prices and future capital outflows .
Thus , worries about a Putin who has “ lost touch with reality ” imply not only a lower ( or even negative ) GDP growth rate , but also – and more immediately – a weaker currency , driving up prices of imported consumer goods .
All Russians will soon feel the effects ; whether that will bring their president back from his world to this one is another matter .
Read more from " Cold War II ? "
