The Gaza Trap
TEL AVIV – Israel ’ s “ Operation Protective Edge ” against Hamas in Gaza is the kind of asymmetrical warfare that has characterized nearly all Middle East conflicts in recent years .
Victories in such wars are always elusive .
Whatever the achievements of Israel ’ s superior army and its anti-missile systems , and however appalling the devastation of Gaza , Hamas will survive , if only because Israel wants it to .
The alternative – jihadist anarchy that would turn Gaza into a Palestinian Somalia – is simply too unbearable to contemplate .
Hamas leader Khaled Meshal ’ s boastful rhetoric cannot hide the fact that Hamas ’ s military power has been dealt a devastating blow .
But , unless Israel is ready to pay an exceptionally high price in terms of its international standing by occupying Gaza and destroying its entire military hierarchy and arsenal , Hamas can still claim victory , having survived yet another onslaught by Israel ’ s colossal military machine .
The superior power in an asymmetrical conflict always has a problem defining its objectives .
In this case , Israel aspires to achieve “ quiet ” with few enough Palestinian civilian casualties to minimize international criticism .
But the failure to achieve this goal is precisely where the superior power is defeated in asymmetrical conflicts .
Moreover , “ quiet ” is not a strategic goal ; nor is Israel ’ s way of pursuing it – a war every two or three years – particularly convincing .
The real question is this : Assuming that Israel gets the quiet that it wants , what does it intend to do with Gaza in the future ?
And what does it intend to do with the Palestinian problem of which Gaza is an integral part ?
The question of Palestine is at the root of the asymmetrical wars that Israel has been facing in recent years , not only against Hamas , Qatar ’ s Palestinian client , but also against Hezbollah , Iran ’ s proxy in the region .
These wars are creating a new kind of threat to Israel , for they add to the conflicts ’ strictly military dimension the domains of diplomacy , regional politics , legitimacy , and international law , in which Israel does not have the upper hand .
As a result , in asymmetrical conflicts , Israel finds its military superiority vitiated .
These are political battles that cannot be won by military means .
The asymmetry between the nature of the threats and Israel ’ s response ends up putting the superior military power in a position of strategic inferiority .
The spread of violence to the West Bank – and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas ’ s support of Hamas ’ s objectives – means that Israel cannot avoid the conflict ’ s political consequences .
Hamas , a neglected opponent of Abbas ’ s diplomatic strategy , is gradually becoming the avant-garde of Palestine ’ s struggle for liberation .
Contrary to what Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu believes , the main existential threat facing the country is not a nuclear-armed Iran .
The real peril is to be found at home : the corrosive effect of the Palestinian problem on Israel ’ s international standing .
The devastation caused by Israel ’ s periodic asymmetrical confrontations , combined with the continuing occupation of Palestinian lands and the ever-growing expansion of settlements , has fueled a growing campaign to undermine Israel ’ s legitimacy .
For example , the seemingly benign Boycott , Divestment , and Sanctions movement , viewed by many of its supporters as a legitimate form of non-violent resistance , has continued to gain ground .
BDS ’ s opponents ( including me ) regard the movement as a political subterfuge intended to bring about the implosion of the Jewish state .
The Palestinian mainstream , represented by Abbas , made a strategic decision to opt for a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders .
Israel ’ s strategic response would normally be that it aspires to be a “ Jewish democratic state , ” which presupposes a Jewish majority .
But if the never-ending peace process continues to fail to produce a two-state solution , how can Israel avoid the reality of a single state in a continuous state of civil war ?
There is only one way out of the Gaza tragedy that can provide justice to its many victims : The parties to the conflict and the regional actors now vying to act as mediators must leverage the ongoing calamity into a grand peace agenda .
This would mean launching a Marshall Plan to upgrade Gaza ’ s infrastructure and improve social conditions .
It would also entail lifting the blockade and opening Gaza to the world .
The price Hamas would have to pay is complete disarmament and demilitarization of Gaza under international supervision , with Abbas ’ s Palestinian Authority controlling the border crossings into Israel and Egypt .
Simultaneously , negotiations for a two-state solution should resume , with an unequivocal commitment by the United States and the other members of the so-called Middle East Quartet ( the United Nations , the European Union , and Russia ) to use all possible influence on the parties to prevent another failure .
Israel is devoid of a convincing strategy ; what it has is a series of improvisations aimed at securing the nation ’ s physical survival on as much land as the international community might allow .
But improvisation is simply unsustainable in the long run .
For example , Israel has reached out to those Arab countries that are willing to subordinate the Palestinian problem to discreet bilateral relations , essentially on security matters .
But any such “ alliances ” that Israel might be able to develop – say , with Saudi Arabia and Egypt – can only be circumstantial and ephemeral .
The challenge for Israel is to tie its military tactics and diplomacy to a clearly defined political goal .
And a credible national strategy must recognize that as long as the Palestinian conflict remains unresolved , Israel ’ s moral foundations and international standing will be dangerously compromised .
