The Hundred and Two Ways
VIENNA : Across Europe the “ third way ” debate has become the only political game in town , the only hint at new directions in a rather confused multitude of trends and ideas .
The recent paper signed by Tony Blair and Gerhard Schröder , entitled Europe : The Third Way ( Die neue Mitte ) begins with a bold statement : “ Social democrats are in government in almost all the countries of the Union .
Social democracy has found new acceptance — but only because , while retaining its traditional values , it has begun in a credible way to renew its ideas and modernize its programs .
It has also found new acceptance because it stands not only for social justice but also for economic dynamism and the unleashing of creativity and innovation . ”
It was perhaps unfortunate that this document was published a week before the recent European elections .
Not only is it said to have created a certain amount of confusion , above all among German Social Democrats , but the European elections , whatever their shortcomings and limitations , allow us to check the statement of fact that “ social democracy has found new acceptance . ”
The result of this check is telling . In six of fifteen EU countries , Social Democratic Parties had 20 % or less of the vote ( Belgium , Denmark , Finland , Ireland , Italy , the Netherlands ) , in two others ( France , Luxemburg ) 22 % or 23 % .
In five further countries the vote for Social Democratic Parties was between 26 & and 33 % ( Germany , Greece , Britain , Austria and Sweden ) .
In Spain 35 % voted for the democratic Socialists , and in Portugal 43 % .
In only four countries were Social Democrats relatively the strongest party , and this includes France where the fragmentation of the Right meant that Jospin ’ s Socialists ( in themselves hardly unified ) were strongest with 22 % .
It is tempting to examine the real strength of the Social Democrats in European governments ( where changes are imminent in Belgium and Luxemburg ) , for they had twice the present proportion of the popular vote twenty years ago .
Social Democrats are distinctly minority parties in most European countries .
Even in Britain , Blair ’ s deceptively large parliamentary majority is based on 43 % of the popular vote .
In terms of electoral analysis the real trend is towards non-traditional parties , many of which did not exist twenty years ago .
In most European countries their vote adds up to more than the Social Democratic vote .
In truth , voters are confused and uncertain , pulled hither and yon .
It is hard to discern any real trend towards a new crystallization of electoral views .
It is conceivable that the ideas promoted by Messrs. Blair and Schröder finds widespread support . ( It may find as much support outside as inside Socialist parties .
Mr. Blair seems to get on at least as well with Spain ’ s conservative Prime Minister Aznar as with his French Socialist colleague Jospin ) .
Without wishing to claim first authorship let alone originality , some of the “ third way ” ideas are not at all dissimilar from the thrust of the Report of a Committee which I chaired in 1995-96 , entitled , Wealth Creation and Social Cohesion in a Free Society .
The key issue with which all countries are confronted today is the answer to the question : how can we create sustainable conditions of economic improvement in global markets while not sacrificing the basic cohesion of our societies or the institutions of the constitution of liberty ?
We need market economies with competitive strength , and this can only be brought about by loosening constraints and liberating the supply side of economies .
We need also societies which include all citizens rather than defining out an underclass .
Useful as individual competition is in the economy , it has to be tempered by solidarity .
The Blair-Schröder paper uses a phrase which I find misleading when it says : “ We support a market economy , not a market society ” — or is this more than a slip of the pen ?
Do they want a command society ?
If so , they would take a step in the Singapore direction and reduce if not endanger the third element of a program of squaring the circle , that of doing it all “ in a free society . ”
Anthony Giddens has identified six policy areas of the “ third way ” : ( 1 ) a new politics or “ second wave of democratization ” by going directly to the people ; ( 2 ) a new relationship between state , market and civil society that “ joins them up ; ” ( 3 ) supply-side policies through social investment notably in education and infrastructure projects ; ( 4 ) the fundamental reform of the welfare state through creating a new balance of risk and security ; ( 5 ) a new relationship to the environment by “ ecological modernization ; ” ( 6 ) a strong commitment to transnational initiatives in a world of “ fuzzy sovereignty . ”
This project has been described as a combination of neoliberal economic and social democratic social policy .
That is unfair .
In some ways the key feature of this approach is one which is implicit rather than explicit ; it is its optimism .
I have described it as “ globalization plus , ” that is , accepting the needs of global markets but adding key elements of social well-being .
There are other ways of describing the underlying approach , for instance by reference to the use of the word “ risk . ”
Ulrich Beck , another protagonist of the “ third way , ” has shown that risk is opportunity as well as a threat to security , an invitation to entrepreneurship and initiative as well as a warning of uncertainties .
The same could be argued for another favorite word of this approach , flexibility .
Perhaps this is where the “ third way ” actually divides social democrats .
Old Labour sees risk as threat and flexibility as insecurity , and tries to hold on to the old certainties .
New Labour emphasizes the new opportunities of individual initiative and the ways in which people can enhance their well-being by coping with new challenges .
Here it becomes evident why the reform of the welfare state is the key policy area in dispute .
It also emerges that New Labour may exist in Britain and Holland but not in many other countries where it is more the parties of the old right which tend towards the neue Mitte .
The alliance between Blair and Aznar is not so surprising after all .
The positive , future-oriented sense of opportunity makes the “ third way ” approach attractive for those who do not feel threatened , including the new “ global class ” of those who can hope to benefit from the changed forces of production .
Perhaps it also shows that the “ third way ” is not likely to inspire a mass movement even if it is in some cases useful for winning elections .
There is something contrived , almost elitist , about a concept which attracts wider attention only if it is coupled with almost evangelist methods of communication .
“ Spin doctors ” are in that sense essential for the “ third way ” as is the strangely religious style of Tony Blair and the presentational brilliance characteristic of Anthony Giddens and Ulrich Beck .
They all manage to deflect criticism as on an oilskin made of a curious mixture of diffidence and dogmatism .
Skeptical questions are as often answered by reference to what might or even should be as by pointing to real conditions .
For an inveterate follower of Karl Popper , this is disconcerting .
Doubts begin with the term “ third way ” itself .
Its use shows a curious absence of historical awareness characteristic of the Clinton-Blair type of leader .
The term also shows an unfortunate need to have an unified or at any rate uniquely labeled ideology .
For many of us , by contrast , the great liberation of the revolution of 1989 means that the time of systems is past .
There no longer is even a First , Second and Third World , but only varieties of attempts to cope with economic , social and political needs , and admittedly also varieties of success .
The “ third way ” presupposes a more Hegelian view of the world .
It forces its adherent to define themselves in relation to others rather than by their own combination of ideas ; and often the others have to be invented or caricatured for the purpose .
The point about an open world is that there are not just two or three ways .
There are many capitalisms , not just that of Chicago ; there are many democracies , not just that of Westminster .
Diversity is not an optional extra of high culture ; it is at the very heart of a world which has abandoned the need for closed , all-encompassing systems .
In fact — it could be said — even politics in the name of the “ third way ” is quite varied .
Nobody will expect Chancellor Schröder to turn Germany into another Britain .
After all reforms , the “ Rhenish ” model will remain quite different from the “ Anglo-Saxon ” model , and neither will necessarily be a model for others .
Not just cynics have observed that the best definition of the “ third way ” may well be that it is what Mr. Blair actually does .
If he is for a directly elected Mayor of London , or against teenage pregnancies , or for the privatization of railways , this must be the “ third way . ”
Still the niggling doubt remains why Blair and his friends need to put it all in one basket .
Are the unlimited opportunities of the post-1989 world too difficult to live with ?
Do “ third way ” leaders crave a certainty in their minds which they deny their peoples in their lives ?
Is everybody supposed to take risks except those at the top ?
I have read most publications around the idea of a “ third way ” and have been struck by the fact that one word appears almost never appears -- liberty .
There is much about fraternity , one of the central themes of the “ third way . ”
Equality is dispensed with as a goal and replaced by social inclusion and , more recently , by justice .
But liberty ?
No doubt , “ third way ” protagonists would say that it is assumed and implied throughout .
Consequently it makes a brief appearance in the list of “ timeless ” values in the Introduction to the Blair-Schröder paper : “ fairness and social justice , liberty and equality of opportunity , solidarity and responsibility to others . ”
But among timely values , liberty has no place .
This is no accident .
The “ third way ” is not about either open societies or liberty .
There is indeed a curious authoritarian streak in it , and not just in practice .
When Giddens speaks of a “ second wave of democratization ” he has the deconstruction of traditional democratic institutions in mind .
Parliaments are outmoded ; referenda and focus groups should take their place .
“ Third way ” reforms of the welfare state not only involve compulsory savings but above all , the strict insistence on everyone , including the disabled and single mothers , working .
Where normal employment — let alone desired employment — is not available , people have to be made to work by the withdrawal of benefits .
The Blair-Schröder document contains among others the following curious statement : “ The state should not row but steer . ”
It should not provide the wherewithal , but determine the direction , in other words .
It will no longer pay for things , but tell people what to do .
The issue is of major importance at a time at which there remain too many authoritarian temptations .
Internationalization of decisions and activities generally means almost invariable a loss of democracy .
NATO Council decisions about war and peace , IMF decisions about Russia , even legislation by the EU Council of Ministers are not subject to democratic controls ; much less is this the case for the “ private ” arena of worldwide financial transactions .
At the other end , decentralization rarely means a gain in democracy and liberty .
Especially at the sub-national level it is more often the empowerment of more or less militant activists than of the people ; it means yielding to the new nationalism of self-aggrandizing leaders .
And at the national level itself , problems and solutions alike militate against the liberal order .
Among the problems , law and order stand out ; among the solutions , a proliferation of agencies and quangos which evade civic control .
The Singapore syndrome , the syndrome of political authoritarianism and economic growth , is in fact not very far from these widespread trends , even preferences : let those up there deal and leave us in peace !
Thus the political class becomes a kind of nomenklatura which remains unchallenged because of the apathy of the many , and when those who do not fit are silenced , nobody raises his or her voice .
I am not suggesting that this is what practitioners of the “ third way ” are doing , and much less that it is what its theorists advocate .
But I wonder whether the curious silence about the fundamental value of a decent life , liberty — old , very old liberty if you wish — will not involuntarily make this political episode one further element in a dangerous development .
Today it seems more important than even a few years ago to begin a new political project with the insistence on liberty before we turn to social inclusion and cohesion .
