Silicon Valley Everywhere
CAMBRIDGE – During the last decades of the twentieth century , Silicon Valley was the unparalleled epicenter of high-tech innovation .
Other regions tried to imitate its success , but none succeeded .
France ’ s Sophia Antipolis , a top-down attempt by the government to create an innovation hub near Cannes , never evolved beyond its origins as a relatively tranquil technology park – notwithstanding its mythological name , California-like weather , and the surrounding area ’ s unbeatable gastronomy .
In the twenty-first century , however , Silicon Valley ’ s competition has gotten fiercer – as reflected by the increasing number of locations affixing the chemical element to their names : Silicon Alley ( New York ) , Silicon Wadi ( Tel Aviv ) , Silicon Sentier ( Paris ) , etc .
In London , for example , the emergence of Silicon Roundabout in the late 2000s caught the British government almost by surprise .
Now rebranded Tech City , the innovation hub in the old Shoreditch neighborhood has evolved into one of London ’ s key economic engines and talent magnets .
Similar scripts are playing out around the world .
In Berlin , a new startup is said to be founded every 20 minutes .
Paris is busy building what will be Europe ’ s largest incubator at Halle Freyssinet .
And in Tel Aviv , the phrase “ Startup Nation ” has gone from a political slogan to economic reality .
For the first time , “ unicorns ” ( startups that reach a valuation of more than $ 1 billion ) are no longer the exclusive preserve of the United States – a reality that would have been unthinkable only a few years ago .
A bright generation of global youth – from Mumbai to Prague to Kenya to Singapore – is betting on innovation , and American venture capital funds , sustained by access to cheap financing , are sating their investment appetites overseas .
There are several factors behind this phenomenon .
In a globalized world , capital flows have accelerated and extended their reach .
Innovators around the world are able to muster support from traditional venture capitalists or from crowd-funding platforms such as Kickstarter .
Ideas move even faster – propelled , sustained , and strengthened by the Internet .
And the ability to turn them into reality is keeping pace , as global supply chains and new technologies like 3D printing reduce implementation times .
Meanwhile , the Great Recession that followed the 2008 global financial crisis has disrupted traditional industries , while creating a large surplus of creative talent and affordable workspaces .
As a highly mobile , well educated , risk-taking workforce converges on urban hubs , the excitement of city life , coupled with the availability of co-working spaces and a variety of supporting mechanisms , helps to sustain innovative momentum .
Former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg provided what is perhaps the pithiest summary of the attraction of urban life .
Speaking at Stanford University ’ s 2013 commencement , he quipped , “ I believe that more and more Stanford graduates will find themselves moving to Silicon Alley , not only because we ’ re the hottest new tech scene in the country , but also because there ’ s more to do on a Friday night than go to the Pizza Hut in Sunnyvale .
And you may even be able to find a date with a girl whose name is not Siri ” ( the digital personal assistant installed on Apple ’ s handheld devices ) .
Bloomberg is generally credited as one of the major forces behind Silicon Alley .
During his tenure in office , he funded early-stage technology companies , hired the city ’ s first chief digital officer , and launched a new university to develop high-tech talent .
Similar policies are now being implemented in many urban areas , in order to attract a critical mass of creative , technologically savvy people .
Cities , as a recent World Economic Forum report highlights , are rapidly becoming not just drivers of innovation , but also testing grounds for new technologies , such as reprogrammable space , self-driving mobility , urban farming , and intelligent street lighting .
Meanwhile , vehicle-hailing apps like Uber and apartment-sharing platforms like Airbnb are demonstrating how cities have become some of the most fertile environments for technological development .
That is yet another reason why many new startups are putting down roots in urban centers .
Most likely , this proliferation of innovation is just the beginning .
As the Internet continues its penetration of all aspects of our lives , we are entering what the computer scientist Mark Weiser has called the era of “ ubiquitous computing ” – a time when technology is so prevalent that it “ recedes into the background of our lives . ”
Before long , the digital world and the physical world will be indistinguishable .
The era of “ Silicon Everywhere ” is upon us – and it is taking shape in the world ’ s cities .
