Asia ’ s Stifled Services
MANILA – The eurozone crisis has dominated discussion among policymakers over the last few years , but the economic slowdown in Asia ’ s two giants – the People ’ s Republic of China ( PRC ) and India – has become a source of growing public concern as well .
How worried should we be about an additional drag on the global economy ?
After years of double-digit GDP growth , the PRC ’ s economy is decelerating .
At the Asian Development Bank , we predict that its growth will slow to 7.7 % this year , from 9.3 % in 2011 .
The PRC ’ s population is aging , real wages are rising , and growth is moderating toward more sustainable rates .
India , too , has massive potential to grow fast and reap a demographic dividend , but it has been struggling with structural reform .
We expect that India ’ s expansion will slow to 5.6 % in 2012 , from 6.5 % last year .
Weak external demand is partly responsible for the falloff in growth , but internal factors – namely , slowing investment and stagnating consumption – are also holding back economic expansion .
Maintaining growth in the face of a global slowdown is a daunting task , and it requires rethinking the future of “ factory Asia . ”
Asia ’ s boom was driven largely by intraregional manufacturing linkages : intermediate goods and parts were sourced from within Asia for assembly into final goods exported to advanced economies .
But , with budget-tightening around the world , demand for Asia ’ s exports is expected to continue to falter .
Where , then , should Asia look for another source of growth ?
Upgrading the service sector – for example , business processing , tourism , and health care – could play a critical role in the region ’ s future growth .
Asia ’ s service sector is already large , contributing significantly to growth and employment .
Services accounted for nearly half of developing Asia ’ s GDP in 2010 , two-thirds of India ’ s growth from 2000 to 2010 , and 43 % of growth in the manufacturing-oriented PRC in the same period .
In addition , service workers comprise more than one-third of total employment in developing Asia .
If these countries follow the same path traveled by the advanced economies , agriculture ’ s dominance will give way to industry , which in turn will be supplanted by services , further broadening their role .
There is certainly room to grow : the share of industry in developing Asia ’ s output surpassed the OECD average in 2010 ( 41 % vs. 24 % ) , but the share of services still lags by a wide margin ( 48 % vs. 75 % ) .
Making Asia ’ s service sector more dynamic is essential to future growth .
But the sector is still dominated by traditional services , such as restaurants , taxis , and barbers .
Modern services – such as Internet connectivity technology , or financial , legal , and other professional business services – account for less than 10 % of Asia ’ s service economy , well below the 20-25 % in advanced economies .
While traditional service industries are able to provide jobs , they do not generate much income .
Labor productivity is also quite low : For most economies in the region , service-sector productivity is less than 20 % of the OECD average .
Even in South Korea , labor productivity in industry is 118 % of the OECD figure , but only 43 % of the average for services .
A vibrant service sector could have broad economic benefits .
Synergies between services and industry could improve overall productivity .
For example , industrial design , marketing , and legal services could facilitate investment and development of new manufactured products .
The service sector also tends to be more effective in job creation , particularly for women , thus supporting inclusive growth .
Developing the service sector could also diversify the production base , thereby enhancing economic resilience and boosting growth momentum .
Modern services are becoming increasingly tradable , providing new export opportunities .
India and the Philippines , for example , have established themselves as world leaders in the export of outsourced business processes .
Skills gaps and a lack of infrastructure are frequently cited as factors that hinder service-sector dynamism in Asia .
But burdensome regulations are the biggest barrier .
Excessive regulation that protects incumbent firms and other vested interests undermines market competitiveness and limits prospects for improved productivity and efficiency .
For example , legal markets are dominated by rich lawyers , schools are controlled by teachers ’ unions , and the medical sector is influenced by powerful doctors , resulting in high business costs that also hamper industrial development .
Many service firms in Asia are owned by the public sector , so governments have less incentive to deregulate services .
But the same authorities have already opened their economies ’ manufacturing and agriculture sectors for the common good , even at the expense of minority groups like farmers and factory workers .
Why , then , are they maintaining policies that protect the special-interest groups that dominate the service sector ?
Many argue that regulations protect small domestic firms against undue competition from large foreign firms .
But the truth is that regulations are stifling even for domestic competition .
In India , for example , there is fear that small mom-and-pop retailers will be crushed when Wal-Mart enters the market in the next few months .
But policymakers must recognize that there are ways to protect small retailers without stifling competition .
The government can , say , impose zoning regulations , help small retailers find & nbsp ; specialized niches in the market , or provide skills training to displaced workers .
The survival of artisanal retailers should not be used as an excuse to introduce or uphold business regulations that ultimately protect the incumbent rich .
Asian policymakers must remember how they successfully developed their manufacturing sector – through competition .
The same logic should be applied to services .
Upgrading the service sector is low-hanging fruit for Asia , because tremendous investments are not required .
And yet service-sector reform remains just out of reach for the region , owing to the absence of the political will needed to dismantle the vested interests that keep it there .
