Are Humans Worse than Chernobyl ?
PORTSMOUTH – Nearly 30 years have passed since the nuclear accident at Chernobyl , and the scientific community is still arguing about the impact radiation is having on the ecosystem surrounding the reactor .
Recently , together with other scientists , I studied the animals in the human exclusion zone around the plant .
The results were shocking : whatever the impact of radiation on animals may be , the effects of human habitation seem to have been a lot worse .
The site offers a stark reminder that humans ’ simple , physical presence in a habitat is more damaging than one of the twentieth century ’ s worst environmental catastrophes .
We studied animals in the nearly 2,200-square-kilometer ( 850 square miles ) sector of the exclusion zone in Belarus called the “ Polessye State Radioecological Reserve . ”
Before the disaster , this area was home to 22,000 people in 92 villages , and the land was farmed and exploited for its forest resources .
In the days after the accident , the area ’ s human residents were evacuated with their farm animals to protect them from high levels of radiation .
Even though radiation levels dropped by a factor of nearly 100 in the months after the accident , the area is still judged unfit for human habitation .
There are few reports on the effects of the accident on wild animals , but we know that in some radiation hot spots trees and wildlife died .
Some might expect that , nearly 30 years later , the area around the reactor remains a wasteland , sparsely populated by genetically damaged animals exposed to chronic radiation across multiple generations .
The reality is very different .
Indeed , as early as a few years after the accident , data collected by Belarusan scientists flying helicopter surveys over the abandoned area showed rising numbers of wild boar , elk , and roe deer .
And , with the passage of time , the region ’ s wildlife population continued to grow , as animals made use of what people had left behind .
Crops , gardens , and orchards provided abundant food supplies .
Abandoned houses and farm buildings offered ready-made nests and dens .
By 1993 , the number of wild boar had increased sixfold , before halving due to a disease outbreak and predation from the rapidly growing wolf population .
Our research shows that the number of large mammals at Chernobyl is similar to that in uncontaminated nature reserves in Belarus – except for wolves , which are far more numerous in the area around the reactor .
The area is also home to lynx and even a few brown bears .
Nor do the population data show any link between radiation levels and mammal densities ; the number of mammals in the most contaminated parts of the zone is similar to that in the least contaminated parts .
To be sure , the fact that animals are thriving at Chernobyl does not mean that radiation is good for wildlife .
Radiation does cause DNA damage , and at current levels we cannot rule out some effects on the reproduction of individual animals .
But a comparison with what happened outside the affected area is instructive .
Whatever damage radiation has wrought , human habitation has caused far greater destruction .
Indeed , in areas outside the zone or nature reserves , populations of elk and wild boar underwent steep declines , as major socioeconomic changes after the fall of the Soviet Union worsened rural poverty and crippled wildlife management .
The lesson from Chernobyl is that if nature is to thrive , it must be given space – from us .
The primary causes behind declining global biodiversity include habitat loss and fragmentation as a result of human activity .
Even some of our most well-meaning environmental efforts , such as the fight against climate change , have led to the expansion of the human presence into previously untouched wilderness .
Demand for biofuels , for example , has been linked to deforestation .
It may also be time we consider embracing high-tech – even genetically modified – agriculture to provide the food we need on smaller areas of land , leaving more space for wildlife .
There are no easy solutions , of course , and all efforts to address the problem will be complicated by continuing rapid growth of the world ’ s human population .
But one thing is clear : we , as a species , need to think more carefully about our impact on the nonhuman animal population and begin to take better account of these effects in our economic and environmental policies .
