Negotiations in a Strategic Trap
TEL AVIV – The Israeli-Palestinian peace process , stymied by irreconcilable differences between the parties , has always depended on the strategic regional context .
It was born , after all , in the wake of the first Gulf War , and was facilitated by the regional consequences of the Cold War ’ s end .
These days , the process is shaped by two major regional dynamics , the so-called Arab Spring and the Iran nuclear deal .
The Iran deal has turned into one of the most serious crises of trust ever in the United States ’ relations with its Middle East allies .
Though they have no alternative , both Israel and the Arab states will find it difficult to trust future US commitments to their security .
To Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu , US President Barack Obama betrayed Israel when he sacrificed Egypt ’ s former president , Hosni Mubarak , and paved the way for the Muslim Brotherhood ’ s rise to power .
Now he has wielded the knife a second time by reaching a deal with Iran , supposedly behind Netanyahu ’ s back .
Israel ’ s conventional strategic wisdom was based on an equation of “ Bushehr versus Yitzhar ” – that is , a readiness to dismantle West Bank settlements if the Iranian centrifuges in Bushehr were dismantled .
As far as Netanyahu is concerned , this is not taking place .
Nor do the Arab revolutions counsel Israel ’ s strategic planners to take security risks .
Israel , they would say , is now surrounded by imploding , failing states / regions ( Lebanon , Syria , Gaza , and Egypt ’ s Sinai Peninsula ) , as well as by a strategically vital buffer state , Jordan , whose long-term survival cannot be taken for granted .
The anarchy along Israel ’ s borders is becoming a breeding ground for Sunni extremists for whom the Jewish state is the ultimate enemy .
To create a Palestinian state when existing Arab states are crumbling – and with a part of Palestine controlled by Hamas – does not seem like a brilliant idea .
Netanyahu is a conservative in revolutionary times .
Unimpressed with what others saw as the beginning of an era of democracy in the Arab world , he preferred not to budge on any front , including Palestine .
Now he is faced with a strategic nightmare come true : Iran ’ s possible integration into the international community without having to dismantle its nuclear-weapons potential .
In this context , US Secretary of State John Kerry ’ s peace initiative has become trapped in a paralyzing power game .
Should the process fail , Kerry warns , the US will not be able to rescue Israel from the wave of international condemnation and sanctions that would be unleashed against it .
But Netanyahu ’ s card is more than a threat .
His friends in the US Senate have already introduced a bill , which currently has 59 cosponsors , that would impose new sanctions on Iran ; this is tantamount to torpedoing the entire Iran deal .
It is this reality that has led the Americans to endorse two Israeli positions – recognition of Israel as a Jewish state and intrusive security arrangements – that the Palestinians are bound to reject .
Recognizing the “ Jewish state ” would be a betrayal of the constituent ethos of Palestinian nationalism , while intrusive security arrangements would be a standing invitation to radical groups to fight what would be seen as occupation in disguise .
Instead of controlling the extremists , a robust Israeli security presence in Palestine would precipitate the collapse of its institutions .
Iran will not change its regional policies overnight .
The nuclear deal is not the “ grand bargain ” that Iran proposed to the US in 2003 and that was supposed to address , in addition to the nuclear dispute , a wide array of regional issues , including the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
For Iran , a strategic partnership with the US would be the ultimate betrayal of the Islamic revolution , an inconceivable change of identity .
With or without a nuclear deal , Iran , which was disinvited from the Geneva II conference on Syria , because of its rejection of the conference ’ s US-inspired terms of reference , aspires to challenge America ’ s policies and represent an alternative path for the region .
“ We did not agree to dismantle anything , ” Iran ’ s foreign minister insisted in defiance of the US interpretation of the nuclear deal .
Such talk allows Netanyahu to persist in his doomsday rhetoric .
One would expect that , with the rising Iranian threat fostering tacit security cooperation between Israel and its more stable Arab neighbors ( particularly Saudi Arabia ) , Netanyahu would aspire to resolve the Palestinian issue , thus removing the last obstacle to an overt strategic partnership .
That was exactly the rationale behind Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin ’ s endorsement of the Oslo process from the outset .
But Netanyahu ’ s school of thought is radically different .
Not only does it advocate an Israeli presence in the West Bank ( the Biblical homeland of Judea and Samaria ) ; it also links territorial concessions to the Palestinians to the neutralization of existential threats emanating from the outer circle of the region .
Among US presidents , George W. Bush identified most strongly with this right-wing Israeli philosophy , and his war in Iraq and policies toward Iran accorded with it perfectly .
Indeed , both he and his father moved to promote an Israeli-Palestinian peace settlement only after their respective Iraq wars .
The 1991 Madrid Peace Conference followed the Gulf War , while the “ road map ” came after the Iraq War .
Now , however , international acceptance of Iran as a nuclear-threshold state , together with the threat emanating from imploding Arab neighbors , flatly contradicts Netanyahu ’ s assumptions about the conditions that must be fulfilled for Israel to offer “ painful concessions ” to the Palestinians .
Someone clearly looks likely to fall into a strategic trap , but who ?
