Asia ’ s Resource Scramble
NEW DELHI – Competition for strategic natural resources – including water , mineral ores , and fossil fuels – has always played a significant role in shaping the terms of the international economic and political order .
But now that competition has intensified , as it encompasses virtually all of Asia , where growing populations and rapid economic development over the last three decades have generated an insatiable appetite for severely limited supplies of key commodities .
Asia is the world ’ s most resource-poor continent , and overexploitation of the natural resources that it does possess has created an environmental crisis that is contributing to regional climate change .
For example , the Tibetan Plateau , which contains the world ’ s third-largest store of ice , is warming at almost twice the average global rate , owing to the rare convergence of high altitudes and low latitudes – with potentially serious consequences for Asia ’ s freshwater supply .
In other words , three interconnected crises – a resource crisis , an environmental crisis , and a climate crisis – are threatening Asia ’ s economic , social , and ecological future .
Population growth , urbanization , and industrialization are exacerbating resource-related stresses , with some cities experiencing severe water shortages , and degrading the environment ( as anyone who has experienced Beijing ’ s smog can attest ) .
Fossil-fuel and water subsidies have contributed to both problems .
Faced with severe supply constraints , Asian economies are increasingly tapping other continents ’ fossil fuels , mineral ores , and timber .
But water is extremely difficult – & # 160 ; and prohibitively expensive – to import .
And Asia has less fresh water per person than any continent other than Antarctica , and some of the world ’ s worst water pollution .
Likewise , food scarcity is a growing problem for Asian countries , with crop yields and overall food production growing more slowly than demand .
At the same time , rising incomes are altering people ’ s diets , which now include more animal-based proteins , further compounding Asia ’ s food challenges .
The intensifying competition over natural resources among Asian countries is shaping resource geopolitics , including the construction of oil and gas pipelines .
China has managed to secure new hydrocarbon supplies through pipelines from Kazakhstan and Russia .
But this option is not available to Asia ’ s other leading economies – Japan , India , and South Korea – which are not contiguous with suppliers in Central Asia , Iran , or Russia .
These countries will remain dependent on oil imports from an increasingly unstable Persian Gulf .
Furthermore , China ’ s fears that hostile naval forces could hold its economy hostage by interdicting its oil imports have prompted it to build a massive oil reserve , and to plan two strategic energy corridors in southern Asia .
The corridors will provide a more direct transport route for oil and liquefied gas from Africa and the Persian Gulf , while minimizing exposure to sea-lanes policed by the United States Navy .
One such corridor extends 800 kilometers from the Bay of Bengal across Burma to southern China .
In addition to gas pipelines – the first is scheduled to be completed this year – it will include a high-speed railroad and a highway from the Burmese coast to China ’ s Yunnan province , offering China ’ s remote interior provinces an outlet to the sea for the first time .
The other corridor – work on which has been delayed , owing to an insurrection in Pakistan ’ s Baluchistan province – will stretch from the Chinese-operated port at Gwadar , near Pakistan ’ s border with Iran , through the Karakoram mountains to the landlocked , energy-producing Xinjiang province .
Notably , in giving China control of its strategic Gwadar port in February , Pakistan has permitted the Chinese government to build a naval base there .
Given the significant role that natural resources have historically played in global strategic relations – including driving armed interventions and full-scale wars – increasingly murky resource geopolitics threatens to exacerbate existing tensions among Asian countries .
Rising dependence on energy imports has already been used to rationalize an increased emphasis on maritime power , raising new concerns about sea-lane safety and vulnerability to supply disruptions .
This partly explains the current tensions between China and Japan over their conflicting territorial claims to islands in the East China Sea , which occupy an area of only seven square kilometers , but are surrounded by rich hydrocarbon reserves .
Disputes in the South China Sea involving China and five of its neighbors , and in southern Asia , are equally resource-driven .
While strategic competition for resources will continue to shape Asia ’ s security dynamics , the associated risks can be moderated if Asia ’ s leaders establish norms and institutions aimed at building rule-based cooperation .
Unfortunately , little progress has been made in this area .
For example , 53 of Asia ’ s 57 transnational river basins lack any water-sharing or cooperative arrangement .
Indeed , Asia is one of only two continents , along with Africa , where regional integration has yet to take hold , largely because political and cultural diversity , together with historical animosities , have hindered institution-building .
Strained political relations among most of Asia ’ s sub-regions make a region-wide security structure or more effective resource cooperation difficult to achieve .
This could have significant implications for Asia ’ s ostensibly unstoppable rise – and thus for the West ’ s supposedly inevitable decline .
After all , Asian economies cannot sustain their impressive economic growth without addressing their resource , environmental , and security challenges – and no single country can do it alone .
