The High Cost of Cheap Fashion
OXFORD – I confess : I do it , too .
Like most Western women , I do it regularly , and it is a guilty pleasure every time .
It is hard to listen to one ’ s conscience when one is faced with so much incredible temptation .
I am talking , of course , about cheap trendy fashion .
I 'll visit a Zara – or Hampamp ; M , or , now that I am in the United Kingdom for the summer , the amazing Primark – and snap up items that are “ cute , ” effectively disposable , and so shockingly inexpensive that one does a double take .
I need to face my addiction – and so do all women like me .
Fashion has been transformed by the recent emergence of retail chains that hire good designers to make throwaway clothing and accessories that are right on trend .
This evolution has freed Western women from the tyranny of a fashion industry that in the bad old days would dictate a style , compelling women to invest heavily in updating their wardrobes , and then blithely declare their entire closets obsolete – again and again , with no end in sight .
Enter the mass-production style emporia , and Western women have the seemingly delicious and liberating option of getting this summer 's must-have tiny floral retro eighties print sundress – which will look appallingly frumpy by next summer – for $ 12 .
They – we – can invest in classic items that don ’ t age so fast , and absorb these low-cost trendy disposables as the mood hits .
These stores solve a psychological problem for us , too , since one can shop at length – a pleasure that may well be hard-wired in the female brain , owing to our evolutionary development as gatherers – without feeling sick about one ’ s overspending by the end of the exercise .
But what has been liberating for Western women is a system built literally on the backs of women in the developing world .
How do Primark and its competitors in the West ’ s shopping malls and High Streets keep that cute frock so cheap ?
By starving and oppressing Bangladeshi , Chinese , Mexican , Haitian , and other women , that ’ s how .
We all know that cheap clothing is usually made in sweatshop conditions – and usually by women .
And we know – or should know – that women in sweatshops around the world report being locked in and forbidden to use bathrooms for long periods , as well as sexual harassment , violent union-busting , and other forms of coercion .
But , like any family secret that would cause us discomfort if faced directly , we Western women turn a blind eye to it .
Boycotts of sweated college t-shirts in the United States led to fairer manufacturing practices , and boycotts of coffee and produce , led mostly by women consumers , resulted in fair-trade purchases by major supermarkets .
And more affluent women do have a history of effective sweated labor boycotts in the past : in the Victorian era , impoverished women were going blind in the ' needle trades ' , turning out elaborate embroideries for wealthy women , until revulsion on the part of these consumers forced conditions to better .
By contrast , today , there is no major movement led by developed-world women to stop this global exploitation by cut-rate manufacturers – even though our money is the one tool powerful enough to force manufacturers to change their ways .
The reason is simple : we like things the way they are .
But it will become increasingly difficult for us to maintain our “ out of sight , out of mind ” attitude .
To their credit , women in the developing world – some of the most exploited and coerced women on earth – are raising their voices .
For example , The Financial Times reported on June 23 that , “ Hundreds of Bangladeshi garment factories supplying western buyers such as Marks and Spencer , Tesco , Walmart , and Hampamp ; M gradually reopened under heavy police protection … after days of violent protests by tens of thousands of laborers demanding higher wages . ”
A thousand riot police used rubber bullets and tear gas on the workers , and hundreds were injured , but they did not back down .
Most of the two million people working in Bangladesh ’ s garment industry are women , and they are the lowest-paid garment workers in the world , earning $ 25 a month .
But they are demanding that their monthly wage be almost tripled , to $ 70 .
Their leaders make the point that , at current pay levels , workers cannot feed themselves or their families .
Economists predict that strikes and unrest will escalate in Bangladesh , and also in Vietnam , with even investment bankers quoted by The Financial Times calling wages for women garment workers in these countries “ unsustainably low . ”
The factories have reopened – for now .
But Bangladesh ’ s government is considering an increase in the minimum wage .
If it happens , one of the world ’ s most oppressed legal workforces will have scored a major victory – largely symbolic for now , but one that will inspire other women garment workers around the world to rise up in protest .
Western women , we should challenge ourselves to follow this story and find ways to do what is right in changing our own consumption patterns .
It is past time to show support for women who are suffering systematic , globalized , cost-effective gender discrimination in the most overt ways – ways that most of us no longer have to face .
Let us support a fair-trade economy , and refuse to shop at outlets targeted by activists for unfair employment practices ( for more information , go to http : / / www.worldwatch.org / node / 1485 ) .
If women around the world who are held in the bondage of sweated labor manage to win this crucial fight , that cute dress at Primark may cost a fair amount more .
But it already costs too much to the women who can ’ t afford to feed and house themselves and their children .
That $ 3 pair of adorable lace-up sandals ?
The price – given the human costs – really is too good to be true .
