The IMF has Failed , Out with Camdessus
CAMBRIDGE : If emerging markets have become a speculative casino , then the IMF 's managing director , Monsieur Camdessus , is the chief croupier .
From Mexico to Asia , Russia to Brazil the IMF has stood by while currency crises boiled up over the past few years .
Of course , the IMF was fast to mobilize vast amounts of money to throw into the pot once it boiled over , but its lack of decisive remedies has failed to move countries out of danger .
If all of this true , why should the IMF 's managing director keep his job ?
Asking for more money and more powers , belatedly bailing the private sector into the process , talking of a new international financial architecture : all of it sounds like hot air , given the Camdessus record .
So , first things first : there is an urgent need for dramatic reform at the IMF .
The managing director , however , has not got a clue as to how to fix things .
M. Camdessus has lost his legitimacy , and he must go .
Abba Eban once said of the PLO that it never missed an opportunity to miss an opportunity .
The IMF under Camdessus seems to be just as willfully blind .
It has shown a pattern of missing every single crisis or misjudging the sustainability of every financially precarious situation .
Russia is a case in point : the IMF proffered another program , another pile of money was stumped up , but no decisive change was forced on Russian policy .
No debt restructuring took place and , small surprise , Russia 's economy collapsed .
The IMF 's answer to this ?
If we had restructured Russia 's debt , there would have been a risk of devaluation .
Through its delays the IMF incited both devaluation and default , with a resulting economic collapse far worse than if some preventive debt restructuring had been insisted upon .
Or take the case of Brazil .
President Cardoso bamboozled the IMF into thinking he was a reform President .
How he succeeded in conning the IMF is hard to see because Cardoso has never taken a hard decision in his life .
As Brazil teetered on the brink the IMF sounded as if it was in as much self-denial as the Brazilian finance minister - no problem , no overvaluation , everything will work out .
Instead , everything blew up .
Or Korea .
Where was the IMF when fragile Korean banks borrowed huge amounts abroad - with overnight maturities - to put the money in Brazilian and Russian bonds ?
And where was the IMF when simple prudence suggested an early deep look at Indonesia 's banking system ?
The point is that preventive care is all-important in avoiding bad surprises , and in the area of foresight the IMF has been strictly useless , if not worse .
The second problem is IMF programs .
They arrive late ; shy away from drastic measures ; avoid using the most powerful ammunition .
A country drowning in debt needs debt restructuring .
If that does not come debtors will try and escape the burdens of dollar debt by staging a run on the central bank 's reserves .
Inevitably , the currency will collapse and the country 's debt burdens and the situation of its banks and companies becomes even worse .
To work , restructuring must come early and needs to be drastic , otherwise a debt problem becomes a problem of default , bank collapse and currency collapse .
In Indonesia the IMF failed to have an early debt moratorium and so fostered a currency collapse .
In Russia the IMF failed in the same way .
That blindness was repeated once again in Brazil .
So long as the bad debts claim center stage , collapse of domestic finance and of a nation 's currency becomes extreme .
But the IMF has failed to support aggressive measures to restore currency credibility .
Raising interest rates to the sky in a country that has bad banks and bad debt won 't convince and ward off speculators .
A far better ( to be pursued alongside debt restructuring ) , is the idea of a currency board .
Abolish the central bank , abolish the exchange rate , take away the toys with which governments create currency crises in the first place .
The IMF has lacked the courage to put the option of currency boards to the forefront .
The IMF 's argument seems to be : if a currency board fails , we will be blamed .
Yet it is clear that a bold move to a currency board in , say Brazil , would immediately create a wave of confidence throughout Latin America , restoring capital inflows and avoiding the deep recession now building up .
People who lack courage , vision , and competence cannot lead .
There needs to be a strong message to the IMF that it must shape up , that it needs to understand the modern financial system better , that it needs to be prepared to lead rather than hide and blame others .
The idea of giving more money for the IMF to fight battles with speculators on an even grander scale is preposterous .
The best idea , of course , is to bring back Jacques de la Rosiere , the former and vastly successful head of the IMF to replace his fellow countryman .
Failing that , the IMF needs a no-nonsense British civil servant who looks at the facts instead of schmoozing finance ministers , who judges financial risks instead of cultivating politicians with long records of failure .
Above all , the IMF needs someone who does not look for yet more statism which only makes crises bigger , but rather for a withdrawal from bailouts and therefore a return of market discipline .
