The Fallout from India ’ s Nuclear Tests
NEW YORK : India ’ s test of five nuclear bombs in two days ( setting off three in a day is something new in history ) is one of those rare events that redraws the map of the world .
A terrifying nuclear arms race in South Asia is likely , with the distinct danger of " nuclear battle " between India and Pakistan .
The world now awaits Pakistan 's decision whether or not to test the bombs already reported to be in its possession .
North Korea is reneging on agreements to yield key nuclear materials .
China is contemplating a full nuclear security guarantee to Pakistan , creating a complex , unstable four-sided nuclear stand-off in Asia between India , Pakistan , China , and , of course , Russia .
Nuclear war , many regional experts say , is more likely now than it ever was in the Cold War .
Unlike Russians and Americans of that bygone era , South Asia ’ s peoples actually have been killing each other over the years , by the millions during the partition of India in 1948 , and in three wars since then .
Moreover , India and Pakistan remain divided by a bitter territorial dispute over Kashmir .
But this possibility of nuclear war , horrifying as it is , may not be the most important consequence of India 's test .
That consequence is the gaping hole punched in the ( little known ) system the world has relied upon against nuclear dangers in the post-Cold War era .
Like sleepers awakened by a shock , people across the globe are startled to discover that they are still living in the nuclear age .
That little noted system of protection is the one mandated by the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty of 1968 , signed by 185 nations , which created two tiers of states .
The first consisted of the five nations possessing nuclear weapons ( America , Russia , Britain , France , and China ) , which promised ( under the Treaty 's Article Six ) to get rid of them ; the second consisted of nations that lacking nuclear weapons , which promised not to get them .
The NPT was an abolition treaty , specifying that non-nuclear nations would start at the goal of zero nuclear weapons , and that nuclear-armed nations would commit themselves to reaching that goal .
At some point the two tiers would fuse , and the world would be nuclear-weapon-free .
Nothing like this occurred during the Cold War .
Nuclear-armed nations built nearly 100,000 nuclear weapons , bearing the explosive power of about a million six hundred thousand Hiroshima-size bombs .
With the Cold War ’ s end , arms reductions began , but the nuclear powers - America in particular - publicly disavowed total nuclear disarmament for " the indefinite future , " in the recent words of Robert Bell , of the US National Security Council .
The US and the other nuclear powers proposed to keep the two-tier system in virtual perpetuity .
This is the context in which India 's plunge into folly and peril took place .
( " The news of the day is : India defies world opinion , " Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee proclaimed with insane arrogance . )
India was in effect saying that if there were to be two classes of nations in the post-Cold-War world , then India was going to be in the first class .
It would be " a global player , " in the words of Pramod Mahajan , an aide to the Prime Minister .
This gambit makes perfect sense if you assume that the post-cold-war world is going to remain nuclear armed and that nuclear arms will remain the main currency of power .
But is that to be the case ?
Do the nuclear powers intend to hold on to their nuclear arsenals " indefinitely ? "
Or are these powers ( now including India ) prepared , by joint agreement , to commit themselves to creating a world without nuclear weapons ?
This is the question India has placed before the world .
India 's tests mean that the days of the two-tiered system are over .
The world is moving toward a single standard , and the question is whether that standard will be possession of nuclear weapons or renunciation of them .
While India posed this question , it cannot answer it .
The world , preeminently the US , must do that .
If President Clinton were to embrace the goal of a world without nuclear weapons ( or other weapons of mass destruction ) , there is reason to hope that other nuclear powers would follow .
Welcome as American sanctions against India are , the most important response to the Indian tests would be an international debate .
Indeed , a considerable number of the most prominent figures of the Cold War , in Russia and the US support abolition of nuclear weapons , including former German chancellor Helmut Schmidt , Paul Nitze , considered by many the author America 's Cold War nuclear policy ; former NATO commander Andrew J. Goodpaster , and Russia ’ s General Aleksander Lebed .
While proponents admit that a world without nuclear weapons would not be without dangers - especially from governments that might decide to violate abolition agreements - these dangers rate far below the perils of living in the world of uncontrolled nuclear proliferation toward which the Indian tests point .
In announcing his sanctions to India 's leaders , President Clinton said , " They have to define the greatness of India in twenty-first century terms , not in terms that everyone else has rejected . "
But have America and the other nuclear powers really rejected those terms ?
Are they ready to follow the advice now being given India and let go of their nuclear arsenals ?
The great nuclear power should demonstrate their resolve not only in words , but in deeds .
