Asia ’ s Leadership Gap
SINGAPORE – This week , ten foreign ministers from the Association of South East Asian Nations ( ASEAN ) are meeting in Hanoi .
When their initial gathering ends , they will host their counterparts from across the region , including US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton .
ASEAN meetings are sometimes criticized as “ talking shops , ” but this time dialogue and strategic leadership are needed immensely .
Ironically , the two leaders who most emphasized the need for leadership in Asia and across the Pacific recently left office .
Japan ’ s former Prime Minister , Yukio Hatoyama , and Australia ’ s former premier , Kevin Rudd , both championed regionalism from early in their short time in office .
But , though they are gone , the issue of regional leadership remains .
Indeed , it is growing more important by the day .
The security issues facing the region , from the Korean peninsula to the outcome of the upcoming elections in Myanmar ( Burma ) this autumn , have grown more pressing – perhaps all the more so in view of reports that North Korea is assisting Myanmar ’ s ruling generals to develop nuclear capabilities .
Moreover , the role and attitude of a rising China must be assessed on a regional basis , particularly given that the long-standing dispute over islets in the South China Sea may be entering a new phase .
Recent Chinese statements declare the islands a “ core interest , ” terms usually reserved for Taiwan and Tibet .
All of these issues test the region ’ s ability to manage peace and mitigate tensions between its main powers – and thus underscore the concern that Hatoyama and Rudd raised .
Hatoyama called for an East Asian Community , emphasizing ties with China and South Korea while questioning the continuing presence of US military bases on the island of Okinawa , the issue that eventually triggered his resignation .
Rudd , by contrast , raised the idea of an Asia / Pacific Community with strong ties to the US .
These leaders ’ departure from office reflected their countries ’ internal politics , and their successors will focus more on declining support at home than on regional ambitions .
But the questions that Hatoyama and Rudd raised – who is in Asia , and who gets to lead regional cooperation – await a satisfying answer .
As Australian and Japanese initiatives fade , attention now turns to ASEAN , which has put in place norms for peace that all major powers affirm .
The ASEAN Regional Forum ( ARF ) is a long-standing forum that brings together foreign ministers , and that is benefiting from renewed attention on the part of Clinton , who is making her second appearance – a perfect attendance record since coming into office , and a marked improvement on the record of her predecessor , Condoleezza Rice .
But more may be needed .
Asia ’ s major economies continue to grow and integrate , whereas the US economy remains soft , and its leaders ’ attention is increasingly focused on its domestic challenges .
A shift of relative strategic influence and strength is discernible , especially given the rise of India and China .
But old and unresolved rivalries within Asia are finding new expression as political ambitions and military budgets expand .
A new forum will soon emerge .
Building on the ASEAN defense ministers ’ meeting , a formal dialogue between the defense ministers of eight key countries – China , Japan , South Korea , India , Australia , New Zealand , Russia , and the US – will run in parallel with the ARF .
There is also talk about establishing a new strategic dialogue among leaders .
Asian leaders already hold such talks annually at the East Asia Summit , an important initiative that brings together India and China , with ASEAN as host .
ASEAN is likely to host a still-wider grouping that includes Russia and the US , though the precise framework is still being debated .
Some favor a permanent expansion of the East Asian Summit .
Others suggest that leaders follow an ASEAN + 8 formula , similar to the defense ministers ’ meeting .
An ASEAN + 8 meeting of leaders could then evolve its own modalities to suit the wider geographical group , and would not need to be held each year .
The US has shown interest in a multilateral path to engagement with Asia on strategic issues .
But President Barack Obama ’ s administration has yet to decide which format it thinks best .
There is a need for substantive engagement , so that a leaders ’ meeting makes sense .
After all , there is already APEC for economic issues , as well as the US-ASEAN Summit , inaugurated last year .
Moreover , the ongoing economic crisis and urgent domestic matters will command much of Obama ’ s attention .
Indeed , he has scheduled and then postponed visits to Indonesia three times already .
To be sure , each time there were extenuating circumstances – a jobs summit , the final vote on the US health-care bill , and the environmental disaster in the Gulf of Mexico .
But , taken together , these cancellations make clear that even a US administration that wants to engage more with Asia may still find itself preoccupied with domestic priorities , especially this year , as mid-term elections approach .
Two leaders who pushed for regionalism in Asia have departed because of domestic politics .
Those who remain obviously would be well served not to overlook exigencies at home .
But they also must acknowledge and attend to the post-crisis challenges facing the region as a whole .
