The Front Line of Democracy
BENGHAZI – This week , I flew to Benghazi to meet Libya ’ s Transitional National Council ( TNC ) , a visit coordinated with European Union High Representative Catherine Ashton and NATO allies .
I was the first Western foreign minister to travel to Libya since the crisis began .
What I saw reminded me of my country 20 years ago , just after Poland ’ s first free elections , which , together with the fall of the Berlin Wall barely six months later , came to symbolize the Cold War ’ s end .
Peoples in transition from authoritarian rule – peaceful in Poland in 1989 , bloody in Libya today – grapple with decisions that determine their fate for decades .
How should the former regime ’ s worst wrongdoers and security police , with their insidious archives , be treated ?
Should the former ruling party be banned ?
How can civilian , democratic control of the army and police be secured ?
What role should religion play in public affairs ?
Should the constitution establish a presidential or parliamentary system ?
The former communist world made those choices 20 years ago .
But very different choices – for better and for worse – were made in Poland , Hungary , and Czechoslovakia , in the Baltic states , across the former Soviet Union , in Central Asia , and in East Germany .
The results form a crucial database of experience .
Today ’ s Arab reformers thus can draw on our successes – and avoid our mistakes .
We central Europeans knew the misery of communism .
Yet we knew what we wanted to replace it with – a system based on modern European democratic market values .
Building democratic structures requires time , discipline , pain , and patience .
But it pays off .
In July , Poland will assume the EU presidency for the first time ; we have earned this responsibility to lead European affairs over the next six months .
Poland learned the hard way that demanding change and defying oppression are much less difficult than formulating and delivering a clear , reasonable program for a better future .
Not all popular demands for freedom succeed : in the confusion , reactionary forces can make their move .
The fall of the Shah in Iran had ruinous consequences for that country .
Belarus won independence in 1991 , but , since 1994 , President Alexander Lukashenko has shamelessly embraced communist symbols – and methods – to cling to power .
Europe has unfinished business here .
Today , across North Africa , millions of people are demanding a voice in their own destiny .
Each country is looking to change and move forward .
In Morocco , the King has announced constitutional reforms , including guarantees for public participation in national decision-making , an independent judiciary , and new regional authorities .
This measured , inclusive reform can be a model for others .
And reformers in the Arab world have had tremendous support from Qatar , which has provided an example of strong leadership , particularly in Libya , but also through the news channel Al Jazeera – a real force for change in the region .
Libya is experiencing a deadly struggle between people insisting on change , and a desperate , greedy regime determined to cling to power after 40 years of crass misrule .
The United Nations Security Council , supported by the Arab League , has authorized the use of all necessary means to protect Libyans from the cruelty of their own leaders .
Our NATO allies launched proportionate military operations aimed at denying Col. Muammar Qaddafi ’ s regime the means to attack civilian targets .
Governments worldwide have frozen illicit assets stashed abroad by the regime – money that should be used to help the opposition to build a new society .
I went to Benghazi to assess the intentions and credibility of the Transitional National Council and Libyan opposition .
We brought medical supplies for the Benghazi Medical Center , where injured people from Misurata and elsewhere are being treated .
Around the table sat improbable allies : some had been prominent officials in Qaddafi ’ s regime ; others had spent many years in prison under sentence of death .
They were united in recognizing that their country deserved a new start .
I was reminded of Poland ’ s “ roundtable ” in 1989 , when Solidarity sat with the ruling communists to negotiate the end of the regime .
I talked frankly with TNC Chairman Mustafa Abdul Jalil , Deputy Chairman Abdul Hafez Ghoga , and TNC Defense Minister Jalal Dheili , himself a former political prisoner .
They were grateful for the international community ’ s involvement , but described in moving terms the huge loss of life that Qaddafi had inflicted on his own people .
I told them that we considered the TNC to be our new legitimate political interlocutors in Libya and were ready to support them , but that in return we expected the TNC to work towards the best standards of transparent democratic government .
They had to realize that they need a plan – revolutionary moments are moments to be seized .
Poland would help by offering training for TNC officials .
Following this visit , my message to European leaders is twofold .
First , Libya ’ s TNC is the best bet we can make now for Libya ’ s future .
Its leaders are cooperating in an effort to bring about real reform in a way that was unthinkable a few months ago .
They deserve the world ’ s energetic support .
Second , while Europe has much to offer its North African neighbors in terms of financial support , advice , and training , the region needs to find its own path to freedom and success .
Let us approach this task in the best spirit of European solidarity , but also with a certain humility .
Europe ’ s former communist countries can make a special contribution to the process of transition across North Africa .
Above all , we understand that sustained reform requires assuming responsibility by mobilizing the energy of one ’ s own people , not relying on well-intentioned but often ill-focused outside help .
Poland is ready to lead the way , on its own and as EU President .
For example , former President Lech Wałesa recently visited Tunisia to offer advice as part of a Polish program to help Tunisia devise robust constitutional reforms and election laws .
North Africa ’ s people know what they don ’ t want – and won ’ t accept .
But they are struggling to identify what they do want , and how to build it .
As I saw in Benghazi , there is a fair chance that Libya ’ s emerging leaders will be good , realistic partners for good realistic policies .
