Risky Risk Management
LONDON – Mainstream economics subscribes to the theory that markets “ clear ” continuously .
The theory ’ s big idea is that if wages and prices are completely flexible , resources will be fully employed , so that any shock to the system will result in instantaneous adjustment of wages and prices to the new situation .
This system-wide responsiveness depends on economic agents having perfect information about the future , which is manifestly absurd .
Nevertheless , mainstream economists believe that economic actors possess enough information to lend their theorizing a sufficient dose of reality .
The aspect of the theory that applies particularly to financial markets is called the “ efficient market theory , ” which should have blown sky-high by last autumn ’ s financial breakdown .
But I doubt that it has .
Seventy years ago , John Maynard Keynes pointed out its fallacy .
When shocks to the system occur , agents do not know what will happen next .
In the face of this uncertainty , they do not readjust their spending ; instead , they refrain from spending until the mists clear , sending the economy into a tailspin .
It is the shock , not the adjustments to it , that spreads throughout the system .
The inescapable information deficit obstructs all those smoothly working adjustment mechanisms – i.e. , flexible wages and flexible interest rates – posited by mainstream economic theory .
An economy hit by a shock does not maintain its buoyancy ; rather , it becomes a leaky balloon .
Hence Keynes gave governments two tasks : to pump up the economy with air when it starts to deflate , and to minimize the chances of serious shocks happening in the first place .
Today , that first lesson appears to have been learned : various bailout and stimulus packages have stimulated depressed economies sufficiently for us to have a reasonable expectation that the worst of the slump is over .
But , judging from recent proposals in the United States , the United Kingdom , and the European Union to reform the financial system , it is far from clear that the second lesson has been learned .
Admittedly , there are some good things in these proposals .
For example , the US Treasury suggests that originators of mortgages should retain a “ material ” financial interest in the loans they make , in contrast to the recent practice of securitizing them .
This would , among other things , reduce the role of credit rating agencies .
But there is no indication as to how much of the loan they would be required to hold , or for how long .
Nor do these official responses to the crisis envisage limiting the amount of loans to some multiple of the borrowers ’ income or some proportion of the value of the property being bought .
This , it is feared , might slow recovery .
It would have been better for both recovery and reform to promise to introduce such limitations in ( say ) two years time .
Most disappointing to reformers has been the official rejection of the “ Glass-Steagall ” approach to banking reform .
This would have restored the separation between retail and investment banking , which was swept away by the de-regulating wave of the 1980 ’ s and 1990 ’ s .
The logic behind the separation was absolutely clear : banks whose deposits were insured by the taxpayers should not be allowed to speculate with their depositors ’ money .
Instead , the reform proposals have opted for a mixture of higher capital requirements for leading banks and pre-funding of deposit insurance by a special levy on banks .
There seems to be little appetite for proposals to vary capital adequacy requirements counter-cyclically .
This would enable capital buffers to be created in good years , which could then be drawn down in bad years .
Admittedly , there are difficulties with all proposals to restrict the scope of “ risky ” banking , especially in the context of a global economy with free capital mobility .
As is frequently pointed out , unless banking regulations are identical across frontiers , there will be plenty of scope for “ regulatory arbitrage . ”
Similarly , banks would have incentives to “ game ” capital-adequacy requirements by manipulating how capital and assets are defined .
Indeed , investment banks like Goldman Sachs and Barclays Capital are already inventing new types of securities to reduce the capital cost of holding risky assets .
The underlying problem , though , is that both regulators and bankers continue to rely on mathematical models that promise more than they can deliver for managing financial risks .
Although regulators now place their faith in “ macro-prudential ” models to manage “ systemic ” risk , rather than leaving financial institutions to manage their own risks , both sides lumber on in the untenable belief that all risk is measurable ( and therefore controllable ) , ignoring Keynes ’ s crucial distinction between “ risk ” and “ uncertainty . ”
Salvation does not lie in better “ risk management ” by either regulators or banks , but , as Keynes believed , in taking adequate precautions against uncertainty .
As long as policies and institutions to do this were in place , Keynes argued , risk could be let to look after itself .
Treasury reformers have shirked the challenge of working out the implications of this crucial insight .
