Why Israel ?
TEL AVIV – Israel ’ s latest war in Gaza has echoed through Europe ’ s capitals in a powerful and destructive way .
In Berlin , London , Paris , Rome , and elsewhere , Israel is being denounced as a “ terrorist state . ”
Angry demonstrators burned synagogues in France and , of all places , Germany , with some even chanting “ Jews to the gas ! ”
The grotesque coupling of legitimate solidarity with Palestine and anti-Jewish invective seems to have forged a politically correct form of anti-Semitism – one that , 70 years after the Holocaust , is raising the specter of Kristallnacht over Europe ’ s Jewish communities .
Israelis are struggling to comprehend why five million refugees and 200,000 deaths in Syria mean so much less to the Western conscience than the 2,000 Palestinians killed in Gaza .
They cannot quite grasp how European demonstrators can denounce Israel ’ s wars as “ genocide ” – a term that has never been applied to the Syrian hecatomb , the obliteration of Grozny by Russia , the 500,000 casualties in Iraq since the United States-led invasion in 2003 , or US airstrikes in Afghanistan and Pakistan .
In fact , the answer is simple : Defining Israel ’ s sins in terms borrowed from the Holocaust is Europe ’ s righteous way to rid itself of its Jewish complex .
“ The Holocaust , ” as Thomas Keneally wrote in Schindler ’ s Ark , “ is a Gentile problem , not a Jewish one . ”
Or , as the psychiatrist Zvi Rex famously quipped , “ Germans will never forgive the Jews for Auschwitz . ”
There is no denying that Gaza ’ s agony is a humanitarian disaster .
But it does not even approach other humanitarian crises of recent decades , including those in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( DRC ) , Sudan , Iraq , and Afghanistan .
In fact , since 1882 , the entire Arab-Jewish / Israeli conflict has produced barely half the number of casualties that Syria has in just three years .
Since 1950 , the Arab-Israeli conflict ranks 49th in terms of fatalities .
This does not square with the global vilification of Israel that is drowning out legitimate criticism .
When other countries falter , their policies are questioned ; when Israel ’ s behavior is controversial or problematic , its right to exist comes under fire .
There are more United Nations resolutions devoted to human rights abuses committed by Israel than to abuses by all other countries combined .
Stories about Israel focus almost exclusively on the Palestinian conflict .
Joyce Karam , the Washington bureau chief of the Pan-Arab newspaper Al-Hayat , believes that this is because “ Muslim killing Muslim or Arab killing Arab seems more acceptable than Israel killing Arabs . ”
Syrian , Libyan , and Yemenite victims are faceless ; the lionization of the incomparably fewer Gazan casualties makes them unique .
This is not to say that Israel should be consoled by the macabre arithmetic of bloodshed .
The hypocrisy of some of Israel ’ s critics in no way vindicates its colonial encroachment on Palestinian space , which makes it the last developed , “ Western ” country occupying and manhandling a non-Western people .
Most of today ’ s conflicts – in Colombia , Somalia , the DRC , Sudan , and now even Iraq and Afghanistan – are internal .
Even a major power like Russia faces punishing sanctions for refusing to end its occupation of a foreign land .
Israel ’ s clash with Palestine represents a particularly compelling drama for the West .
The story of Israel extends far beyond the current conflict , to recount an extraordinary symbiosis between Jewish heritage and European civilization that ended in calamity .
From its birth , Israel has borne the scars of the greatest crime ever committed on Europe ’ s soil .
The plight of the Palestinians – the victims of Zionism ’ s triumph – touches another neuralgic point in the European mind .
Nonetheless , the Israel-Palestine tragedy is unique .
It is an absorbing odyssey of two nations with mutually exclusive claims on sacred lands and religious shrines that are central in the lives of millions of people worldwide .
It is also a war of conflicting images , in which both parties claim a monopoly on justice and martyrdom .
Jewish persecution , and the way that Zionism has employed it , has become a model for Palestinian nationalism .
Catchwords like “ exile , ” “ diaspora , ” “ Holocaust , ” “ return , ” and “ genocide ” are now an inextricable component of the Palestinian national ethos .
It is important to note that the Holocaust does not give Israel immunity from criticism , nor can every attack on Israel ’ s policies be dismissed as anti-Semitism .
Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu ’ s Israel is rightly perceived as a status quo state that aspires to have it all : continued control over and settlement of the Palestinian territories and “ quiet for quiet ” from the Palestinians .
But Hamas ’ s control within Gaza is equally problematic .
In order to end its fatal flirtation with jihadism and bolster stability , Gaza must pursue an economic and political deal with Israel that represses the temptation of war .
Just as the rehabilitation of the Egyptian towns along the Suez Canal in the wake of the 1973 Yom Kippur war paved the way for an Israeli-Egyptian peace , a prosperous Gaza would serve the interests of all parties involved – beginning with Israel .
