WikiLeaky Power
PARIS – Beyond the headlines , the embarrassment of governments , and the blow dealt to the secrecy of diplomatic correspondence , WikiLeaks ’ exposure of US diplomatic cables offers a raw illustration of how deeply the essence of power has been altered in our information age .
Since its inception , the state has been the main vessel of power ; access to power usually meant control of the state , whether by election or by violent takeover .
This model , within which individuals are subjects or , at best , taxpayers and voters , is being undermined by several recent trends that have empowered the individual .
Consider the Internet , a network of connected nodes invented in the 1960 ’ s , at the height of the Cold War , to preserve the United States from total chaos after a nuclear attack on its nerve centers .
It was deliberately constructed with no hierarchy , no core , and no central authority , though few at the time could have suspected where , given the numerous breakthroughs of the digital revolution , the Internet ’ s built-in trend toward decentralized power would lead .
It has led to the second trend : a metamorphosis of the production process .
Information has become much more than a message conveyed by technology ; it is now the raw material of services-intensive advanced economies , and the building block of modern social and productive organizations .
The third trend concerns the room this has opened for individual and collective action .
In The Human Condition , the philosopher Hannah Arendt linked politics to the human capacity not simply to act , but to “ act in concert . ”
While concerted action is a familiar notion , it used to be aimed mainly at influencing the state – exemplified by the way civil society prompted America ’ s withdrawal from Vietnam .
Today , however , collective action is of a different magnitude .
Because of the universality of the digital language , its ease of use , and the virtual absence of marginal costs for producing or disseminating information , the state ’ s tools of control have been weakened and depleted .
Global finance has been one of the most eager beneficiaries of these trends , using Internet networks not just as a tool to conduct operations with greater efficiency and velocity , but also as a means to circumvent state supervision .
Corporations have dwelled on connectivity to globalize their markets , R & amp ; D , ownership , tax domiciliation , and leadership , thoroughly transforming their relationship with states , whether in their country of origin or elsewhere .
In September 1992 , it took George Soros $ 10 billion to bring the Bank of England to its knees and impose devaluation on the pound .
It now takes only a computer and Internet connection to cause serious trouble : intrusion by hackers into protected networks , or the introduction of havoc-wreaking software viruses and worms in sensitive information systems .
While the terrorist attacks of September 11 , 2001 – the deadliest of all time – had nothing “ virtual ” about them , their perpetrator , al-Qaeda , projects a cloud of threat and power by using cyberspace to promote its bloody “ successes , ” spread hatred , and recruit jihadists .
Of course , access to a networked world has also balanced state power in positive ways , by giving a formidable boost to independent advocacy , as seen in the online campaign to ban landmines and the treaty that ratified its success – despite opposition by powerful states .
Many similar organizations have flourished , gaining the ability to shape political outcomes and public policies .
But there is no place where the transformative power of connectivity is potentially greater than in China , with its reported 420 million Internet users .
No matter how eager China ’ s authorities are to keep the Internet under their control – for example , by blocking foreign Web sites – they are also aware of how much their economy now needs the Internet .
As a result , the room for “ concerted action ” has never been so large for individual Chinese to gain access to uncensored information , share opinions , and communicate country-wide to expose official misconduct .
The Nobel Peace Prize laureate Liu Xiaobo was jailed for circulating on the Internet his proposal for a truly democratic constitution , Charter 08 , which gathered 10,000 signatures online in only 24 hours .
In the late 1980 ’ s , glasnost – transparency – was one of the nails in the coffin of the Soviet Union .
While WikiLeaks has certainly not had a similar effect , it epitomizes the extent of the individual ’ s empowerment in a networked world .
All that was necessary to challenge the world ’ s mightiest power , after all , was a disgruntled US Army intelligence analyst , some hacking knowledge , a few computers , and a handful of determined activists enrolled under the contested banner of transparency .
At the time she was named Director of Policy Planning at the US State Department , Anne-Marie Slaughter , a respected scholar of international affairs , boldly heralded the advent of a networked world .
“ War , diplomacy , business , media , society … are networked , ” she wrote in Foreign Affairs in January 2009 , and “ in this world , the measure of power is connectedness . ”
Having the greatest potential for connectivity , America has the edge in a “ networked century . ”
This drive prompted US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in January 2010 to proclaim the “ freedom to connect ” as the cyber-equivalent of the more familiar freedoms of assembly or expression .
Of course , Clinton added , these technologies are not an unmitigated blessing , and can be misused for darker purposes .
But her list of the potential abuses of the connected world contained nothing similar to the WikiLeaks storm .
That storm will leave behind no trace of understanding if it is assessed in isolation , rather than as part of a broader pattern .
WikiLeaks ’ latest release demonstrates that the transformation of power by the “ digital revolution ” could be as far-reaching as that brought about by the fifteenth-century printing revolution .
In this game , where new players invite themselves , the edge goes to agility and innovation .
All of this implies that connectedness will remain a double-edged sword – the leverage it provides being fraught with vulnerability .
And that means that we can count on more surprises in store for states .
