A World of Gray
CANBERRA – Václav Havel , the Czech playwright and dissident turned president , and North Korean despot Kim Jong-il might have lived on different planets , for all their common commitment to human dignity , rights , and democracy .
When they died just a day apart this month , the contrast was hard for the global commentariat to resist : Prague ’ s prince of light against Pyongyang ’ s prince of darkness .
But it is worth remembering that Manichaean good-versus-evil typecasting , to which former US President George W. Bush and former British Prime Minister Tony Blair were famously prone , and of which we have had something of a resurgence in recent days , carries with it two big risks for international policymakers .
One risk is that such thinking limits the options for dealing effectively with those who are cast as irredeemably evil .
The debacle of the United States-led invasion of Iraq in 2003 should have taught us once and for all the peril of talking only through the barrel of a gun to those whose behavior disgusts us .
Sometimes , threats to a civilian population will be so acute and immediate as to make coercive military intervention the only option , as with Muammar el-Qaddafi ’ s Libya , at least at the time of the imminent assault on Benghazi in March .
But more often it will be a matter of relying on less extreme measures , like targeted sanctions and threats of international prosecution – and on diplomatic pressure and persuasion .
Negotiating with the genocidal butchers of the Khmer Rouge was acutely troubling , personally and politically , for those of us involved , but those talks secured a lasting peace in Cambodia .
And it is only negotiation – albeit backed by good old-fashioned containment and deterrence – that can possibly deliver sustainable peace with Iran and North Korea .
The second risk that arises from seeing the world in black-and-white terms is greater public cynicism , thereby making ideals-based policymaking in the future even harder .
Expectations raised too high are expectations bound to be disappointed : think of former British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook ’ s “ ethical foreign policy ” at the start of Blair ’ s premiership .
Political leaders who make a big play of “ values ” are often those most likely to stumble .
Think of the lamentable response by US President Bill Clinton ’ s administration to the Rwandan genocide in 1994 or Australia ’ s shameful rejection of asylum-seeking boat people in the Tampa affair under John Howard ’ s government a decade ago .
Then there is many Western governments ’ highly selective embrace of democracy when it results in the election of those ( like Hamas ) whom they find unacceptable ; the unwillingness of almost every nuclear-weapons state to match its disarmament rhetoric with credible action ; and the almost universal double-talk on climate change .
But if double talk were an indictable offense , there would be few left to attend international summits .
The task is neither to pillory nor to sanctify political leaders caught in these traps , but somehow to reconcile what they will often see as hopelessly competing demands of moral values and national interests , and to find ways to get them to do more good and less harm .
A useful way forward in this respect may be to rethink fundamentally the concept of “ national interest . ”
Traditionally seen as having just two dimensions – economic and geostrategic – there is a strong case for adding a third : every country ’ s interest in being , and being seen to be , a good international citizen .
Actively helping to solve global public-goods challenges ( like climate change , human-rights protection , international piracy , drug trafficking , cross-border population flows , and elimination of weapons of mass destruction ) , even when there is no direct economic or strategic payoff , is not simply the foreign policy equivalent of Boy Scout good deeds .
Selfless cooperation on these issues can actually work to a country ’ s advantage by boosting its reputation and generating reciprocal support : my help in solving your drug-trafficking problem today will increase the chances of you supporting my asylum-seeker problem tomorrow .
And a story couched in these realist terms is likely to be easier to sell to domestic constituencies than one pitched as disinterested altruism .
Countries should pursue what the great international-relations scholar Hedley Bull called “ purposes beyond ourselves ” : our common humanity demands no less .
But the real world is a place of gray shades , not black and white , and more often than not the cause of human decency and security will be better served by recognizing and working around that constraint rather than challenging it head on .
