The Responsibility to Protect Comes of Age
NEW YORK – Good news not only sells less well than bad news , but also often seems harder to believe .
Reaction to Harvard psychologist Stephen Pinker ’ s majestic new book , The Better Angels of Our Nature , is a case in point .
In 800 meticulously argued and documented pages , Pinker shows that , over the course of history , there has been a dramatic decline in violence , both domestically and internationally – and that this downward trend is continuing through the post-Cold War years .
But the response of many reviewers to Pinker ’ s work has been incomprehension , denial , or a tenacious focus on individual horror stories , as though they somehow change the larger picture .
Many will be similarly slow to accept that when it comes to the most conscience-shocking classes of violence – genocide , ethnic cleansing , and other mass atrocities – dramatic progress has been made recently .
Those gains culminated in the interventions , unthinkable a decade ago , that the United Nations Security Council authorized this year to stop unfolding human-rights catastrophes in Côte d ’ Ivoire and Libya .
With progress like this , it is no longer fanciful to hope that never again will there be another Holocaust , Cambodia , Rwanda , or Srebrenica .
It is ten years since an international commission that I co-chaired gave birth to the concept of the Responsibility to Protect ( “ RtoP ” ) , and six years since more than 150 heads of state and government endorsed it unanimously at the UN ’ s World Summit in 2005 .
The core idea was simple : stop arguing for a “ right to intervene , ” which inevitably generates a backlash , and talk instead about “ responsibility ” – that of every state to protect its own citizens from atrocities , but also that of the wider international community to act if a state is unable or unwilling to do so .
The new concept also made clear that international protective action meant military coercion only in extreme and unavoidable cases .
The normal sequence would be assistance , persuasion , and non-military pressure like sanctions and criminal prosecution .
For some time after 2005 , it was possible to argue that all of this was hot air , and that fast , decisive action to respond to genocidal atrocities would remain as unlikely as ever .
The jury remained out even after Kenya in early 2008 , when horrific post-election violence was widely considered an RtoP case , and former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan led a successful diplomatic mission to persuade ethnic-group leaders to quell the storm .
But it was in Côte d ’ Ivoire , and especially in Libya early this year , that RtoP really came of age .
The two Security Council resolutions on Libya in February and March were textbook examples of a phased response to an increasingly desperate situation .
Invoking RtoP , that response began with a warning and the threat of sanctions and prosecution at the International Criminal Court , and only subsequently allowed military force to protect civilians . The threat was real , and the response – in terms of many thousands of lives saved – was unquestionably effective .
Other developments , both before and since , have reinforced and embedded the RtoP norm .
Even as the NATO-led intervention in Libya was being widely criticized for overreaching its narrow mandate , a major General Assembly debate in July 2011 reaffirmed overwhelming support among UN member states for the RtoP concept , in all of its dimensions .
The arguments now are not about the principle , but about how to apply it .
In particular , unlike previous situations – ranging from the Burmese response to Cyclone Nargis to the Sri Lankan military ’ s civilian massacres masquerading as a legitimate response to terrorist insurgency – there is little conceptual disagreement now about what are , and are not , “ RtoP cases . ”
For all of the lamentable inadequacy of the Security Council ’ s response to the situation in Syria , no one has seriously argued that it is not an RtoP case .
Moreover , there have been important institutional developments in terms of early-warning mechanisms and civilian and military preparedness , not least with President Barack Obama ’ s recent initiation in the United States of an interagency Atrocities Prevention Board .
Nobody denies that challenges remain in ensuring that RtoP is applied effectively and consistently .
An immediate need is to counter the perception that any condemnatory response to an unfolding RtoP situation means stepping onto a slippery slope to military confrontation – a perception that Russia and China heavily milked in seeking to justify their vote against an early-stage Security Council resolution on Syria .
It is crucial in this context that RtoP advocates continue to emphasize that coercive military force can be contemplated only in the most extreme and exceptional circumstances .
The best way to make that point would be to revive the dormant debate about adopting narrow guidelines for military intervention , as recommended by my commission and Secretary-General Annan prior to the UN vote in 2005 .
Clear criteria like “ last resort , ” “ proportionality , ” and “ balance of consequences ” would make it harder to use cynical diversionary tactics in the Security Council and elsewhere .
I have learned from long experience that to be optimistic about almost anything in international affairs is to run the risk of being thought ignorant or naïve , if not demented .
But , on the issue of mass-atrocity crimes – where the international community has long had good reason for shame – real optimism is now justified .
That is very good news indeed .
