The Return of Just Wars ?
SALZBURG – As war loomed over Kosovo ten years ago , Germany ’ s then foreign minister , Joschka Fischer , explained that the principle that had always governed his involvement in politics was : “ Never again war ; never again Auschwitz ! ”
Ethnic cleansing and violence in Kosovo , however , soon made it clear to him that there were moments when one had to choose between those two imperatives : a new Auschwitz sometimes could be prevented only by means of war .
The idea of a “ just war , ” legitimized by a justa causa ( just cause ) , though scorned for many years , is thus back in vogue .
The notion used to be frowned upon because any warring party tends to view its own cause as just .
Moreover , in the absence of an impartial judge , a winner can always impose his “ truth ” upon the vanquished , as happened with the Treaty of Versailles after World War I.
While “ just wars ” seem to be back , international law has also come to condemn waging aggressive ( “ unjust ” ) war as a punishable crime , with the consequence that every warring party now declares its wars to be a defense against foreign attack , much as Hitler did in 1939 .
( Indeed , all war ministries have become “ defense ministries , ” leaving one to wonder against whom a country must be defended if there are no longer any attackers . )
But in this matter as well , the winner gets to judge who was the aggressor , so it is fortunate that Hitler did not prevail .
Of course , military intervention for purposes beyond defending one ’ s country remains possible , but requires a UN Security Council resolution .
The latter alone , provided no permanent member of the Security Council disagrees , can decide whether a war is legitimized by a “ just cause ” ( nowadays generally a gross breach of human rights ) .
The Security Council ’ s permanent members thus remain legibus soluti , i.e. , sovereign in the seventeenth-century sense of the word , meaning “ able to do evil with impunity . ”
The right of humanitarian intervention limits the sovereignty of all other countries .
Behind this is the notion that respect for human rights can be enforced externally , together with the hope that rulers will behave better because they recognize that they may be held accountable for violating human rights .
Whether this hope is justified remains to be seen .
In the meantime , the return to the idea of a “ just cause ” carries big risks , especially evident when , as happened in Georgia , a great power claims the mantle of a protector of the rights of its nationals in a neighboring country .
If this idea stands , Russian minorities from the Baltic to the Crimea may turn out to be ticking time bombs .
The idea of the “ moral indifference ” of the law of war is based on the recognition that wars will not be eliminated , and that they should instead be limited and their horrors mitigated by universally applicable rules of conduct .
Precisely because it is less ambitious than the principle of “ just war , ” moral indifference has been tremendously successful in mitigating war ’ s horrors by banning some particularly inhuman types of weapons , forcing armies to protect civilians and accord humane treatment to prisoners of war , banning annexations , etc .
The pacifist Leo Tolstoy , in his novel War and Peace , regarded this pruning and tending of war as cynical .
Wars shouldn ’ t happen at all , he believed .
On the other hand , Tolstoy justified the unrestrained and unregulated eruption of public anger and the furious slaying of retreating French soldiers by Russian peasants .
Mao would approve .
Pacifists want to understand war as a lawless condition that should be abolished .
But those who recognize that humanity won ’ t succeed in stopping war seek , instead , to contain and “ humanize ” it .
The medieval Popes practiced this wisdom when they limited permissible wars to certain times of year .
But any “ last stand ” type of warfare refuses to recognize the possibility of a future war for which it may be a precedent .
Such a war will always be without rules , always a total war .
After all , when it ’ s do or die , no laws apply .
So the object of international law is not to ban “ unjust ” wars and permit “ just ” ones , but to assure that wars are waged for limited aims , so that they don ’ t rage out of control .
You have to be able to lose without losing everything .
The language of justice and injustice , and demands of unconditional surrender and criminal retribution for the vanquished only promote – indeed , provoke – total war .
The flip side of the criminalization of “ aggressive ” war is the fact that peace is also no longer a reliable legal state that can be ended only by a formal declaration of war .
When state leaders decide to bomb a city like Belgrade without any formal end to peace , they are not engaging in war , but in a form of state terrorism .
Terrorism will prevail if its mentality infects the civilized world , and if state leaders resort to terror to fight terror .
Fighting terrorism is not a war , because terrorism itself is not a warring party , but a means to an end .
Terrorists , when caught , are subject to criminal sanctions and punishment under the law .
Countries unwilling or unable to prevent terrorist violence emanating from their territory forfeit their right to territorial integrity , and others can declare war on them to pursue the problem at its root .
But those who adhere to the motto “ Terror can only be countered with terror ” should remember who coined that phrase : Adolf Hitler .
