The Target Zone Controversy
CAMBRIDGE : Target zones are the new buzz words in international policy debates .
The French call for new international monetary arrangements that will put paid to today 's supposedly benign neglect of currency fluctuations .
The Germans have jumped onto the bandwagon , and the Japanese , whether they mean it or not , express great interest .
Should we believe that target zones , to be discussed at the upcoming Cologne Summit , offer a blueprint for the Euro-dollar rate to move in a narrow range , and that the Yen will stop its wild dance ?
There is no chance that America will join a scheme that limits its flexibility and puts responsibility for US economic performance in the hands of financially inexperienced and statist-minded socialist governments .
Equally remote is the chance that the US will agree with Japan on narrow exchange rate margins ; the Japanese can 't manage their own economy , so why should America tie itself to their misfortunes ?
The superficial reason for target zones is that without large fluctuations between the dollar and the yen , the Asian currency crisis would not have happened .
True , the dollar / yen rate moved a lot in the last 5 years ; the Yen rose to 80Yen / $ 1 and dipped all the way to the 140Yen / $ 1 .
Currencies like Thailand 's bhat , then fixed to the dollar , went on a joy ride when the dollar weakened .
But they crashed when the Yen tumbled .
Much the same happened elsewhere in Asia .
Currency movements , however , were merely the straw that broke the camel 's back .
Asia 's crisis had much more to do with mountains of irresponsibly short debts and woeful banking systems .
They are where the dynamite was placed ; the dollar / yen rate was merely the spark that lit the fuse .
Avoiding financial crises , from Mexico to Brazil to Asia , requires sound domestic financial structures and good exchange rate policies .
So , don 't fix the dollar / Yen rate but find better exchange rate policies for emerging markets .
In Eastern Europe , including Russia , that means currency boards tied to the Euro ; in Latin America it means full dollarization and no more amateur management of exchange rates and central banks .
In Asia it means flexible exchange rates .
Target zones among the dollar , euro , and yen won 't help at all .
If emerging market problems are not a good reason for target zones , what about the risks of global instability provoked by vast international currency swings ?
Again , this is a non-reason .
In the past , on an ad hoc basis , governments got together on a few occasions where rates went far out of whack .
That was the case of the dollar in 1985 ; of the Yen in 1995 .
Ad hoc joint intervention worked impressively both times because rates had gotten so far out of line in the first place .
Speculators were scared when governments said " no further . "
There is every reason to believe that we could get the same ad-hoc joint intervention going should circumstances warrant today .
No government has an interest in fomenting an obviously bad situation .
But if ad-hoc intervention works , why not formalize it ?
Why not draw lines in the sand so the problem never emerges again ?
Here judgments part .
The French and the new German government like the idea of fixing anything that moves ; the British and Americans are deeply suspicious of market intervention .
They argue that intervening at extreme points demands little more than a show of force , but that intervening regularly needs much more to convince markets : it demands international coordination .
Both governments rightly point out that there is no such thing as coordination .
The US Congress will not accept European interference , the ECB will not take instructions from America 's Treasury , and Alan Greenspan wants his hands free to run the US economy .
All this is immutable fact .
Target zones will only sow confusion .
Europe 's love of target zones is not innocent .
European policymakers have two selfish reasons for promoting exchange rate bands .
First , they recognize that the dollar and Yen will weaken on the Euro this year — Japan 's dying and about to monetize its debt , the US stock market is running out of steam and with it the US economy .
Moreover , the Euro is attractive to portfolio investors .
The risk is that Europe 's unemployment problems will worsen as the euro 's value rises .
Here comes the second , hidden reason : Europe 's finance ministers cannot make the ECB march to their tune but they can negotiate international currency deals .
If there were a target zone and the Euro appreciated strongly , the ECB would be forced – like it or not — to cut interest rates and soften the euro .
Target zones are a backdoor way to restore political control over monetary policy .
Other arguments are just window dressing that should not fool anyone .
If that were all , the US might even agree .
But America will not accept exchange rate arrangements that jeopardize its prosperity .
Bringing Japan into the discussion is absurd .
In a pathetic spectacle of incompetence , Japan 's economy is sinking , its public finances moving to junk bond status .
Japan cannot jump-start a recovery , cannot limit its deficits or at least make them produce growth , it cannot decide whether its central bank should monetize debt , cannot decide on a strong or weak Yen .
It is inconceivable that Japan could function in a target zone .
European governments are manipulating the fear caused by trembling capital markets and the crashing third world currencies to shape what looks like a responsible , internationalist agenda .
They want to drag the US into a domestic debate about the ECB .
They will fail and must settle for castigating America as a dogmatic free marketeer , which it is .
Europeans would do better to look for a more competitive and dynamic economy so that the exchange rate becomes a less desperate battle .
Forget target zones .
Markets may be irrational at times , but more often than not socialist policymakers are worse .
