The Struggle for Mastery of the Pacific
TOKYO – On May 1 , the Shanghai Expo began , illuminated by a huge fireworks display .
The festivities will continue until the end of October .
In 1970 , Japan celebrated its own tremendous postwar economic growth with the Osaka Expo , as well as by launching the Bullet Train .
The world watches and wonders whether China will follow Japan ’ s path and emerge as a fully modern yet peacefully inclined country .
There are reasons to doubt that it will .
China ’ s willingness to demonstrate its new might is not confined to land ; on the contrary , China ’ s maritime ambitions have no end in sight .
Indeed , when Admiral Timothy J. Keating , the commander of the United States Navy ’ s Pacific fleet , visited China in 2007 , a high-ranking Chinese naval officer proposed that the two countries demarcate a “ zone of control ” at Hawaii , defining the limits of US naval influence and the beginning of China ’ s maritime sphere .
The Chinese navy , it is now believed , is trying to achieve that very aim .
China ’ s ambition is marked by muscle flexing .
On April 8 , a helicopter from a Chinese naval vessel operating in international waters south of Okinawa came within 90 meters of a Japanese Self-Defense Force escort ship – so close that a gun-wielding Chinese soldier was clearly visible .
Japan protested , describing the incident as an “ extremely dangerous act . ”
As if demonstrating its intention to ignore the protest , on April 21 Chinese Navy vessels sailed northward , between Okinawa and the Miyako islands , and conducted a large-scale exercise .
Once again , a Chinese military helicopter circled a Japanese escort ship .
Although reconnaissance flights by Russia ’ s Air Force frequently occur in Japan ’ s northern skies , both countries understand the need for caution in their actions .
The Japanese and Chinese militaries , however , do not have sufficient ties to create confidence that caution will prevail .
To prevent an accident from inciting a volatile incident , it is imperative that the two sides develop a deeper bilateral military dialogue .
Nothing of the sort is happening .
Moreover , Japan ’ s government has encouraged Chinese regional ambitions by embracing an anti-American attitude similar to the administration of South Korea ’ s former president , Roh Moo-hyun .
By promising in last summer ’ s election campaign to expel America ’ s bases on Okinawa , Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama put himself in a bind .
It now appears that he wants to backtrack on his promise , but massive protests are inhibiting him from doing so .
Sensing a widening gulf between Japan and the US , the Chinese Navy is demonstrating its growing might in the seas around Japan – and asserting its aspiration to replace the US as the Pacific ’ s dominant naval power .
There is a precedent for this : when the US closed Subic Bay Naval Base and Clark Air Force Base in the Philippines , the Chinese military immediately stepped up its activity around the Spratly Islands , which are recognized as Filipino territory but which China is claiming vehemently .
China ’ s struggle for mastery in the Pacific is now raising fears in Japan .
South of Okinawa is Yonaguni Island , with a population of just 1,800 and visible from Taiwan on a clear day .
Within Japan , there is growing controversy over the Hatoyama government ’ s push for a law that would allow particular foreign residents on the island to vote in local elections .
The inhabitants of Yonaguni strongly oppose the law , not because they are exclusionary , but because they believe that they are protecting a sensitive border .
Because a mere 137 votes can get a town council member elected , a large number of foreigners with a particular interest in moving onto the island could nominate a winning candidate .
The worry is that such a council could legislate in ways “ friendly ” to neighboring states , which might compromise Japan ’ s national security dramatically .
Even Hatoyama ’ s defense minister , Toshimi Kitazawa , who had been prone to naïve remarks on the issue , appears to have come to his senses .
He is now calling for the construction of a Self-Defense Force base on Yonaguni .
But the situation on the island demonstrates anew that China is prepared to take advantage of every misstep that the gaffe-prone Hatoyama government makes .
And it is not just the waters near Japan that should concern Hatoyama , for the Chinese Navy is not only eyeing the Pacific , but also steering toward South Asia , the Indian Ocean , the Middle East , and Africa .
Indeed , the growing contest between India and China is not only military in nature , but also concerns the acquisition of natural resources .
By controlling the sea lanes , China hopes to gain leverage over India ’ s capacity for economic growth .
Chinese military expansion has seen double-digit annual growth for 22 years .
Although Chinese officials say that the 2010 military budget has been restrained , and will grow by only 7.5 % , China ’ s military expenditures already exceeds those of Japan by 15 % .
In fact , China probably limited the increase this year after recognizing that the international community is becoming alarmed by the steep upward trajectory of its military build-up .
But there remain doubts about the true level of China ’ s military spending , owing to a pronounced lack of transparency in the budget process .
It remains unclear , for example , whether the research and development costs for an aircraft carrier are included .
History has repeatedly demonstrated that such ambiguity , particular if practiced by a rising power , can spark an arms race .
The secretive naval build-up of Kaiser Wilhelm II ’ s Germany , for example , helped incite World War I. US President John F. Kennedy ’ s belief that a “ missile gap ” existed in the Soviet Union ’ s favor inspired the production of multiple-warhead nuclear missiles , accelerating the nuclear arms race at the height of the Cold War .
China claims that it is entitled to play a role in setting the rules that govern the international system .
China should , of course , play such a part .
But until China acts with greater sincerity and transparency in eliminating the international community ’ s concerns , it runs the risk that its neighbors will not only suspect its efforts in the international arena , but take active countermeasures to defend their security .
