A Prisoner ’ s Reflections on Nelson Mandela
KHARKIV – Incarceration is said to leave you with a feeling of helplessness and vulnerability .
But the truth of life for a political prisoner , even for one on a hunger strike , is the opposite .
As a prisoner , I have been forced to focus on what is essential about myself , my political beliefs , and my country .
So I can almost feel the presence of the brave women and men , old and young , who have gathered in Kyiv and other Ukrainian cities to defend their dreams of a democratic and European future .
In prison , your hopes and dreams become your reality .
I am sure that Nelson Mandela would have understood my feelings and agreed .
The South African apartheid regime may have locked him away for almost three decades , but in the great Soweto protests and the other demonstrations for freedom and equality , courageous young South Africans invariably looked to his example and felt his presence .
Around the world , most people now rightly celebrate the gentle dignity with which Mandela led South Africa out of the political wilderness .
Even here , behind prison bars and 24-hour surveillance of the type that he experienced for so long , I can conjure the warmth of his broad smile , merry eyes , and those colorful Hawaiian-style shirts that he wore with such panache .
And I can admire his unyielding – and , yes , sometimes wily – commitment to reconciliation , which saved his country from the race war that those who refused to accept the end of white-minority rule saw as inevitable .
How wrong they were , and how miraculous was Mandela ’ s achievement in making even his most implacable enemies feel at home in post-apartheid South Africa .
But here , in this place , it is not Mandela the statesman who touches my soul and fires my imagination .
“ My ” Mandela is the prisoner , the Mandela of Robben Island , who endured 27 years behind bars ( 18 of them on a rock in the South Atlantic ) and yet emerged with his spirit intact , brimming with a vision of a tolerant South Africa , a country liberated even for apartheid ’ s architects and beneficiaries .
No purges marked the end of white rule .
There were no witch-hunts , nor was there summary justice .
All that Mandela demanded was that the truth about the past be revealed .
Through the unique innovation of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission , Mandela found the only viable bridge between his country ’ s racist legacy and its multi-racial present and future – a combination of political genius and humane wisdom that only the greatest of leaders possess .
Mandela was able to guide South Africa to freedom , because he was able to see its future more clearly than those who lived through the apartheid years outside of prison .
Indeed , he possessed that rare clarity of moral vision that prison – perhaps like no other environment – can nurture .
Imprisonment brought Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn this clarity as well .
“ Gradually it was disclosed to me that the line separating good and evil passes not through states , nor between classes , nor between political parties , either – but right through every human heart – and through all human hearts , ” he wrote in The Gulag Archipelago .
“ This line shifts … .And even within hearts overwhelmed by evil , one small bridgehead of good is retained .
And even in the best of all hearts , there remains ... an un-uprooted small corner of evil . ”
The ability to begin to see more clearly than most the inner workings of the human soul is one of the few gifts that imprisonment can bestow .
Forced to reckon with your own vulnerability , isolation , and losses ( and seemingly lost cause ) , you learn to look more carefully into the human heart – yours and that of your jailers .
Mandela epitomized this rare gift .
How else could he have personally invited one of his Robben Island jailers to attend his inauguration as South Africa ’ s first democratically elected president ?
Of course , behind Mandela ’ s generous spirit was a character of steel .
He bore his imprisonment for the sake of his cause .
And he bore the anguish of the suffering imposed on his family .
And yet he neither broke nor surrendered to the rage that would have consumed most people .
As usual , Mandela ’ s own words about his day of personal liberation show how well he understood this : “ As I walked out the door toward the gate that would lead to my freedom , I knew if I didn ’ t leave my bitterness and hatred behind , I ’ d still be in prison . ”
And just as Mandela knew in his prison cell that apartheid would one day fall , I know in my solitude that Ukraine ’ s ultimate triumph as a European democracy is certain .
