What Reset Button ?
MOSCOW – The emergence of a Kremlin leader , President Dmitri Medvedev , without a KGB background , combined with the economic crisis , has inspired talk that when Barack Obama visits Moscow , America ’ s president will be seeing a country on the verge of a new political thaw , a revived perestroika .
But pushing the “ re-set button ” on US-Russia relations may be harder than Obama and his team imagined .
Russian ( or Soviet ) leaders opt for perestroika or a thaw only when forced to do so by dire conditions that threaten the regime ’ s survival .
An atmosphere of mortal fear , mutual suspicion , and hatred among the Communist elite was the catalyst for Nikita Khrushchev ’ s post-Stalin thaw .
For Mikhail Gorbachev in the 1980 ’ s , the catalyst for his perestroika was the USSR ’ s growing economic paralysis .
For both men , the goal of clinging to power was a top priority .
Changing the system and easing their grip on power was a risky move that could undermine their authority .
But the risks of inertia seemed to be even higher .
In the end , having opted for change , both were forced to leave their posts prematurely , against their will .
As he revived centralized Kremlin control over Russian politics and public affairs , Vladimir Putin has been concerned primarily with minimizing challenges to state power , which he concentrated in his own hands .
To this end , he stripped the political system of competition , emasculated state institutions , marginalized the opposition , and basically eliminated public participation .
His power-building project was facilitated by high oil prices , but came at the cost of a steady deterioration in the quality of governance and abandonment of the goal of modernization .
With policymaking fully nontransparent and reduced to a very closed circle , and implementation delegated to an unaccountable bureaucracy , the inevitable result of Putin ’ s political model was pervasive corruption .
The desire to avoid public discontent and ensure social stability led to a suspension of reform .
Instead of creating incentives that would unleash public energies , the government pushed citizens farther and farther from politics and policymaking , thereby deepening social apathy and atomization .
Moreover , the opportunity provided by the oil boom was wasted .
Indeed , today Russia risks lagging even further behind the developed countries .
Its economy remains undiversified and uncompetitive , and its contribution to global technological progress is minuscule .
Worse still , economic growth based on exports of natural resources has proved unsustainable .
When oil prices were high and growing , the government could compensate for poor performance by throwing money at problems .
Today , with oil prices dramatically reduced , this largesse is no longer available , and economic experts agree that the growth potential of Russia ’ s petro-economy has been exhausted .
Despite all this , the situation is not sufficiently dire to push Russia ’ s leaders to open at least some channels of genuine public participation and yield any of their power .
The price of oil , at around $ 70 a barrel , may be half of what it was a year ago , but up from around $ 40 earlier this year .
Nor does the Russian economy ’ s contraction and the expected deepening of poverty ( the World Bank ’ s report released in late June was grimmer about Russia than its previous report ) presage an immediate catastrophe .
And , unlike in the late 1980 ’ s and 1990 ’ s , Russia is not indebted to foreign banks or international organizations , though it plans to resume foreign borrowing next year .
So the government will prefer to muddle through the crisis , rather than risk any decisive reform .
The goal of clinging to power remains the priority , and risk-aversion the main guideline .
The ruling elite are known to be torn by disputes and rivalries .
Just recently , two of Putin ’ s deputies gave interviews to two Western media outlets offering what sounded like starkly opposite visions for Russia ’ s development .
But such disputes never spill over into the broad public sphere ; members of the elite are primarily concerned about social and political stability and would not stir the public by seeking support for an alternative policy course .
These delaying tactics are enabled by a lack of pressure from below .
Russians may be concerned by growing unemployment and reduced incomes , but this is not manifesting itself in any drive to organize or try to effect political change .
The public below , just like the leaders above , cherish political stability ; the popularity ratings of both Prime Minister Putin and President Dmitri Medvedev remain above 70 % .
Disgruntlement over the increasingly authoritarian governance may be common among business circles , elements of the neutered political opposition , liberal intellectuals , and even part of the bureaucracy .
But these forces are too timid and fragmented , with no drive for political action .
The current government ’ s tactic of muddling through without changing the political system or the structure of the economy is fraught with the risk of gradual decline .
To the Kremlin ’ s rulers , this may seem an acceptable cost for retaining power , but postponing reform will only aggravate Russia ’ s countless problems .
Besides , muddling through may prove unaffordable even in the short run , if oil prices decline again .
A dramatic curtailment of state resources may eventually push the government toward modernization , but it might also produce an uglier shift — toward harder political crackdown , economic nationalism and an essentially isolationist course .
This would be catastrophic for Russia — to say nothing of relations with the US .
