What Next after Failed Sanctions on Iran ?
LOS ANGELES amp # 45 ; amp # 45 ; The approval of fresh sanctions on Iran marks the third time that the United Nations Security Council has been galvanized to stem the Islamic Republic ’ s feared uranium enrichment efforts .
Unfortunately , the new sanctions are unlikely to be any more effective than the first two rounds .
Consider the two earlier Security Council resolutions .
The December 2006 resolution curbed international assistance to Iran in mastering the nuclear fuel cycle .
The March 2007 resolution called for “ vigilance and restraint ” in the sale of heavy weapons to Iran and avoidance of new grants , financial assistance , or concessional loans .
Neither moved the country ’ s ruling mullahs .
Few expect a different outcome from the new sanctions , which authorize international interception of Iranian contraband and tightened monitoring of the regime ’ s financial institutions , along with travel limitations and asset freezes applied to people and companies involved in Iran ’ s nuclear program .
The failure of targeted UN sanctions should come as no surprise .
The US has been on the sanctions treadmill for years .
Between 2003 and 2007 the US Treasury Department brought litigation against 94 companies for violating the ban against trade and investment in Iran . The State Department imposed sanctions 111 times against foreign entities that engaged in proliferation or terrorism-related activities with Iran .
And both departments have used their power to freeze financial assets or access to the US financial system .
The results amounted to little more than a pin prick .
Iran ’ s nuclear programs continued to be financed by international commerce .
In 1994 , Iran exported $ 37 billion in goods ; by 2007 , the figure had nearly doubled , to $ 70 billion . In roughly the same period , Iran ’ s imports also soared , from $ 22 billion in 1994 to $ 45 billion in 2006 .
Evaluating two decades of US sanctions to curb Iran ’ s nuclear appetite , the US Congress ’ s Government Accountability Office recently concluded that the results are “ unclear , ” adding with candid obliqueness that “ some evidence , such as foreign firms signing contracts to invest in Iran ’ s energy and Iran ’ s continued proliferation efforts , raise questions about the extent of the sanctions ’ impact . ”
Not only have sanctions failed to halt Iran ’ s fuel cycle programs , but so have other avenues .
The European Union ’ s multiple offers of political and economic inducements went nowhere , as did cajoling by the International Atomic Energy Agency .
To be sure Iran offered , in 2005 and subsequently , to tether its program to international co-management , which arguably could have placed resident international monitors on site .
But both the international community and Iran failed to follow through , and now that opportunity has increasingly become moot as Iranian engineers gain confidence in their handiwork .
Some hope that the next US administration can stem Iran ’ s nuclear ambitions through bilateral diplomacy .
But Europe ’ s negotiating experience raises doubts about that prospect , as Iran remains unequivocal about never abandoning its nuclear fuel cycle program .
Assuming that concern over Iran ’ s nuclear “ breakout ” capacity mounts , this leaves the US and its allies with three options , each with its own risks .
First , a naval blockade ( reminiscent of the Cuban missile crisis ) that halted both Iran ’ s oil exports and imports of refined fuel would cripple the country ’ s economy .
But the US military would have to be able to prevent Iran from closing the Strait of Hormuz , through which much of the world ’ s oil supply passes .
A halt in Iran ’ s oil exports alone would dramatically upset international oil markets , and the Iranian leadership would likely dig in its heels to continue , if not accelerate , nuclear development .
Second , while a military strike would slow Iran ’ s nuclear program , facilities could be rebuilt in the absence of inspectors to find and destroy remnants , regime change , and / or military occupation .
Moreover , the attack shock could trigger Iranian vengeance regionally and elsewhere , with a global economic impact far exceeding that implied by a blockade .
This leaves an unsettling fallback option .
An Iran on the cusp of becoming a nuclear-armed state confronting a nuclear-armed Israel bringing its bomb out of the basement .
In that event , there remains the hope that mutual nuclear deterrence will promote mutual common sense .
Absent a dramatic improvement in the Middle East ’ s grim political landscape , the failure of deterrence would bring the sum of all the fears of our nuclear age upon us .
