Yugoslavia and the Paradox of International Human
CHICAGO : NATO 's stated reason for bombing Yugoslavia is to enforce international law prohibitions on war crimes , crimes against humanity , and perhaps even genocide .
United States officials in particular justify NATO 's attacks in legalistic terms .
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright maintains that NATO is bombing " to uphold the law . "
The U.S. Senate is pressuring President Clinton to ensure that the war crimes tribunal in The Hague indicts Slobodan Milosevic .
David Scheffer , the U.S. Ambassador for War Crimes , proclaims NATO 's unprecedented enforcement of human rights to be a " watershed " for international law .
The problem with these legalistic arguments is that NATO itself is flouting international law .
The NATO operation shows how the efficacy of international human rights law depends on its selective application .
NATO is violating international law in order to uphold it , and NATO would not be upholding international law if it were subject to it .
Most egregiously , NATO has violated the United Nations Charter .
In large part out of concern for human rights , the Charter prohibits one nation 's use of force against another unless the Security Council authorizes the attack or unless the attack is a self-defensive response to armed aggression across recognized borders .
NATO 's attack satisfies neither pre-condition .
The illegality of NATO 's attack , combined with NATO 's destruction of civilian targets , might also constitute war crimes .
Yugoslavia is pressing many of these legal claims before the International Court of Justice .
In addition , as the UN 's chief human rights officer recently noted , NATO 's possible war crimes fall within the jurisdiction of the same war crimes tribunal that might indict Mr. Milosevic .
NATO and U.S. officials who rail against the illegality of Yugoslavia 's atrocities in Kosovo scoff at claims that NATO 's bombing might violate international law .
These officials confuse the motive for NATO 's actions with the legality of such actions .
NATO 's intervention was motivated in part by humanitarian concerns , and in part by the need to resolve a crisis of credibility and purpose .
But NATO ' s motives , benign or not , are no defense to illegality .
None of this is to suggest that NATO 's illegal acts will be remedied by the institutions of international law .
International Court of Justice decisions are frequently ignored , especially by the United States .
The war crimes tribunal in The Hague , established and dominated by western countries , will never indict , much less convict , a NATO official .
And no country is likely to bomb a NATO country to redress NATO violations of international law in the Balkans .
In short , NATO is immune from the very international laws it purports to enforce .
NATO 's opportunistic invocation of international human rights law is but one example of the broader double standard that characterizes this law .
The United States is the worst perpetrator of the double standard .
No nation on earth more aggressively enforces international human rights law against other countries .
And no nation on earth more aggressively resists the application of international human rights law to itself .
The United States stands nearly alone in refusing to join the Land Mine Treaty , the Rights of the Child Convention , or the International Criminal Court .
When it does ratify human rights treaties , it renders them inapplicable to U.S. officials .
And though the United States invokes international human rights institutions when doing so suits its purposes , it renounces these institutions when they attempt to assert jurisdiction over the United States .
This human rights law double standard can be defended , to a point .
The U.S. provides extraordinary ( though imperfect ) human rights protections within its borders in virtue of its domestic legal system .
So its failure to apply international human rights law in its domestic sphere makes little practical difference to the rights available there .
The United States resists application of human rights law to its activities abroad because it has unique human rights enforcement obligations , and thus potential exposure to the strictures of human rights law .
That said , the United States ' opportunistic use of human rights law rhetoric -- on full display in the Balkans conflict -- still seems hypocritical .
The double standard that underlies this hypocrisy , however , is an inevitable feature of international human rights law .
International law is often criticized as toothless because it lacks a dependable centralized enforcement mechanism .
Some aspects of international law -- for example , principles of diplomatic immunity , or international communications standards -- have little need for such a sanctioning authority .
These rules provide reciprocal benefits and are thus largely self-enforcing .
Not so with international human rights law .
If one nation -- say , Yugoslavia -- is otherwise inclined to abuse its citizens , it will perceive no reciprocal benefit from compliance with an international norm that requires greater respect for human rights .
A nation like Yugoslavia is unlikely to comply with international human rights law unless other nations -- say , NATO -- sanction non-compliance .
Such sanctions are very costly to impose .
This is why most violations of international human rights law go unredressed .
It is also why the rare enforcement of human rights law that we do see tends to conform to the enforcing nation 's political interests .
For example , the U.S. government intervenes in Haiti to avoid a flood of refugees and imposes sanctions on Cuba because of domestic political benefits .
But it does not sanction Turkey or China for their human rights abuses , because such sanctions are strategically too costly .
International human rights law thus depends on powerful nations for enforcement , which in turn means that powerful nations are not subject to this law when they violate it .
Whether the illegality of human rights enforcement actions ultimately matters will depend on the success of these actions .
At this point , it is far from obvious that the humanitarian benefits of NATO 's intervention will outweigh the costs of the intervention -- costs measured in lives lost as a result of NATO acts and in the larger danger that the intervention poses to international order .
