The Sons Also Rise
The looming succession of Ilam Aliyev to replace his dying father , Haider Aliyev , as Azerbaijan 's ruler marks a triumph of nepotism on a scale other postcommunist leaders can only dream about .
But Azerbaijan 's dynastic politics are hardly exceptional .
One Bush has practically succeeded another as America 's president , and the son of Singapore 's founder , Lee Kwan Hew , is to become the country 's premier .
Indeed , democratic leaders with dynastic dreams have bedeviled India , the Philippines , Indonesia , Sri Lanka , Haiti , and many other countries .
Despite Communists ' self-proclaimed " divine right " to a monopoly on power , other systems have proven far more vulnerable to monarchist seizures .
Until the Aliyev 's came along , only North Korea 's utterly loony Kim Il Sung managed to anoint his son atop a red throne .
Otherwise , communist patriarchs--and their often scarcely more democratic postcommunist successors--have not seen fit to pitch their bloodlines against the sprawling institutional bureaucracy left behind by Leninism .
Why ?
By its nature communism--whose bureaucracy still exists in almost unadulterated form in the countries of the former Soviet Union--spawned lobbies and clans with a combined might that even the closest-knit family can scarcely expect to overcome .
As a result , postcommunists prefer to place their offspring in lucrative commercial jobs where they can pile up foreign-currency fortunes .
( Even President Aliyev groomed his son for power by installing him as vice-president of SOCAR , the vastly lucrative state oil monopoly . )
Kim Jong Il 's father similarly ensured a smooth succession a decade ago by appointing family members to positions of power for 40 years , clearing the way by sending the incumbents to concentration camps .
But another reason behind North Korea 's dynastic succession was that Kim Il Sung created a national ideology , Juche , that mixed communism with a heavy dose of Confucian values .
Confucianism exalts an idealized bond between father and son as the model for all human relations .
As sons must revere fathers , so subjects must revere their rulers .
Perhaps this " Confucian factor " is playing some part in Singapore 's succession .
In " The Communist Manifesto , " Marx and Engels dismissed the family as the product and protector of private gain .
Such ideas were hardly new .
In Plato 's ideal republic , children would be separated from their parents at birth , so that " no mother shall know her own child . "
In the brave new world of postrevolutionary Russia , Anatoli Lunacharski looked forward to freedom from the mutual relations of husbands , wives , fathers , children , so you could not tell who was related to whom and how closely .
A glimpse of what it meant to be the child of a very top leader can be found in Svetlana Stalin 's account of her brother , Vasily . " He lived in a big government dacha with an enormous staff , a stable and kennels , all of course at government expense . . .
They gave him medals , higher and higher ranks , horses , automobiles , privileges , everything . "
An alcoholic , Vasily was a lieutenant-general before 30 and air commander of the Moscow military district .
For all the theorizing of Plato and Marx , the family seems to prevail unless other social institutions counteract or supersede it .
Nepotism , patronage within the family circle , is thus a natural way for anybody in power , or aspiring to it , to strengthen his support in societies where other institutions are weak or non-existent , or where the destruction of existing institutions forms part of the power-grabber 's intentions .
Nepotism as a means of security is readily seen in the successful revolutionary 's habit of appointing a brother or cousin to run the army : Fidel Castro did so in Cuba , Daniel Ortega in Nicaragua , Hafez Assad in Syria , and Saddam Hussein in Iraq .
It is also a way of " banking " the spoils of power with a view to living off the interest later .
Relatives can work at jobs which it would be improper or inconvenient for the family 's head to be seen doing himself .
For example , most modern societies , including postcommunist ones , favor a division between the makers of big money and the holders of high office because of the conflicts between public and private interest .
( Italy and Signor Berlusconi are a big exception here . )
If the jobs of ruling and moneymaking are shared across generations , or among brothers or cousins or in-laws , criticism is more easily deflected .
Nepotism of this type is practically the organizing principle of big business in China , where most lucrative deals involve the " princelings , " the offspring of the communist leaders , who number perhaps 3,000-4,000 .
If and when communism collapses in China , the piling-up of fortunes within leading families will probably have played a crucial role by persuading those leaders that life can offer pursuits even more rewarding than the struggle for socialism .
All of this is fine for those who practice nepotism .
The problem is that the public 's loss is usually far greater than the family 's gain .
This is not necessarily because ruling families appropriate so much that they impoverish everybody else .
Far more damaging is the simple fact that when a closed group monopolizes much of society 's power and wealth , initiative and enterprise are stifled in the wider population .
Queues of astrologers now reportedly camp outside the young Aliyev 's home in Baku .
However , the true danger to all would-be 21st Century dynasts lies not in their stars , but in themselves .
