Barroso Overboard ?
BRUSSELS – It is time for José Manuel Barroso to start selling himself .
His chances of being re-appointed as President of the European Commission depend on the case he makes .
Until the global financial crisis broke , Barroso looked fairly certain to get a second five-year term .
Now , it is becoming increasingly hard to find diplomats or policymakers who support him .
French President Nicolas Sarkozy is said to have been disappointed by Barroso ’ s performance during last autumn 's financial meltdown , and German Chancellor Angela Merkel also seems to have fallen silent on the matter of his future .
No one doubts that Barroso is in an awkward position .
The European Commission has few powers of its own with which to confront the recession as it spreads throughout the European Union ; most powers belong to the European Central Bank .
But the Commission does have a voice with which to rally people , and it is for their silence that Barroso and his fellow commissioners are being rebuked .
The perceived lack of leadership from the Commission at this time of deepening economic gloom is just the tip of the iceberg .
The events of recent months have crystallized more deep-seated concerns .
When Barroso , the former Portuguese prime minister , was awarded the EU post by his fellow heads of government , he appeared to be a dynamic new broom who would sweep away the cobwebs left by his predecessor , Italy ’ s Romano Prodi .
But , with the passage of time , the Barroso-led Commission has also come under fire for being unadventurous and lacklustre .
Even before the clouds of recession began to gather , Euroskepticism was on the rise , with the Commission blamed , rightly or wrongly , for the EU ’ s failure “ to reach out to the citizen . ”
The job of Commission President is arguably among the most difficult in the world .
The institution has been in near-imperceptible decline for almost 20 years , thanks to the rise of the European Parliament and the way EU member governments have whittled away its authority while consolidating their own powers as the EU ’ s true legislators .
Yet the head of the Commission is called upon to be the dynamic public face of Europe .
The Commission ’ s own internal culture of cautiousness and red tape is a constraint that nobody in Brussels much likes to talk about .
It is not a structure that is conducive to political coups de theâtre , and most of the Commission ’ s work is the relentless grind of EU regulation and re-regulation .
But the bottom line is that at a time when everyone is asking , “ What is Europe doing ? ” , the Commission ’ s responses have seemed inadequate .
For reasons that are now obscure , there is an unwritten rule that Commission presidents must be drawn from the ranks of past or current prime ministers .
This has in large part accounted for Barroso ’ s high hopes of getting a second term .
There was , it appeared , no other credible candidate to challenge him .
For his part , Barroso is widely seen as having avoided controversy throughout 2008 in order not to risk offending any governments that might have been inclined to block his reappointment .
That seeming passivity is now his greatest problem .
France ’ s presidency of the EU during the second half of 2008 showed that dynamic leadership is a quality widely appreciated by the European public .
With his sense of showmanship , Sarkozy almost effortlessly eclipsed Barroso when handling the Russia-Georgia crisis in August , followed by the EU ’ s responses to the autumn crisis of cascading bank collapses .
The Commission was left on the sidelines .
What is to be done ?
France ’ s successful presidency has intensified doubts about the effectiveness of the Commission and its president , so much so that even in Paris concerns are being voiced that the Brussels executive must somehow be strengthened if it is not to become a mere secretariat .
EU governments have wanted a pliable Commission , but now the cost could be the death of the “ community method ” that protects the EU against national frictions .
Barroso needs to respond to all these doubts .
If he is to reassure EU national leaders that they should re-appoint him , then he needs to signal that his second term can hold out fresh promise .
He is good at giving upbeat speeches , but this will not be enough .
Some sort of plan is needed .
When he arrived in Brussels in 2004 , Barroso was repeatedly asked whether he had a “ big idea ” for Europe ’ s future .
Back then , he did not need one to be appointed .
This time , he must produce one if he is to save his skin .
