A Watershed Doctrine for America
LOS ANGELES – As the United States stumbles through its economic challenges at home , the pressure of world events will not subside .
But America ’ s ability to address them has changed .
Its fiscal weakness limits its ability to act as global policeman .
Despite the relatively costless overthrow of the Qaddafi regime , America ’ s prolonged interventions in Afghanistan and Iraq have severely strained the public ’ s tolerance for an active foreign policy .
Nonetheless , the US seems destined to remain the world ’ s most important actor for the foreseeable future .
But today it is an actor without a script – it lacks a strategic guide comparable to the Cold War ’ s containment doctrine to prioritize policy .
Quite simply , the ad hoc policymaking that directed interventions in the Balkans , Somalia , southwest Asia , and the Middle East in the past two decades will not suffice in this new era of limitations .
This suggests that the US should seek out an overarching strategy to discipline its impulses to fight wars of choice or engage in nation-building efforts .
President Barack Obama ’ s 2010 National Security Strategy nurtures broad policy aspirations – “ [ n ] ow we must position the United States to champion mutual interests among nations and peoples ” – but falls short as a practical guide .
I suggest an alternative strategy , one already embedded in America history , though largely unrecognized .
But making explicit what lies implicit can sharpen US decision-making .
I call this strategy the “ Watershed Doctrine . ”
A watershed is a tipping point , a turning point , a game changer .
When the US has confronted a “ negative watershed ” – a lethal threat to the country – it committed meaningful financial and human resources in order to address the risks .
Positive watersheds – opportunities to engineer seismic shifts in international or regional political affairs through nation-building , or to use economic and military assistance to prevent plausible negative watersheds – demand an equal level of commitment .
The Watershed concept provides policymakers with a standard to use – or at the very least to debate .
It is an organizing tool for policymaking : Is an international challenge a watershed or not ?
If so , get involved .
If not , stay out .
We find watersheds throughout American history .
The War of 1812 and the Civil War are clear examples .
Had American forces not expelled the British from US territory in the first , and had Abraham Lincoln and the Union not prevailed in the second , the country would have been balkanized and unable to become the dominant power of the twentieth century .
By contrast , America ’ s flirtation with colonialism in the Spanish American War , its involvement in Mexico , Central America , and the Caribbean throughout the twentieth century , and , arguably , World War I , were not watersheds for the US .
But America ’ s inability after the Great War to overcome Old World politics at Versailles and isolationism at home marked a failed opportunity to promote a positive watershed .
That failure placed the world on the path to the negative watershed posed by Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan .
Nothing foreordained that the US and its allies would prevail .
Had the Axis ’ s negative watershed succeeded , the US would have become a far different country .
A positive watershed , under-appreciated today , developed in the years immediately after World War II with the political transformation of Germany and Japan .
America ’ s remarkable investment of resources in this outcome made both countries stable , peaceful democracies , thereby eliminating them as adversaries and turning them into vital bulwarks against the next harbinger of a negative watershed , the Soviet Union .
Unlike the battle against the Axis , the US fought the Cold War in many ways , on many fronts , and over many decades – using politics , economics , and nuclear deterrence , as well as limited armed action , to ensure the USSR ’ s containment .
In time , the US had to accept that each political contest or military battle lost was not a watershed as long as its core interests in Europe , the Far East , and Latin America were not threatened .
Through trial and error – backed by a durable political and economic system – the US prevailed and the Soviet Union disintegrated .
The rise of Islamic fundamentalism poses another historic challenge , though one that is far more inchoate than any that the US has faced before .
In other times , the challenge would not even be called a watershed .
But the risk that weapons of mass destruction could be turned against the US makes it so .
Then there is the “ Arab Spring , ” a potential positive watershed that calls upon the US to decide how deep a political , economic , and military commitment it ought to make to nurture positive results .
Today , the US is a more sober and realistic country than it was in the heyday of the early post-Cold War period .
But , in the aftermath of setbacks in regions where it intervened , and with heightened economic distress at home , the US finds itself uncertain about how to respond to changing global events .
Pursuing a “ Watershed Doctrine ” might provide the right answer .
