Heeding History in East Asia
SEOUL – Chinese , South Korean , and Japanese diplomats recently took to the podium of the United Nations General Assembly to reassert their countries ’ positions on the territorial issues surrounding several small islands in the seas of East Asia .
But the composed manner in which they delivered their remarks belied their countries ’ long-simmering tensions over the islands , which have come to a near boil in the last few months .
At the center of one heated dispute , between China and Japan , are the Senkaku Islands , which the Chinese call the Diaoyu Islands .
In September , Japan ’ s government announced its purchase of three of the islands from their private Japanese owner , inciting protests across China .
Soon after , hundreds of Chinese fishing vessels approached the islands to assert China ’ s sovereignty .
These vessels have lately been joined by an increasing number of Chinese surveillance forces , which periodically enter the waters surrounding the islands , sometimes leading to direct confrontation with Japanese patrol ships .
With the situation threatening to escalate further , both sides need to contain the conflict quickly and restore the status quo .
Indeed , the situation is all the more volatile in view of the political transition now underway in China .
Meanwhile , the Republic of Korea and Japan are engaged in a territorial standoff over the islets of Dokdo ( called Takeshima in Japanese ) .
In early August , Lee Myung-bak became the first South Korean president to visit the islets ; Japan ’ s government responded by proposing to take the sovereignty issue to the International Court of Justice .
But the ICJ cannot exercise jurisdiction in the dispute without both countries ’ consent , and South Korea has rejected Japan ’ s proposal , maintaining that Lee was within his authority to visit the islets , given that Dokdo is unquestionably South Korean territory .
Indeed , South Korea ’ s government denies that there is any dispute over the islands .
Historical context is crucial to assessing the Dokdo issue .
Like the rest of Korea , Dokdo was annexed by Japan in the early twentieth century , and restored to Korean control after World War II , when Korea regained its independence .
Thus , while outsiders might view the desolate islands as insignificant , for Koreans , Japan ’ s position on Dokdo is tantamount to a challenge to their country ’ s independence and a denial of its right to exercise sovereignty over its own territory .
As a result , Dokdo has been a thorn in relations between the two countries for decades .
In 2005 , the creation of a so-called “ Takeshima Day ” by a local government in Japan triggered a public uproar in South Korea .
But Japan has not shied away from the issue , with prominent political figures joining Takeshima Day celebrations each year .
Furthermore , Japan ’ s habit of distorting facts in its history books – for example , denying that its former colonial subjects were forced into sexual slavery – has fueled distrust and anger in South Korea and elsewhere in East Asia , including China .
Dokdo is situated midway between the Korean peninsula and Japan ’ s main island , roughly 115 nautical miles from each .
But the islets are much closer to the nearest Korean island , Ulleungdo , than to Japan ’ s Okishima .
A survey of historical documents shows a distinct shift in Japan ’ s position on Dokdo .
For example , in the late seventeenth century , when conflict between Korea and Japan erupted over the passage of Japanese fishermen to Ulleungdo , Tottori-han ( one of Japan ’ s feudal clans ) told Japan ’ s central government that Ulleungdo and Dokdo did not fall within Japanese territory .
Likewise , a report in 1870 by Japan ’ s Ministry of Foreign Affairs , “ A Confidential Inquiry into the Particulars of Korea ’ s Foreign Relations , ” shows that the ministry recognized Dokdo as Korean territory .
Indeed , the report includes the subject title “ How Takeshima and Matsushima Came to Belong to Joseon ” ( later renamed Korea ) .
Moreover , the Dajokan , Japan ’ s highest decision-making body in 1868-1885 , denied any claims of sovereignty over Dokdo through its Order of 1877 .
Yet , in 1905 , Japan took measures to incorporate Dokdo in order to use it as a strategic military site for its war with Russia .
The final text of the 1951 San Francisco Peace Treaty , which ended WWII in the Pacific , makes no mention of Dokdo .
But earlier versions identified the islets as Korean territory .
The reference in the final version , drafted by the United States , was removed in light of US interests in building strategic partnerships with both South Korea and Japan .
However , the 1943 Cairo Declaration , which stipulated the Allied Powers ’ basic position on Japan ’ s territorial boundaries after WWII , stated that Japan would be expelled from all territories that it had annexed through violence .
In this context , the unconditional return of Dokdo to Korea – and Korea ’ s continued sovereignty over Dokdo – is indisputable .
In an increasingly interconnected world , significant challenges can be addressed only through regional and global partnerships .
But , in order to build a meaningful framework for cooperation , enduring distrust among East Asian countries must be dispelled .
Regional leaders must not get caught up in finger-pointing or avoid taking responsibility for past transgressions .
An honest evaluation of history is crucial to establishing lasting peace and prosperity in East Asia .
