Yes , You Can Do Something About the Weather
CAMBRIDGE : Blaming the weather is one of mankind ’ s oldest excuses , but for a large part of humanity it is more serious than we realize .
Because mankind is actually changing global weather patterns , the problems brought by adverse weather conditions in the future could actually multiply .
What ’ s worse is that the rich countries may be an important cause of the increasing weather damage being suffered by the poorest countries in the world .
Last week I visited several countries in Central and South America .
In addition to the usual woes of financial upheaval , every one was reeling from severe weather disturbances of the past two years .
The El Nino phenomenon of 1997-98 led to massive rainfall followed by severe flooding throughout the Andean Countries , especially Ecuador and Peru .
Torrential downpours destroyed crops , and wiped away billions of dollars of roads , bridges , and electricity pylons .
Meanwhile , Central American countries are still cleaning up from the shock of Hurricane Mitch , the worst hurricane to hit Central America in 200 years .
Nearly 10,000 lives were lost ; property damage totaled billions of dollars .
In both El Nino and the hurricane , increased outbreaks of infectious disease followed natural disasters .
It is probably the case that the two weather disasters were linked .
El Nino occurs when warm water from the Western Pacific ( near Indonesia , Malaysia , and the Philippines ) sloshes across the Pacific to the Western border of South America .
Warm water off the coast of South America leads to torrential rainfall in Ecuador and Peru , and at the same time , drought in Southeast Asia .
The El Nino is followed a year or so later by the so-called La Nina effect , in which the warm water bounces back across the Pacific .
History has shown that years of La Nina , such as 1998 , are typically characterized by fierce hurricane activity in the Caribbean , exactly what occurred with Hurricane Mitch .
Terrible destruction -- in thousands of lives , and billions of dollars of property in very poor economies -- would be bad enough without another sneaking suspicion : that the rich countries may be inadvertent factors in the severity of recent events .
Most everybody has heard by now of the likelihood of long-term global warming , in which the heavy use of oil and gas by industrial economies leads to a rising concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere .
Rising carbon dioxide , in turn , causes the Earth to retain more heat from the sun , increasing the earth ’ s temperature .
Computer models suggest that global warming may well be a factor in the increased frequency and severity of El Nino phenomena in the past 20 years , and thus also perhaps in the intensification of hurricanes in the Caribbean Basin .
Weather models are too imprecise at this point to prove these linkages with certainty ( weathermen and economists share a reputation for imperfect forecasts ! ) , but a growing body of science suggests two basic facts .
$ heavy energy use in the rich economies is indeed gradually warming the earth ;
$ it is poor countries -- mainly in the tropics -- rather than the rich countries -- mainly in the temperate economies -- who are likely to suffer the most severe damage .
So , rich countries are imposing what economists call an “ externality ” on poor countries : by changing the global climate they may be causing havoc in the most vulnerable places on earth .
Rich countries are often eager to tell poor countries what to do : how to run national policies , how to reconstruct themselves after a hurricane or flood , even how to cut down on energy use in the poor countries .
The rich countries are much worse , of course , at taking responsibility for their own actions .
If rich countries are the major force in global climate change , and if that climate change is a major force in loss of life , loss of crops , physical destruction , and even spreading disease , among poor countries , then rich countries have a real job to do .
On the one hand , they should help pay for any damages they indirectly inflict on poorer countries ( scientists will be needed to establish or disprove such linkages ) , and on the other hand , they should take serious and long-term actions ( such as reducing the use of fossil fuels ) to limit the environmental costs they are imposing on themselves and the rest of the world .
