To the Victors Go the Foils
NEW YORK – A surprising number of elections and political transitions is scheduled to occur over the coming months .
An incomplete list includes Russia , China , France , the United States , Egypt , Mexico , and South Korea .
At first glance , these countries have little in common .
Some are well-established democracies ; some are authoritarian systems ; and others are somewhere in between .
Yet , for all of their differences , these governments – and the individuals who will lead them – face many of the same challenges .
Three stand out .
The first is that no country is entirely its own master .
In today ’ s world , no country enjoys total autonomy or independence .
To one degree or another , all depend on access to foreign markets to sell their manufactured goods , agricultural products , resources , or services – or to supply them .
None can eliminate economic competition with others over access to third-country markets .
Many countries require capital inflows to finance investment or official debt .
Global supply and demand largely set oil and gas prices .
Economic interdependence and the vulnerability associated with it is an inescapable fact of contemporary life .
But economic dependence on others is not the only international reality with which governments must contend .
It is equally difficult – if not impossible – for countries to isolate themselves from terrorism , weapons , pandemic disease , or climate change .
After all , borders are not impermeable .
On the contrary , globalization – the immense flow across borders of people , ideas , greenhouse gases , goods , services , currencies , commodities , television and radio signals , drugs , weapons , emails , viruses ( computer and biological ) , and a good deal else – is a defining reality of our time .
Few of the challenges that it raises can be met unilaterally ; more often than not , cooperation , compromise , and a degree of multilateralism are essential .
A second universal challenge is technology .
George Orwell ’ s vision of 1984 could hardly have been more wrong , because the hallmark of modern technology is not Big Brother , but decentralization .
More computing power can now be held on a desktop or in a person ’ s hand than could be gathered in a room only a generation ago . & nbsp ;
As a result , people everywhere now have more access to more sources of information than ever before. making it increasingly difficult for governments to control , much less monopolize , the flow of knowledge .
Citizens also have a growing ability through mobile phones and social networking to communicate directly and discreetly with one another . & nbsp ;
One consequence of this trend is that authoritarian governments can no longer wield control over their citizens as easily as they once did .
Technology is , no doubt , one explanation for the uprisings that we are seeing in much of the Arab world .
But modern technology also has implications for well-established democracies .
It is far more difficult to generate social consensus and to govern in a world in which citizens can choose what they read , watch , and listen to , and with whom they talk .
A third widespread challenge that awaits emerging leaders is the inescapable reality that citizens ’ demands increasingly overwhelm the capacity to satisfy them .
This was always true in the so-called developing ( and often relatively poor ) world .
But now it is also the case in the relatively well-off mature democracies , as well as among those countries that have been growing fastest .
Economic growth is slower in many cases than the historic norm .
This is readily apparent for much of Europe , Japan , and the US .
But growth is also slowing in China and India , which together account for more than one-third of the world ’ s population .
Unemployment rates are high , especially in the US and Western Europe , and especially among the young and those nearing the end of their careers ( but who are still expected to live for decades ) .
More worrying still , much of this will translate into long-term unemployment .
The net result of these economic and demographic shifts is that a growing share of national income is now being directed to provide health , pensions , and other forms of basic support , while a declining percentage of citizens in nearly every society is now working to support a growing number of fellow citizens .
This rising dependency ratio is made worse by widening economic inequality ; as more wealth is concentrated in fewer hands , the promise of ever-improving standards of living for most people may not be fulfilled .
Together , these three trends – a loss of economic and physical autonomy , the diffusion of information technology , and slower growth against a backdrop of larger and older populations – will create enormous political challenges in virtually every country .
Demands are mounting at the same time as the ability of governments to satisfy them is diminishing .
The leaders who will take power after this year ’ s transitions will confront this fundamental reality .
Leaders will also have to confront the byproducts of increased nationalism , populism , and , in some cases , extremism .
Hostility to immigration and economic protectionism , already visible , can be projected to increase .
These developments within countries will make more difficult the challenge of generating global consensus on how to meet threats beyond borders : as governing successfully at home becomes more difficult , so will governing abroad .
For citizens and leaders alike , tough times lie ahead .
