A War on Tolerance
AMSTERDAM & # 45 ; & # 45 ; When “ tolerance ” becomes a term of abuse in a place like the Netherlands , you know that something has gone seriously wrong .
The Dutch always took pride in being the most tolerant people on earth .
In less feverish times than these , no one could possibly have taken exception to Queen Beatrix ’ s speech last Christmas , when she pleaded for tolerance and “ respect for minorities . ”
But Geert Wilders , leader of the right-wing , anti-Muslim Freedom Party , was so disgusted by the Dutch queen ’ s “ multi-cultural rubbish ” that he wanted her to be stripped of her constitutional role in the government .
Wilders , a popular rabble-rouser whose party occupies nine seats in the Dutch parliament , compares the Koran to Hitler ’ s Mein Kampf , wants to stop Muslims from moving to the Netherlands , and thunders that those who are already in the country should tear up half the Koran if they wish to stay .
Tolerance towards Islam is cowardly appeasement in his eyes .
He thinks that Europe is in peril of being “ Islamized . ”
“ There will soon be more mosques than churches , ” he says , if true Europeans don ’ t have the guts to stand up and save Western civilization .
Notwithstanding his call to ban the Koran , Wilders and his admirers claim to believe in unfettered free speech as a Western birthright .
Beatrix stated that the right to free speech does not automatically mean the right to offend .
Wilders disagrees .
No criticism of Islam , however offensive , should ever be hampered by political correctness .
Wilders uses every opportunity to test Muslims ’ ( often very limited ) tolerance .
His latest provocation is a short film denouncing Islam , which is yet to be shown , but has already caused panic all around .
Remarkably for a Dutch politician – and a minor one , at that – news of Wilders ’ s antics has reached the world press .
So Dutch embassies are bracing themselves for violent demonstrations , and the government is considering special security measures .
Some commentators suggest that Wilders , born and raised as a Catholic in a provincial Dutch town , is , like his Muslim enemies , a true believer , driven by the goal of keeping Europe “ Judeo-Christian . ”
Perhaps , but this is probably a red herring .
His war on Islam is also , and perhaps even mainly , a war on the cultural and political elites , the Dutch intellectual establishment , the Eurocrats of Brussels , and the liberal-minded queen .
Indeed , his speeches are studded with references to arrogant elites who are out of touch with the feelings of the common man .
“ Tolerance ” is seen as weak and elitist , typical of people who live far removed from the harsh realities of the street , where violent and unruly foreigners menace upstanding Dutch folks .
This notion of the elitist appeaser is not confined to the Netherlands .
In Israel , the educated Jewish activists who criticize Israeli abuses against Palestinians , the peaceniks who believe that negotiation is better than violence and that even Arabs have rights , are called , with a knowing sneer , “ beautiful souls . ”
The common man , rooted in the real world , supposedly knows better : uncompromising toughness , the hard line , is the only way to get results .
In the United States , the word “ liberal , ” in the mouths of populist radio hosts and right-wing politicians , has become almost synonymous with “ effete East Coast snob ” or , worse , “ New York intellectual . ”
Liberals , in this view , are not only soft , but are somehow distinctly un-American .
The association of elites with foreignness , tolerance , and metropolitan cities is nothing new .
Elites often can speak foreign languages , and big cities are traditionally more tolerant and open to mixed populations .
Modern populism – American politicians running , or pretending to run , “ against Washington , ” or French populists speaking for “ deep France ” – is invariably hostile to capital cities .
Brussels , the capital of the European Union , stands for everything populists , whether left or right , hate .
And Muslim immigrants live in Amsterdam , London , or Marseilles , not in the kind of small towns where right-wing populists find most of their support .
Still , the politics of resentment works best when it can tap into real fears .
There are reasons for people to feel anxious about economic globalization , pan-European bureaucracy , the huge and not always effectively controlled influx of immigrants , and the aggression of radical political Islam .
These anxieties have too often been ignored .
There is a sense among many Europeans , not just in the Netherlands , that they have been abandoned in a fast-changing world , that multi-national corporations are more powerful than nation-states , that the urban rich and highly educated do fine and ordinary folks in the provinces languish , while democratically elected politicians are not only powerless , but have abjectly surrendered to these larger forces that threaten the common man .
Tolerance is seen as not just weak , but as a betrayal .
The Muslim threat is , of course , not a fantasy .
A small number of ideological extremists has inflicted real violence in the name of Islam , and will continue to do so .
But the popular resentment of Islam goes deeper and wider .
Wilders , and others like him , are not just attacking Islamic extremists .
His success is based on that sense of tolerance as betrayal .
And , as so often happens , the loathing of elites has found an outlet in the loathing of outsiders , who look different and whose ways are strange .
We must fight Islamic extremism , but not by tapping into the darkest gut feelings of the unthinking mob .
Nothing good ever came from that .
