Yeltsin \ u0027s Last Surprise
MOSCOW : The hardest thing about power is knowing when to let go .
The next hardest , particularly in a country like Russia which has experienced nothing but dictatorship for a millennium , is knowing whom to hand over power to .
In announcing his resignation on December 31 Boris Yeltsin may have succeeded on both counts , assuring not only his personal safety , but his place in history and Russia 's infant democracy .
Yeltsin was more than the man who saved Russia in 1991 when a coup by communist hard-liners threatened to turn back the clock by nullifying Mikhail Gorbachev 's perestroika and glasnost .
In nine muddy years since then Yeltsin also created a new Russia , very much in his own image : one unpredictable , wayward , but full of promise .
By stepping down now , Yeltsin has given his handpicked successor , acting president Vladimir Putin , the best chance to win elections that will take place this coming March .
Shades of Kremlin tsars and commissars of old ?
As a deft manoeuvrer of the old school of communist politics , the gibe is tempting to apply to Yeltsin .
It is also unfair .
With mandatory presidential elections next year , Moscow was awash in rumours : “ feeding time at the zoo ” as one British prime minister called it .
By ending the whispering campaign that he intended to cling to power no matter what , President Yeltsin deserves more cheers than jeers .
Through this orderly and constitutionally correct device to attempt to assure his succession , Yeltsin may have put paid to any possibility of a chaotic power struggle in the Kremlin without sacrificing democratic principles .
Russia may now go on to complete its transition from communism to capitalism .
But what do we know of the heir apparent , Vladimir Putin ?
In keeping with his shadowy KGB background , very little .
Putin is a married 46 year old , and a graduate of Saint Petersburg University 's Law Faculty .
Stationed for a decade as a KGB agent in the former East Germany , he saw Western democratic and business practices at close hand , and is believed to be committed to them .
After communism 's collapse , he worked with people like Anotoly Chubais in the liberal St. Petersburg government of the early 1990s .
Transferred to Moscow , he headed the FSB ( the transformed KGB ) until Yeltsin suddenly appointed him prime minister last August .
Despite his murky profile , Putin 's most potent claim to fame – and to power – is a dour toughness .
In the bloody mountains and ruined cities of Chechnya , Putin established his credentials as the hard man Russia needs to restore order and stop the country 's internal disintegration by revitalizing state power .
That the West seems nervous about Putin only enhances his prestige at home .
With Western economic policy prescriptions widely seen as having failed in Russia ; with NATO expanding near to the country 's borders and old allies like Serbia bombed ; with America seen as wanting to weaken Russia even more , breaking it up into pieces and controlling the oil-rich Caspian basin , anti-western sentiments are on the rise .
President Putin 's keen political antenna has caught this trend .
So the fact that the West eyes Russia 's acting president with suspicion makes him even more desirable to the traditional Russian heart .
Vladimir Putin , however , prefers to promote the impression of his being a more enlightened and modern leader .
His prime ministerial new year 's address – " Russia at the Turn of the Millennium " -- was posted on a Russian Government website for all the world to see before being published in Russian newspapers .
In it he outlined his presidential program : playing to the crowds , he declared that Russia is no plaything for the West to kick around .
But demagoguery stopped there .
Russia , he also declared , must mend itself .
It will remain cooperative and friendly with the world , provided that the world is cooperative and friendly too .
But the hard work of rebuilding Russia must be done by Russians , and with no time to waste .
In Russia cultural instincts , in which communal ideas remain more valued than individualist principles , help determine the success or failure of policies .
The national strategies Putin will likely follow will take into account these social impulses .
Thus he is unlikely to publicly trumpet the unforgiving capitalist policies of Gaidar and Chubais , even if he quietly pursues them .
Undoubtedly a strong patriot , Putin also knows that Russia 's national idea of itself must be cleansed of haughtiness and imperial ambitions .
Time and again he has said that Russia 's national idea must blend traditional Russian concepts with a new , modern content .
The Russia he envisions will be a great power once more , but great in the ways that a truly modern society must be : in its democratic commitments , its economy , and its domestic tranquillity .
The consensus in Russia today is that Putin is a man of neither great talents nor great vices .
To ordinary Russians he appears as modest , principled , and honest – a vast contrast with the tainted politicians of the Yeltsin years .
He is a perfect fit for a Russia grown tired of the heroes , revolutionaries , criminals – even saviours – who make life exciting but rarely stable .
A recent poll showed that what Russia most wants is a new Brezhnev , whose 20 years ( 1964-1982 ) of leadership first were disdained as an " era of stagnation , " but are now nostalgically recalled as the " golden era of stagnation . "
Putin fits the desired mould for a firmness and stolidity that ensures stability , a strong state , and a " golden middle " between radical reforms and strong-arm rule .
In the back of their minds , however , Russians also hold a secret fear about Putin .
It concerns a man , a pleasant quiet individual who walks soundlessly through the Kremlin 's corridors , someone who uncomplainingly takes on ( and completes ) many hard and unpleasant tasks neglected by others who fight noisily for high position .
Russians know that , one day , these unassuming political beasts of burden suddenly come out on top , as Stalin did in the early 1920s .
So of President Putin Russia , like history , must still reserve its judgement .
