The Promise of Central Asia
Central Asia is frequently in the news these days – and most of the news seems to be bad .
The casual reader , viewer , and listener has become acquainted with a region of landlocked and poor countries – Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan , Tajikistan , Turkmenistan , and Uzbekistan – that share a legacy of isolation , squandered natural resources , environmental degradation , and Soviet-era political systems .
And yet , it is also a region with a distant history of great economic and cultural achievement in the Silk Road era , and that recently has emerged as a focus of renewed global competition reminiscent of the Cold War .
Can Central Asia regain a key role at the center of the huge Eurasian landmass , surrounded by some of the world ’ s most dynamic economies – China , Russia , and India ?
While there is a laudable international effort to help Africa grow out of heavy donor dependency in the next decade , the equally momentous economic-development and human-security challenges facing Central Asia is generally not fully understood .
History and geography – measured by distance from the closest seaports – have isolated these countries physically , economically , and socially , and have exacerbated the difficulties of their transitions to market economies .
The result is that development and governance indicators in Central Asia are on par with those in many sub-Saharan African countries .
The Central Asian Human Development Report , recently launched by the United Nations Development Program , argues that the countries of Central Asia have a great opportunity to capitalize on their location at the center of a dynamic continent , their abundant natural resources , and their still-strong potential to forge a prosperous , stable , and cohesive region .
This will require them to open up to the rest of the world , cooperate with each other and their neighbors , and radically reform their antiquated political systems .
Regional cooperation should include areas ranging from trade , transport , and transit , to water and energy , as well as efforts to control of drug trafficking .
The Report estimates that by doing so , and by improving their investment climates and governance , Central Asian countries can double their incomes over ten years , modernize their economies , connect with the rest of the world , and improve the lives of their citizens dramatically .
Currently , the region suffers from tremendous transport and transit constraints .
Trade times and costs are unnaturally high due to unintegrated and lengthy border procedures , high tariff rates , corruption , and underinvestment in transport infrastructure .
These costs could be halved by better customs , border and transit management , improved transport corridors and more competitive transport services .
By joining the World Trade Organization , improving their investment climates , and stopping interference with shuttle traders – mostly poor women trying to make a living – governments would give the region ’ s businesses and farmers access to markets and attract much-needed new investment .
Central Asia is blessed with an abundance of energy and water resources , even though much is wasted by inefficient use and poor maintenance of infrastructure .
An estimated $ 1.7 billion of agricultural production is lost annually due to poor water management .
The region is poised to become one of the main suppliers of oil and gas for world energy markets , and its big rivers , if properly managed , have the capacity to provide enough water both for irrigation and for electricity exports to China , India , and Russia .
But cooperation is needed both within the region and with key neighbors in order to realize effective regional water and energy management .
The region is also at risk from the effects of drug trafficking .
While illicit drugs are moved through all Central Asian countries , Tajikistan bears the brunt of the scourge due to its location at the northern border of Afghanistan .
Up to 100 tons of heroin are estimated to pass through Tajikistan each year , which is equivalent to the estimated annual North American and West European demand .
Unless Central Asian countries and their neighbors cooperate in controlling drug production , use , and trafficking , this source of major health risks , corruption , and crime will not be eradicated .
The good news today is that most of the Central Asian countries , their neighbors and the international community have recognized the importance of cooperation , openness , and integration .
Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan , and Tajikistan are actively opening up and working together on many fronts .
Unfortunately , not all are equally interested in open borders and close cooperation : Turkmenistan stands aside and Uzbekistan ’ s borders remain substantially closed .
Cooperation clearly is not only for the region ’ s governments ; businesses , traders , and civil society must be involved as well .
Yet it will be up to the leadership in the region to overcome obstacles to openness and co-operation .
Market-oriented reforms and good governance are preconditions for effective cross-border ties .
The international community , which has a shared interest in a prosperous , stable , and cohesive Central Asia , can and should play a supporting role in these efforts .
