A Day of Liberation
When I was seven years old , in 1960 , my grandmother Angelica opened my eyes to the meaning of 8 May 1945 , the day when Nazi Germany surrendered and World War II ended in Europe .
We were spending our summer holidays in Normandy where the liberation of Europe from Nazism had started on D-Day , 6 June 1944 .
One evening , I listened to my parents and my grandmother talking about the past .
I have forgotten the details of their conversation , but I can still hear my grandmother ’ s sigh of relief when she said “ Thank God we lost that war ! ”
From a child ’ s perspective , it wasn ’ t self-evident that losing was a good thing .
But of course , my grandmother was right to equate defeat with liberation .
The more I have thought about the lesson she taught me 45 years ago , the clearer I have seen another , less obvious dimension in what she said : It is “ we ” who lost the war .
Collectively , the Germans had not been the innocent victims of a small gang of criminal outsiders called “ Nazis ” – Nazism had been an inside ideology supported by millions of Germans , and every German was liable for its atrocities whether or not he or she had adhered to it individually .
In today ’ s Germany , an overwhelming majority subscribes to the proposition that 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation – not only for Europe , but also for Germany itself .
Compared to public opinion in 1960 , that ’ s certainly an enormous progress .
But paradoxically , it may also contain an element of forgetfulness , because it tends to conceal the fact that liberation required a military defeat .
To use my grandmother ’ s parlance , it is not “ us ” who were the liberators , but “ them ” .
The way people see the past tells us more about their present attitudes than about the past itself .
This is what the term “ politics of memory ” is meant to indicate .
And this is why it doesn ’ t matter whether the relevant events happened 60 years ago ( as World War II ) , 90 years ( as in the case of the Armenian genocide ) or even 600 years ( such as the battle of Kosovo in 1389 ) .
A violent conflict in the past may survive as a war of memories in the present , as can be observed in the current dispute between China and South Korea on one side , and Japan on the other .
A war of memories , in turn , may sometimes lead to a violent conflict in the future .
Former perpetrators often try to de-legitimize their former victims ’ moral superiority by claiming they were victims themselves .
Therefore , the 60th anniversary of the firebombing of Dresden by Allied forces on 13 February 1945 has probably been a more crucial moment in terms of the German “ politics of memory ” than the 60th anniversary of 8 May 1945 is going to be .
Far-right groups infamously dubbed the attack by which at least 30,000 people were killed “ Dresden ’ s Holocaust of bombs . ”
Fortunately , their propaganda campaign has been a failure .
Although it is true that thousands of the civilians killed in Dresden and other German cities were innocent at an individual level , there can be no doubt it was morally imperative that Germany be defeated collectively .
On the left side of the German political spectrum , the proposition that 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation remains unchallenged .
However , it is sometimes repressed that the massive use of force had been necessary to achieve that result .
Left-wing pacifism tends to overlook this simple fact .
Its slogan “ Never again war ! ” is only half the truth – the other half is “ Never again appeasement ! ” 8 May 1945 was not “ zero hour , ” as a popular saying in Germany goes .
It had an antecedent , that is , a lack of pre-emptive resistance at home and abroad to the threat that built up in Nazi Germany during the 1930 ’ s .
There is yet another lesson to be learned .
Yes , 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation to which the Soviet army contributed decisively .
But for millions of Central and East Europeans , liberation was followed by Stalin ’ s oppressive regime .
The current war of memories between the Baltic republics and Russia , with regard to the international celebration in Moscow on 9 May this year , reminds Germany of a special historic responsibility .
The German-Soviet non-aggression treaty , the so-called Hitler-Stalin pact , concluded in August 1939 , had been supplemented by a secret appendix dividing the border states Finland , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Poland and Romania into spheres of interest for the two parties .
But excusing Nazi atrocities by pointing to Stalinist crimes is an intellectually and morally unacceptable stratagem .
When Chancellor Schröder travels to Moscow for the Red Square celebrations , he should bear in mind Nazi Germany ’ s contribution to the Baltic tragedy .
On 8 May this year , public speakers will remind us how important it is not to forget .
They will stress that if the lessons of history are not learned , history is bound to repeat itself .
All this is perfectly true .
But personally , I will also remember my grandmother ’ s sentence “ Thank God we lost that war ! ”
Thank God – and thanks to all those brave Allied soldiers who sacrificed their lives for the sake of Europe ’ s liberty .
