The Scientific Men \ u0027s Club
I serve on the senior appointments and promotions committee of a medical school .
Over the years , I 've come to recognize something that is as disturbing as it is undeniable : as a group , male basic scientists sail through the committee effortlessly .
Many work in fields so specialized that they have only ten colleagues in the entire world , half of whom are their mentors or one-time fellow graduate students .
These are their " peers , " and they readily provide laudatory letters of recommendation establishing that the applicant has attained " national and international recognition . "
In contrast , applications by clinical faculty and women provoke far more discussion .
I don 't resent the ease with which basic science faculty are promoted ; after all , I am sure that I also enjoyed the perks that come with this designation .
Nonetheless , the system seems blatantly unfair .
We rely on external referees for promoting basic scientists , who publish their work in national or international journals .
By contrast , it is difficult to quantify how good clinical scientists are .
Indeed , we struggle--more or less successfully , I think--even to define what a " scholarly " practicing physician is , because a clinician 's reputation rests on local interactions that are often difficult to document .
The issue of women faculty members , especially in basic sciences , is far more complex .
I suspect that here the problem reflects fundamental differences between the way women and men approach science as a microcosm of life .
Most of my fellow male faculty members are not muscle-bound , testosterone-driven types , but in their scientific careers , they display two types of typically male behavior .
The first is a compulsion to be the first to establish completely trivial facts about science .
As I grow older , I 'm no longer sure why this is so important , but the male members of our species seem to think that it is .
Most young male faculty members have an obsessive need to work 20 hours a day , seven days a week to make sure that a ( sometimes-illusory ) competitor is beaten to the punch .
Ten or 15 years from now , will anybody care ?
Most women in basic sciences seem to be uninterested from the outset in playing such games .
The second male behavior is a patricidal imperative that is perhaps the most shameful and atavistic of the primal impulses that still lurk in some archaic part of our brains .
The idea that one must somehow supplant one 's mentor , cast the previous generation out into the wilderness , and make oneself the leader of the pack seems to obsess men .
Women scientists seem to behave far more collegially .
There is a certain senior ( male ) faculty member who is one of the kindest and most accomplished investigators at my institution .
He is surrounded by and works with a group of young women he has mentored .
Most are bright , creative , and productive in their own right , but they do not seek desperately to dissociate themselves from him , establish their own little fiefdoms elsewhere , and beat him at his own game .
At the risk of sounding simplistic , I can 't help feeling that working together as a group is an innately feminine tendency .
More importantly , I can 't help believing that this way of operating is ultimately far more scientifically productive than the traditional male drive to establish one 's own " identity " and " independence . "
Unfortunately , one of the unwritten laws of academia--unquestioned by the committee on which I serve--is that a candidate who does not seek and grasp the holy grail of " independence " is not qualified to be promoted .
Almost every time a woman candidate comes up before the committee , her " independence " is questioned in a way that is irrelevant , if not insulting .
Sadder still , the most stringent adherents to and enforcers of this male paradigm are the rare women that have " made it " in the male world to serve on the committee .
" I made it , " they seem to say , " so why can 't she ? "
In most cases , the women are as smart as the men , if not smarter .
But most have chosen to work either in a group with their mentors or with their husbands , who often work in the same fields .
Although they generate as many of the ideas as their male colleagues do , it is the latter who go to meetings and present the group 's research results .
This seems to me to reflect women 's all-too-common impulse to accommodate the unbridled male ego rather than any deficiency in their creativity or " independence . "
There was surely a time when eschewing children and family was the only way that a woman could prove her commitment to science .
In many places , that has begun to change .
I hope that the time will come when there are enough women in science that a greater diversity of female role models is represented in bodies that decide about careers .
This would encourage greater sympathy for and empathy with the different needs and impulses of women and men--and a deeper appreciation that the male paradigm is not the only valid one within which to live life and excel in science .
