The Message of Croatian Elections
ZAGREB : Barely two months after Franjo Tudjman 's death , Croatia is a different country .
Years of political fear have been washed away in just a few days .
Last month , parliamentary elections dealt a mortal blow to Tudjmans ' monolithic party , HDZ .
This week , the opposition 's Stipe Mesic won Croatia 's presidency .
Tudjman , long an object of dread , has vanished from the political screen , taking into oblivion the ideological clutter that made Croatia a pariah state .
Despite an electoral law favoring it , Tudjman 's mammoth organization has been reduced to a mere 40 seats in the 151-seat lower chamber of the Sabor ( parliament ) .
The coalition of Ivica Ra an 's ex-Communists ( SDP ) and Drazen Budiša 's right-liberals ( HSLS ) , known as § the Two " , hold 71 seats .
The allied coalition of § the Four ¨ ( Peasant Party , Liberal Party , National Party , and the Istrian regionalists ) , which together with " the Two ¨ make up a new governing coalition called § the Six " , won an additional 24 seats , meaning that the new premier , Ivica Račan , a former head of Croatia 's defunct League of Communists and the man who yielded power to Tudjman in 1990 , has a comfortable majority , but not the two-thirds needed to change Tudjman 's constitution of excessive presidential power .
The consequences of HDZ 's collapse shaped the presidential contest .
HDZ 's candidate , Tudjman 's reputedly moderate foreign minister Mate Granic , whom pundits declared an easy winner , confronted two adversaries – Drazen Budiša , the candidate of § the Two " , and Stipe Mesic , whom § the Four ¨ put forth almost as an afterthought .
Stipe Mesic edged Granic out of the race in the first round ( 24 January ) and defeated Budiša decisively in the second round ( 7 February ) .
Mesic 's astounding victory speaks volumes about the current mood of the Croat electorate .
Mesic is an unassuming populist involved in the Croat opposition movement since the 1960s .
From a Communist family who witnessed the murder of his grandmother by the collaborationist Ustašas as a child , he belonged to the reform wing of the communist party in 197 .
Afterward , in a period of hard-line communist reaction , he became a political prisoner , even a non-person .
He joined with Tudjman and the national movement in 1989 , becoming Prime Minister , and briefly , as Croatia 's representative in 1991 , served as ex-Yugoslavia 's last collective president .
But he soon fell out of Tudjman 's favor .
He spoke against the repression of Serbs and broke with Tudjman over Croatia 's aggression in Bosnia .
He shared the seeming isolation of Tudjman 's harshest critics , becoming a member , but not the paramount leader , of the small Croat National Party – an organization clearly in opposition but otherwise nondescript .
Quite courageously , Mesic stuck his neck out by testifying in the Croat cases at the Hague tribunal for war crimes in the former Yugoslavia and by pursuing his own brand of reconciliation politics in Bosnia and Montenegro , activities that many thought would kill off his chances in electoral politics .
This raises an interesting question : was the downfall of Tudjmanism postponed by the opposition 's fear of appearing more radical than was believed to be practical ?
It has long been suspected that the Croat electorate was more daring than the opposition parties .
Now that the electorate has rewarded the radical Mesic over the overcautious Budiša , this assessment has acquired an instant patina .
Admittedly , Mesic had the advantage of being the temperamental opposite of Tudjman .
Where Budiša shared with Tudjman the air of being a national monument , something compounded by his prissy and high-strung demeanor , Mesic was unconventional and homespun .
At a time when the electorate wanted somebody unlike Tudjman in ideas and bearing , Mesic was the logical choice .
This might not be the best news for § the Two ¨ – the SDP-HSLS part of the new ruling coalition .
Ra an had the bad sense to publicize his lack of enthusiasm for a possible Mesic victory .
Only Budiša , he said , could guarantee the changes promised by the new government .
Forgetting that but for a timely death they would have had to share power with Tudjman for two more years , § the Two ¨ attempted to compel Mesic to agree to reducing many presidential prerogatives immediately after the elections .
Mesic remains uncommitted here .
He senses that the electorate is uneasy with the growing arrogance of § the Two ¨ , a tendency that has not been mitigated by early and decisive actions that might augur better times .
With HDZ and its extreme-right appendages out of the way , Croatia now lacks a convincing opposition .
Racan 's insistence on unanimity is an echo not only of Tudjman , but also of Racan 's own communist past .
Mesic could now galvanize § the Four ¨ to cohere around a program that is more European , more market-oriented , more liberal , more sensitive to Croatia 's regions , and more pluralist than what " the Two " can offer .
This would be good for Croatia .
This is a society that needs diversity of opinion more than anything else .
There is a lesson in Croatia 's seemingly precipitous changes for the Balkans and other troubled regions in post-communist Europe .
Admittedly , Croatia 's problems never were as severe as those of the countries further east .
Still , the successes and longevity of ideologues like Tudjman could be more apparent than real .
They are most successful when they dominate not only their own movements , but the opposition 's agenda as well .
It may sound archaic in high-tech politics of the new millennium , but the ability to deflate the ideological boasts of nationalist prophets by old-fashioned and straightforward opposition is the key to change .
Mesic triumphed over Tudjmanism when he professed a complete lack of interest in the chimera of Greater Croatia .
He refused to underwrite an expansionist blank check and he was not punished by the electorate for any lack of patriotic ardor .
For oppositions , this is not a road without risks , but it is one worth taking .
Western political leaders grappling with this part of the world should also learn not to settle for second best .
