Understanding Japan ’ s Disasters
NEWPORT BEACH – As we all struggle to comprehend the economic and financial impact of Japan ’ s calamity , it is tempting to seek historical analogies for guidance .
Indeed , many have been quick to cite the aftermath of the terrible 1995 Kobe earthquake .
But , while that example provides some insights , it is too limited to understand what lies ahead for Japan , and excessive reliance on it could undermine appropriate policy responses , both in Japan and abroad .
First , let us consider the similarities between Japan ’ s current tragedy and that of 1995 .
Both involved terrible earthquakes that resulted in tremendous human suffering and large-scale physical damage .
Both required the Japanese government to display considerable agility in its rescue efforts .
Both triggered multiple offers of help from friends and allies around the world .
In both cases , wealth destruction was accompanied by disruptions to daily economic life .
There are also important forward-looking similarities .
As with the aftermath of Kobe , the current focus on rescuing survivors will be followed by a huge reconstruction program .
Massive budgetary allocations will be made ( 2 % of GDP in the case of Kobe ) .
Affected households will receive financial assistance to help them restore some normalcy to their lives .
Roads , housing , and much other infrastructure will be repaired and upgraded .
These similarities have led several economists to provide early predictions of the national and global economic consequences , including a sharp V-like recovery in Japan ’ s growth rate in 2011 , as the initial downturn is followed by a surge in economic activity , implying a rapid recovery in Japan ’ s tax base and level of GDP .
Such predictions counsel caution against over-reaction by policymakers outside Japan .
Rather than immediately incorporating Japanese developments into their thinking , policymakers should treat the effects on the global economy as “ transitory ” – that is , temporary and reversible – and thus “ look through ” them in designing their responses .
But there is a risk that this approach could understate the Japanese disaster ’ s domestic and international consequences .
As such , it could contribute to insufficient responses in Japan itself – from the government to individual companies and households – as well as in other countries .
Indeed , such a mal-diagnosis could delay what I believe will be an eventual solid recovery in Japan .
Five factors suggest that Japan faces a uniquely difficult and uncertain set of challenges .
First , the economic damage from Japan ’ s three calamities ( a horrifying earthquake , a devastating tsunami , and a nuclear crisis ) may well be double that of Kobe .
And , unlike Kobe , these calamities did affect Tokyo – indirectly , fortunately – where some 40 % of Japan ’ s industrial production is located .
Second , Japan ’ s public finances are weaker than in 1995 , and demographic factors are less favorable .
Domestic public debt today stands at roughly 205 % of GDP , compared to around 85 % in 1995 .
The country ’ s sovereign rating is AA- , not AAA , as it was 16 years ago .
This erodes the flexibility and ultimate effectiveness of fiscal responses .
Third , benchmark interest rates are already near zero , and have been for a while .
This undermines the potency of monetary policy notwithstanding bold and imaginative efforts by the Bank of Japan to inject liquidity into the economy .
Fourth , the addition of destabilizing nuclear uncertainty to the terrible impact of the natural disasters amplifies the reconstruction challenges .
Given the damage and dangers , it will take time for Japan to restore fully its power-generation capabilities , affecting the potential GDP growth rate .
Food safety is also a concern , as is the economic impact of nuclear uncertainties on the Japanese psyche .
Finally , Japan ’ s external environment today is more challenging .
During the post-Kobe reconstruction period , world demand was buoyant and global productivity surged , owing to China ’ s gathering boom , America ’ s information-technology and communications revolution , and political and economic convergence in Europe .
Today , aggregate demand in advanced economies is still recovering from the global financial crisis , while systemically important emerging economies like Brazil and China are tapping their policy brakes in order to counter economic overheating .
Meanwhile , on the supply side , countries are dealing with high and volatile commodity prices , including an oil-price spike as a result of the Middle East uprisings .
If this analysis proves correct , it implies that Japan ’ s reconstruction challenge will be more difficult than after the Kobe earthquake .
Negative wealth and income effects this time around will be more severe , and the recovery process will probably take longer and be more complex .
At the national level , this calls urgently for a degree of unity and decisiveness that has been absent from Japanese politics for years .
Without it , the authorities will find it difficult to communicate and implement a medium-term economic vision that puts rapid sustained growth , and not just reconstruction , at the core of the policy response .
Japan 's disasters will add to the global economy ’ s headwinds – be they the impact of the initial fall in consumption in the world ’ s third-largest economy , or disruptions to global supply chains ( particularly in technology and autos ) .
And Japan ’ s nuclear crisis will mean greater uncertainty about nuclear power in other countries .
There is also a financial angle , the importance of which depends on the mix of new government borrowing , debt monetization , and repatriation of Japanese savings that is used to fund Japan 's reconstruction program .
The greater the repatriation component , the larger the negative impact on some financial markets .
So , as tempting as they may be , analytical shortcuts are best avoided at this early stage .
It will take time and thorough analysis to specify the true consequences of Japan ’ s triple calamity , including the longer-term impact on its economy and that of the rest of the world .
The Japanese have shown admirable courage in the face of unthinkable tragedy .
I have no doubt that a successful reconstruction program will lead their country to recovery .
In the meantime , however , the urgency of restoring a sense of normalcy and hope to a dramatically wounded society warrants thoughtful and deep analyses .
