The U.S. Economy : Is it the Next Bubble to Burst ?
CAMBRIDGE : There is a reasonable chance that the U.S. economy is living through a speculative bubble of the same kind that has burst for so many other economies this past decade - Japan , Korea , Mexico , to name a few .
These financial bubbles were all powered by an underlying myth of economic invisibility .
The Japanese thought they had it ten years ago .
Hard to believe , but many serious analysts thought Japan was on the verge of conquering the world economy at that time . . . that is , just before the Japanese stock market fell by more than 50 percent .
Then Mexico thought that its new free trade arrangements with the U.S. would lead to a surge in economic growth . . . just months before the economy collapsed in the worst crisis in a generation .
Many in the U.S. now think that the U.S. economy is unstoppable , that the Internet revolution underway in the United States is the greatest thing since the industrial revolution itself .
Such hyperbole , and the surging U.S. stock market based on these super-bullish views , should immediately give us pause .
Is hubris at work here , as it was in earlier bubbles ?
If the U.S. stock market surge were indeed to end , or to reverse itself , what would be the consequences for the rest of the world ?
The U.S. is surely powered by two real strengths - great flexibility of its market system , and great prowess in developing new technologies .
The recent U.S. boom is heavily based on enormous investments of U.S. companies in the new information technologies .
With its special mix of markets and innovation , the U.S. economy is indeed remaking itself with amazing speed .
But financial bubbles are often founded on true economic strengths .
A bubble occurs when those very real strengths suddenly take on exaggerated , even mythic , proportions in the eyes of investors , who are then prepared to throw vast amounts of money into the stock market without attention to realistic prospects for future earnings .
Consider my favorite case of the week .
Amazon , a pioneer of internet retailing - first with books , and now with just about anything - announced that it had lost $ 138 million in the second quarter of 1999 , though its sales revenues tripled to $ 314 million .
Investors were mesmerized by the rise in sales volumes , and gave no heed to the continuing losses of the company . . . losses that reflect the small retail margins in highly competitive U.S. retail markets .
The company 's announcement was followed by a further surge of some 4 percent in its stock market price !
The company has yet to turn a profit , and the book value of its underlying assets are around $ 650 million .
Nonetheless , Amazon is now valued in the stock market at $ 19 billion , making it one of the largest 300 companies in the world in terms of market value !
What this suggests is that the U.S. stock market has taken leave of its senses .
Yes , there are theories galore to prove that the market pricing is just right .
Maybe Amazon will finally be able to turn its large customer base into large profits , but that remains to be proved .
But what if the financial markets are simply wrong , as they have been so much of the time in the world in the past 10 years ?
What if the euphoria is followed by collapse ?
One thing is for sure : U.S. consumers would stop their current buying spree , and this would slow the U.S. economy .
But would the U.S. go into recession , much less depression ?
Perhaps briefly , but probably not deeply .
With inflation low , a relatively healthy banking sector , and a budget in surplus , the U.S. Government would probably have the flexibility of monetary and fiscal policy to achieve a relatively soft landing .
Some investors would surely go bankrupt , but unless things get even more wild than now , the U.S. financial sector would probably survive intact even with a fairly significant stock market correction .
Still , this is the time for bank regulators in the U.S. to keep a close watch on bank portfolios , just to make sure that the current euphoria does not turn into a mountain of reckless bank lending .
Would the rest of the world suffer deeply from a U.S. stock market correction , for example by experiencing a drop in export sales to a slowing U.S. market ?
Probably that effect would also be fairly modest .
On the one hand , European , Asian , Latin America , and African economies would have a smaller market in the U.S. , but on the other hand , those economies would probably have an easier time attracting capital to their own economies , since less global capital would be flowing to the U.S. economy .
Slower export earnings could therefore be offset by rising domestic investment spending , especially if these economies lowered their interest rates in the event of a U.S. slowdown .
In short , the U.S. economy may well be in a financial bubble .
Millions of Americans who now consider themselves investment geniuses could well end up rather disappointed if and when the bubble bursts .
Even though American pride and consumer spending would be dented , the damage to the world economy would probably not be huge .
Governments should have the tools - especially monetary policy - to limit the damage , if they use those tools correctly .
