A Talking Cure for Syria
LONDON – The proposal by the United States and Russia to hold a diplomatic conference to end the carnage in Syria deserves a less skeptical reaction than it has received .
While it will be difficult to get all of the relevant parties to the table in Geneva any time soon , much less to ensure an outcome that will stick , diplomacy is the only game left .
As much as one might wish otherwise , every other policy option canvassed so far is wrong in principle , nonviable in practice , unlikely to be effective , or bound to increase rather than diminish suffering .
After two years of civil war , with no decisive military victory by either side in sight , the situation could not be more desperate .
According to current United Nations estimates , more than 80,000 Syrians are dead , and 6.8 million – one-third of the country ’ s population – need urgent humanitarian assistance .
Some 4.25 million are displaced internally , and more than 1.5 million have fled the country , sheltering as refugees mainly in Lebanon , Jordan , and Turkey .
The strain on Syria ’ s neighbors is immense , and the conflict is inexorably seeping into the wider region .
Both government and rebel forces have committed atrocity crimes .
Many more are feared as violence among the main sectarian groups escalates .
Continued international paralysis is indefensible .
Inaction would ignite fires throughout the Middle East , and would violate the international community ’ s now-accepted responsibility to protect , through timely and decisive collective action , populations at risk of genocide , ethnic cleansing , and other major crimes against humanity and war crimes .
That principle , unanimously agreed by the UN General Assembly in 2005 , has been successfully invoked elsewhere , including in support of diplomatic intervention in Kenya in 2008 .
It also underpinned Security Council-mandated military interventions in Libya and Cote d ’ Ivoire in 2011 and , more recently , in Mali .
But how can it be applied to the mess now in Syria ?
The most immediate need , about which there should be little controversy , is massive humanitarian assistance .
Delivery problems abound in the war zones , but not everywhere .
Yet international donors are dragging their feet both in meeting existing commitments and in making new ones .
And all the aid in the world won ’ t stop the killing .
It is too late now for non-military tools of coercion to have much effect , although Security Council threats of International Criminal Court prosecution for atrocity crimes – including any use of chemical weapons – must remain on the table .
But what of the military-response options still strongly favored by many policymakers and pundits ?
The trouble is that every tray in this toolkit , too , is empty .
Direct military intervention to overthrow Syrian President Bashar al-Assad ’ s regime would never win Security Council approval , and has no volunteers anyway among capable military powers – albeit in most cases because of the political and military risks involved , rather than the legal indefensibility of acting outside the UN Charter .
A less partisan intervention – pouring in troops and airpower to separate the warring parties forcibly – also has no takers , no likely UN authority , and only marginal hope of causing less harm than it would be intended to avoid .
There are many more enthusiasts for a more calibrated military intervention , designed to establish one or more no-fly zones , and maybe safe havens and humanitarian corridors on the ground .
In the early days of the crisis , it was argued that , given the strength of the regime ’ s air defenses and ground forces , even these limited objectives could not be achieved without fighting an all-out war – and thus causing a net increase in human suffering .
With most of the country now ablaze , this argument is less convincing .
But it remains the case that there are no obvious takers for a military role , partly because of the scale , difficulty , and risk of the commitment required , and partly because of the likely political and legal costs , given the minimal prospect of Security Council endorsement .
The United Kingdom and France are pressing hard for indirect military intervention : supplying arms to the rebel side , in their view , would be a low-cost , low-risk , potentially high-return option .
And the European Union has now lifted its ban .
But the US is rightly cautious .
A troubling proportion of the opposition forces are Islamic extremists , and there is no guarantee that weapons deliveries will stay out of their hands .
More broadly , increases in the supply of weapons funneled to rebel forces by Qatar , Saudi Arabia , and others have correlated with surges in the civilian death toll , suggesting that they cost more lives than they save – and with no evident strategic gains .
The Assad regime , with its own external supporters , seems likely to have no difficulty matching any new hardware thrown at it .
If the rationale for arming the opposition is not so much to win the war as to weaken the government ’ s resistance to negotiation , it is arguable that the elements of a “ hurting stalemate ” are already in place , with more weapons likely to produce nothing but more fighting and more casualties .
The pressure that has always mattered most for the Assad regime is that capable of being applied by Russia .
What is new , and encouraging , about the events of the last month is that Russia has found enough common ground with the US – in their mutual anxiety about the rising influence of radical Islam in an increasingly fragmented and volatile region – to be prepared at last to do some squeezing .
Painful concessions will be required from both sides if the Geneva conference is even to convene , let alone reach agreement on a cease-fire and transitional administration .
It is encouraging that the US , following talks between Secretary of State John Kerry and Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov , seems prepared to accept a role for senior Assad regime members in any settlement , and that constructive proposals are starting to emerge from at least some opposition quarters .
Compromise can be anathema for purists , but it has always been the stuff of which peace is made .
It has never been more necessary than it is now in Syria .
