Britain by Itself
LONDON – The United Kingdom ’ s general election is a little more than a month away , but already the campaign seems to have been with us forever , rolling implacably forward , but with little evidence of any genuine excitement – or even significant movement in the polls .
Support for the two main contenders – the Labour Party and the ruling Conservative Party – seems stuck in the low-to-mid 30s .
The Conservatives hope that the government ’ s record on the economy will convince undecided voters to break in their favor late in the campaign .
Maybe they are right ; they deserve to be .
In the meantime , Labour seems to be hoping for who-knows-what to turn the tide , while keeping their collective fingers crossed that they will not be eviscerated in Scotland , where the Scottish National Party is threatening to sweep the board .
One surprise is the election campaign ’ s insularity .
A dark cloud , in the form of a possible referendum on whether the UK will remain in the European Union hangs over the outcome , but no one talks about it much .
Prime Minister David Cameron has said that a referendum is needed in order to prevent the country from sleepwalking toward an accidental and disastrous EU exit .
And so it must come as a surprise to some of Britain ’ s EU partners that none of the country ’ s politicians seems to be making any effort to wake a somnambulant public .
More broadly , while much of the world seems to be going to hell in a handbasket , there has been little talk about Britain ’ s international role and responsibilities .
The UK was once famous for punching above its weight in global affairs , but perhaps the country no longer really matters much – if only because it does not want to matter .
The closest anyone has come to putting some international fizz into the campaign was when US President Barack Obama fired a couple of warning shots across the UK ’ s bow .
The Obama administration seems bent on proving that the so-called “ special relationship ” goes beyond raucous backslapping .
The first salvo – a warning that Britain should not be overly accommodating toward China – followed the UK ’ s decision to join China ’ s Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank .
But the problem is far broader than the AIIB .
In any case , it is doubtful that anyone in London will take much notice .
These days , policy on China is driven entirely by the Treasury , which subscribes to the view that one can do business with the Chinese only from a position of servility .
The second barrage was over a more serious matter , regarding defense spending .
The criticism was directed at all European members of NATO , but it was clear that the US government believes that Britain bears a special responsibility to maintain its military commitments .
The UK has a long track record of scolding its European NATO partners for not spending the 2 % of GDP that each has pledged to dedicate to defense ; now it appears that Britain itself risks falling short .
There is an economic argument against assigning a fixed percentage of national wealth to a given departmental budget .
The British economy is now growing fast by current European standards , so 2 % of GDP is becoming a larger sum .
( The same is true of the UK ’ s similar commitment to the United Nations to spend 0.7 % of its GDP on international development assistance . )
Government officials presumably recognize the embarrassment that would be caused were Britain to fall short of the 2 % target , so they seem to be looking for programs that can be squeezed into the Defense Department ’ s budget to pad spending .
This is exactly the sort of behavior the UK has criticized in others : lumping all sorts of pension payments and intelligence commitments into their calculations of defense spending .
There is a very real risk in all of this .
The fact that neither of the major parties is prepared to make the case for increasing defense spending sends the wrong sort of message to Russian President Vladimir Putin .
The proper response to Russian adventurism in Ukraine should not only be to work with the rest of the EU to help the government in Kyiv steady its economy ; it should also include ramping up defense spending and convincing NATO members to do the same .
It is unfortunate that some of the most important issues facing the UK are being ignored in the country ’ s current election campaign .
Whatever the outcome when voters head to the polls on May 7 , the next government will have to deal with reality .
The country ’ s defense posture and Russia ’ s threat to European security are sure to be near the top of the next prime minister ’ s agenda .
