A Nuclear South Korea ?
SEOUL – South Korean officials have recently realized that the United States is likely to try to forbid them from enriching uranium and expanding their country ’ s missile range , rather than leave these issues on the diplomatic back burner .
Indeed , recent discreet talks , in which the US has disregarded South Korean efforts to supplement the controversial US-South Korea Nuclear Cooperation Agreement , which expires in March 2014 , suggest that there are reasons to be deeply worried about the alliance ’ s future .
American negotiators – the reluctant midwives of South Korea ’ s increasing responsibility in the field of atomic energy – remain steadfast in their opposition to South Korea ’ s drive for improved defensive capabilities and a more advanced energy policy , despite the potential strategic benefits .
But American nonproliferation experts do not anticipate progress on South Korea ’ s efforts to win support for its preferred policies until the US gains more leverage .
Such a stalemate is not new .
Nuclear talks between the two countries have often been characterized by poor communication and a lack of understanding .
While South Korean officials rarely say in public what they really think , it is widely believed that US policymakers have little motivation to reconcile with South Korea ’ s government right now – they would prefer to stifle South Korea ’ s increasingly loud demands .
In the US-South Korea relationship ’ s heyday , American politicians considered the country an “ extended arm of America . ”
Such condescension may have been defensible when South Korea ’ s military dictatorship needed America ’ s political protection and security guarantee , but now the country is a beacon of democracy in East Asia .
So , while South Koreans understand the need for compromise and cooperation , they believe that the time is right for a more balanced partnership .
This belief does not imply South Korean cynicism about nonproliferation .
Rather , it reflects concern about a nuclear North Korea , compounded by anxiety over the recent US-Japan missile-defense accord .
Given that the US and South Korea have the same assessment of the intelligence regarding North Korea ’ s nuclear progress , not to mention South Korea ’ s vulnerability , their failure to reach a practical agreement is troubling .
Former Deputy Foreign Minister Chun Yung-woo warned an American official in 2010 that revising the Nuclear Cooperation Agreement could soon become a “ defining issue ” in South Korea-US relations , and that it was already attracting “ significant amounts of negative press attention . ”
Given South Korea ’ s status as one of the world ’ s top five nuclear-power producers , Chun argued , the South Korean public would not tolerate the perception that Japan was receiving preferential treatment .
Indeed , right-wing leaders like Representative Chung Mong-joon of the governing Saenuri Party have been vocal in expressing their doubts about South Korea ’ s current denuclearization policy , suggesting that a nuclear weapons program could prevent a second war on the peninsula .
The conservatives seem to believe that American nuclear protection for South Korea is a thing of the past .
Despite their hawkish approach to North Korea ’ s nuclear threats , South Korean officials know that uranium enrichment and spent-fuel reprocessing remains only a distant possibility .
As a result , they are approaching negotiations skeptically , rather than emphasizing the sense of mutual obligation that should characterize the alliance .
But their pessimism is hardly groundless , given that the United Arab Emirates has already signed a similar agreement with the US declaring that it would not produce nuclear fuel .
Indeed , South Korean negotiators appear convinced that they will not be able to make any headway with the US on the issue .
( To be sure , this failure may not matter much , given South Korean scientists ’ past declaration that they will not contribute to any nuclear program that could be used for military purposes . )
The US-South Korea debate over nuclear weapons should show both sides that their 59-year-old alliance urgently needs to be updated .
Together , the allies can improve global prospects for nuclear nonproliferation , but only if they hammer out a grand bargain that accounts for South Korea ’ s current – and future – security concerns .
