The Terror Next Door
LONDON – In a prominent hadith , the Prophet Mohammed said : “ If disorder threatens , take refuge in Yemen . ”
The Prophet was referring to the prosperous and civilized Yemen . But today disorder and radicalization in Yemen are beginning to infect Saudi Arabia , and thus the safety of the world ’ s largest oil producer .
The Prophet ’ s hadith about Yemen has enjoyed new resonance ever since the 1980 ’ s , when Saudi Arabia – in line with American policy – sought to export domestic dissenters , most prominently Osama bin Laden , a Yemeni of Saudi birth , to fight Soviet infidels in Afghanistan .
Although dissent was mostly diverted to Afghanistan , bin Laden ’ s most trusted companions ( his wife , too ) have remained mainly in Yemen .
In the wake of the Taliban ’ s ouster in Afghanistan , bin Laden and his followers have come to regard Yemen , alongside Pakistan , as a haven .
Indeed , Yemen is now a bubbling cauldron of jihadis who have flocked there because it , like Afghanistan and Pakistan , has weak , easily manipulated state institutions .
US President Barack Obama ’ s recent order to shut down the Guantánamo Bay detention facility has made the problem of Yemen ’ s weakness a leading international issue .
One-third of the Guantánamo detainees are Yemeni , but Yemen cannot guarantee the United States that the detainees will be controlled effectively if they are returned home .
This fear is real .
Many previously released Guantánamo inmates have disappeared underground .
Saudi Arabia , unlike Yemen , has supposedly created a “ model ” system for reintegrating and re-educating Guantánamo returnees .
The Al Munasaha rehabilitation center is supposed to “ cure ” jihadi passions , and Saudi returnees from Guantánamo who spend time at Al Munasaha are later offered jobs and wives .
But many of them relapse and escape to Yemen .
Most notorious among these recidivists is Abu Sufyan Al Shihri , now “ Deputy Leader of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula . ”
Seven other Saudi jihadis who escaped to Yemen are also known to be active in Al Qaeda there .
Thus the two largest countries on the Arabian peninsula – Saudi Arabia , the biggest in terms of landmass and oil wealth , and Yemen in terms of population – are now locked in life-and-death struggles with internal enemies .
The paradox is that , though the threat to both countries is the same , each is worsening the outlook for the other by the policies they are pursuing .
For example , in the 1980 ’ s , millions of Yemeni men worked in the Kingdom .
Remittance income formed a big part of Yemen ’ s budget .
But in 1991 , 800,000 Yemenis were expelled because they were seen as a domestic security threat in the run-up to the first Gulf war .
Since then , Yemeni labor has been banned from Saudi Arabia .
Embittered and unemployed , young Yemeni men often become subject to another Saudi policy gone awry – its propagation for export of the Sunni Wahhabi form of Islam .
With new Wahhabi madrasas popping up everywhere in Yemen because of Saudi financial support , it is small wonder that the number of Yemeni jihadis has grown exponentially .
But Yemen , too , is engaged in its own destructive policies .
President Ali Abdullah Salih has regularly used Yemeni Wahhabis to defeat his domestic opponents – first the Communists , then the Zaidis , and then the Huthis .
Saudi Arabia ’ s relationship with Yemen is unlike that with any other Arab country .
The two countries are joined through historical , ethnic , and tribal ties , yet neither has the means to resolve popular resentments and resistance .
Saudi Arabia ’ s traditional “ soft power ” foreign policy tools – lavish spending of oil money and da ’ wa , “ the Call ” – are no longer effective .
Building fences and sending helicopters to police the borders will not be sufficient , and the idea that jihadis can be rehabilitated is a myth .
No medicine will work if , when the patient is released , he encounters the same virus : institutionalized Wahhabism .
Yet there are things the Saudis can do to vaccinate themselves , and Yemen , from fanaticism .
The tentative moves toward liberalization that King Abdullah has made over the past two years need to be accelerated , made more daring , and become more effective in removing the Wahhabi ideology as an incubator for radicalism .
This should not be impossible , because both Saudi Arabia and Yemen have moderate , indigenous Islamic traditions that can be mobilized against jihadism .
If given the financial support that the Wahhabis received , these forces could reverse the current drift to fanaticism .
Both King Abdullah and President Salih understand the problem ; they need to stop using the old tactics and grasp the strategic need for change .
The first change is economic .
Instead of exporting radicalism , Saudi Arabia must start importing Yemeni manpower by lifting its ban on Yemeni workers .
Yemeni officials have also requested admission to the Gulf Cooperation Council .
Up to now , GCC leaders have spurned Yemen ’ s membership for the same reasons that the European Union fears admitting Turkey : Yemen would instantly become the bloc ’ s most populous country .
Indeed , Yemen ’ s population exceeds that of all six GCC members – Qatar , Kuwait , the United Arab Emirates , Bahrain , Oman , and Saudi Arabia – combined .
But if Yemen ’ s masses are not to become more radicalized , they will need to be incorporated into an economic zone that offers hope for the future .
The GCC can and must assume that role .
Yemen is strategically important , not only for Saudi Arabia , but for the world , because it is the only country on the Arabian Peninsula from which oil can reach the open seas without passing through a narrow strait – either the Strait of Hormuz or the Suez Canal .
To endanger this passage is to endanger the world economy ’ s energy lifeline .
When considering Yemen ’ s future , therefore , the stakes could hardly be higher .
