Did US Drone Strikes Lose Yemen ?
NEW YORK – Recent revelations that the US killed an innocent American in a drone strike in Pakistan confirm what a new study , “ Death by Drone , ” of civilian harm caused by US drone strikes in Yemen shows – that claims about the precision of drone strikes are overstated .
The revelations also underscore the stark asymmetry between how the US treats drone strikes that kill its own citizens and those that kill others . While the Obama administration has now publicly acknowledged that it has recently killed three US citizens in drone strikes , it has refused to acknowledge countless other drone strikes around the world which have killed non-US civilians .
In Yemen , the US has been conducting drone strikes since at least 2002 , with estimates of the total number of strikes ranging from 91 to 203 .
While the American and Yemeni governments have lauded the drones ’ precise targeting , they have refused to meaningfully disclose key details about the strikes , including how many have been conducted , who has been targeted , or , crucially , the number and identities of civilians killed .
In a May 2013 speech at the National Defense University , Obama offered assurances that , outside the Afghan war theater , no drone strike would be carried out unless there was “ near-certainty that no civilians will be killed or injured . ”
Obama also claimed that the US targets only “ terrorists who pose a continuing and imminent threat to the American people , ” and that it does not launch drone strikes when it has “ the ability to capture individual terrorists . ”
“ Death by Drone , ” which includes first-hand testimony from eyewitnesses and survivors of drone strikes in Yemen , tells a different story .
The nine case studies documented in the report , four of which cover attacks that came after the 2013 speech , provide credible evidence that US drone strikes have killed and injured Yemeni civilians , suggesting that the “ near-certainty ” standard is not being effectively implemented .
The report also casts doubt on Obama ’ s other claims , with evidence indicating that targets of drone strikes , though perhaps posing a threat to Yemen , may not have posed a direct threat to the US , and that their capture may have been possible .
In other words , Yemeni civilians have suffered and died from drone strikes that may not have been necessary .
More generally , the report provides a window into the experiences of Yemeni civilians directly affected by US drone strikes .
The testimonies of these individuals , vital for assessing the US drone program , are all too easy to overlook because these individuals are poor and have no political influence , and because the strikes are conducted in secret , far away from the US .
As Yaslem Saeed bin Ishaq , whose son was killed in a US drone strike in Wadi Sir on August 1 , 2013 , observed , “ They just kill .
They do not know what havoc their missiles have caused . They are unaware of the suffering they create for our families . ”
Indeed , if the US never acknowledges the specific strikes , how can ordinary Americans possibly know that Rasilah al-Faqih , a pregnant Yemeni woman , was killed in Walad Rabei ’ , along with her husband and ten-year-old daughter , as they headed home from a visit to the doctor ?
Or that Abdoh Mohammed al-Jarraah ’ s house in Silat al-Jarraah had 19 people , including women and children , inside when it was hit by a US drone strike ?
The US ’ refusal to acknowledge drone strikes that kill foreigners is sending a damaging message in Yemen and beyond . As Moqbel Abdullah Ali al-Jarraah , a villager from Silat al-Jarraah , put it : “ I believe that America is testing its lethal inventions in our poor villages , because [ it ] cannot afford to do so at any place where human life has value .
Here , we are without value . ”
In every incident recorded in this report , the families of Yemeni civilians killed in US strikes want to know why they were targeted .
As the father of Nasser Mohammed Nasser , one of four innocent civilians killed in a US drone strike on April 19 , 2014 , lamented : “ My son and those who were with him had nothing to do with Al Qaeda . They were simply on their way to earn a living .
Why , then , did the American aircraft strike them ? ”
But the US has given Nasser no answers .
It has not even acknowledged that it killed his son .
In February 2013 , then-White House counterterrorism chief John Brennan testified at his Senate confirmation hearing to become CIA Director that , “ in the interest of transparency , ” the US must acknowledge mistaken killings publicly .
Later that month , he recognized that the US government “ should make public the overall numbers of civilian deaths resulting from US strikes targeting Al Qaeda . ” The US has done neither .
It should come as no surprise , then , that civilians like Nasser , who have lost mothers , fathers , sons , and daughters in US strikes , are outraged not only at the US , but also at the Yemeni government , which consented to the attacks .
They believe that instead of making Yemen and the US safer , drone strikes only strengthen support for Al Qaeda .
Earlier this year , the US announced a new policy for drone exports , purportedly part of a broader effort to work with other countries to “ shape international standards ” on the use of drones and compel recipient states “ to use these systems in accordance with international law . ”
But , as “ Death by Drone ” shows , the US drone program is fundamentally flawed and should not be perpetuated . The Obama administration ’ s recent admissions that its drone strikes killed its own citizens only underscore this fact .
