Why Musharraf Survives
Recent threats by the Bush administration to cut off billions of dollars in aid to Pakistan have sparked panic in government circles .
Likewise , according to the Pakistani ambassador in Washington , military strikes by the United States aimed at al-Qaeda and Taliban havens inside Pakistan ’ s tribal areas would destabilize Pakistan and “ possibly could bring [ General Pervez Musharraf ] down . ”
But how worried should the Pakistani authorities really be in the face of growing US pressure to root out Islamic militants ?
Occasional frustrations notwithstanding , it is , in fact , unlikely that the US will turn against a faithful – and dependent – ally , especially one whose leader enjoys cordial personal relations with Bush .
Nor , due to a lack of organized opposition , will public anger at Musharraf ’ s pro-US policy destabilize his regime .
Indeed , the wily general-president does not merely survive crisis after crisis , but has thrived in power .
How does he do it ?
The answer lies in a finely honed strategy , perfected over years , that juggles US demands and the interests of local intelligence chiefs , mullahs , tribal leaders , venal politicians , and a host of fortune seekers .
Webs of intrigue and murky players obscure details , but the priorities are unmistakeable .
First , American impatience must be held in check .
Pakistan is expected to deliver results on al-Qaeda and the Taliban .
However , the pot is not to be emptied all at once .
For example , when US Vice-President Dick Cheney arrived in Islamabad in early March , threatening an aid cut and direct US action against Islamic militants , his message was not lost .
Shortly before his unmarked aircraft landed , Pakistan announced the capture in Quetta of Mullah Obaidullah , deputy to the elusive Taliban chief , Mullah Omar .
Obaidullah carried a $ 1 million reward and was the most senior Taliban captured since November 2001 .
Obaidullah ’ s capture – carried out reluctantly – underscores the Pakistan military ’ s ambiguous relationship with the Taliban .
Despite more than 700 Pakistani combat deaths , many in Musharraf ’ s army wish to retain the Taliban as quasi-allies who – when the Americans leave Afghanistan someday – will give Pakistan the “ strategic depth ” it needs against India .
Thus , to the chagrin of Afghanistan ’ s president , Hamid Karzai , Quetta remains a hub of Taliban opposition to his regime .
A second aspect of Musharraf ’ s strategy is to create mutually beneficial relations with Islamists .
This is a tricky business .
Musharraf cannot permit the mullahs to become too strong .
The mullahs , on the other hand , consider Musharraf an agent of the great Satan , America , and thus a traitor to Islam .
Nevertheless , Musharraf ’ s men have skillfully fractured the main Islamic opposition party , Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal ( MMA ) , with bribes , blackmail , and internal dissension fomented by agent provocateurs .
As part of the trade-off , terrorist leaders who are officially under house arrest – like Maulana Masood Azhar and Hafiz Saeed – remain able to open offices , address rallies , and preach jihad freely .
Such appeasement carries a price .
This is clear in Islamabad , where over the past two months , Kalashnikov-toting students have openly challenged the state , following a government order for the demolition of dozens of illegally built mosques and seminaries .
Unnerved by the wild-eyed students , the government faltered , then surrendered .
In a dramatic reversal , Musharraf ’ s minister of religious affairs , the son of former dictator General Zia ul-Haq , promised to rebuild damaged mosques and even symbolically laid the first stone at one construction site .
The third element of Musharraf ’ s strategy is more positive : he knows that he must do some good – and also be seen doing it .
This is crucial for his image as a newly emerged world leader , promising moderate Islam in an ocean of extremism .
Some of Musharraf ’ s achievements are significant .
Relations with India have improved , the Kashmir insurgency supported by Pakistan has been scaled back , a women ’ s protection bill was passed in the teeth of Islamic opposition , and a virulent public school curriculum that emphasized jihad and martyrdom has been toned down .
But men who live by the gun are willing to die by the gun , and Musharraf is not taking chances .
He knows that the real threat to his power – and his life – comes from within his constituency , the military .
As a result , he has become obsessed with micromanaging everything from troop movements and special events to postings and promotions , all of which require his personal stamp of approval .
Hardline Islamists , favored previously , are now out , and soldiers charged with mutiny have received the death penalty .
Although this has further deepened pro- and anti-US divisions within the army , among both commissioned and non-commissioned officers , Musharraf clearly expects to remain president well beyond the October 2007 elections , as well as to extend further his term of leadership of the army .
To achieve this end , whatever needs to be done will be done ; principles and rules are elastic .
One might have expected the Americans to know better than to bet all on a man who might be gone tomorrow .
But , beyond pumping in dollars and supporting Musharraf and his military , the US appears clueless in dealing with Pakistan and its problems of social development .
With the defeat of al-Qaeda and the Taliban America ’ s only visible goal , it is no surprise that the US remains enormously unpopular among Pakistanis , forcing Musharraf to maintain his perilous balancing act .
