Turkey ’ s Frontline Foreign Policy
JERUSALEM – A few months before he became Turkey ’ s foreign minister , Ahmet Davutoglu , then Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan ’ s chief adviser , met with a group of Middle Eastern academics and policy experts , including Arabs and Israelis .
With his academic background and immense erudition , he succeeded in painting , on a wide canvass , the new directions of Turkey ’ s policies under the Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) leadership .
By then , it had become clear that Turkey ’ s road to the European Union had been closed , somewhat rudely , owing mainly to combined German and French pressure .
But those who expected Islamist fire and brimstone from Davutoglu were deeply disappointed .
What was articulated was a levelheaded and sophisticated exposé , seldom heard from policymakers : it was thoughtful , honest , and breath-taking .
It was also a clear departure from the conventional foreign-policy straightjacket devised by Kemal Ataturk , which had for decades forced Turkish diplomacy into the Procrustean bed of 1920 ’ s-style integral nationalism .
Davutoglu began conventionally , declaring that Turkey ’ s geopolitical situation would always dictate the country ’ s foreign policy .
Then came the bombshell : contrary to the conventional Kemalist view of the One and Indivisible Turkish Nation , Davutoglu referred to what everyone has known since modern Turkey was created : the country has more Azeris than Azerbaijan , more people of Albanian origin than live in Albania , more people of Bosniak origin than live in Bosnia , and more Kurds than in Iraqi Kurdistan .
This reality , Davutoglu maintained , means that violence and instability in Turkey ’ s immediate neighborhood threatens to spill into Turkey itself , and regional external conflicts can easily become internally disruptive .
Hence the credo of Turkish foreign policy should be “ zero conflicts with our neighbors and in our neighborhood . ”
This , he explained , was the reason that Turkey was trying to find an accommodation with Armenia .
It justified Turkey ’ s policy vis-à-vis the Kurdish Regional Government in Northern Iraq , its involvement in Bosnia and in Kosovo , its rapprochement with Syria , and also its attempt to mediate between Syria and Israel .
Turkey , he argued , is neither pro-Israeli nor pro-Syrian : it seeks an Israeli-Syrian accommodation in order to add another building block to regional stability .
All these steps are taken by the AKP government because it is in Turkey ’ s interest , given not only its geopolitical position , but also its unique multi-ethnic structure ( he didn ’ t use that terminology , though the implication was clear ) .
Since then ( Davutoglu became Foreign Minister in May 2009 ) , much of what Turkey has done can be explained as being in line with this “ zero conflicts ” theory , including a slightly more nuanced policy on the Cyprus issue .
Yet recent developments suggest that , if this policy is pushed to its limits , it stumbles on its own premises .
One can well understand a Turkish policy of trying to defuse tensions with Iran over that country ’ s nuclear program .
But the joint Iranian-Brazilian-Turkish initiative goes beyond such a policy .
Brazil ’ s President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva may have stepped on a hornets ’ nest , owing to his unfamiliarity with regional policies and his general anti-Yanqui sentiments .
Erdogan must have known that , by trying in this way to shield Iran , he is opening a wider chasm with the EU – and obviously with the United States .
Opposing new sanctions against Iran in the Security Council further alienated Turkey from both the EU and the US .
This does not sit well with a “ zero conflict ” policy .
The same can be said about the shrill tone that Turkey , and Erdogan himself , has recently adopted vis-à-vis Israel .
Walking off the stage at Davos during a round-table debate with Israel ’ s President Shimon Peres might have gained Erdogan points in the Arab world , which has historically viewed Turkey with the suspicion owed to the old imperial ruler .
But the vehemence with which he lashed out at Israel during the Gaza flotilla crisis obviously went far beyond ( justified ) support for beleaguered Palestinians and ( equally justified ) criticism of the messy way in which Israel dealt with an obviously difficult situation .
While gaining support on the so-called Arab street , and perhaps upstaging Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad in the role of a modern Commander-of-the-Faithful , Erdogan ’ s policy and behavior have shocked not only Israelis , but also moderate Arab leaders in Egypt , Saudi Arabia , Jordan , and some of the Gulf states .
For many years , the AKP appeared to many in the region and elsewhere as a model for a democratic party with Islamic roots .
But by supporting Hamas , Erdogan has allied Turkey with the most disruptive and extremist fundamentalist force in the Muslim Arab world – an organization that has its origins in the Muslim Brotherhood , the arch-enemy of all Arab regimes in the region ( including , of course , Syria ) .
Since Erdogan is a critic of Israel , Arab rulers cannot say this openly .
But Arab governments – and their security services – are beginning to ask themselves whether Turkey ’ s policies will undermine whatever internal stability their states possess .
This is the exact opposite of a genuine “ zero conflict ” policy that aims to minimize tensions and enhance stability .
Turkey now finds itself , through its alliance with Iran and support for Hamas , rushing headlong into a series of conflicts – with Europe , the US , Israel , and moderate Arab regimes that have survived Iranian Shia fundamentalism but may now feel threatened by a neo-Ottoman Sunni foreign policy .
Turkey is thus emerging not as a regional mediator , equidistant from contending local players , but as an assertive , if not aggressive , regional power aiming for hegemony .
Far from avoiding conflicts and mediating existing tensions , Turkey under the AKP appears intent on stoking new conflicts and creating new frontlines .
