The Triumph of Politics in Europe
MADRID – Economics , particularly economic theories , always yield in the end to political imperatives .
That is why Europe ’ s fast-changing political landscape , reshaped by electoral insurrections in France and Greece against German-backed fiscal austerity , is bound to affect Europe ’ s economic policies as well .
Such an imperative has been at work throughout Europe ’ s postwar history .
Indeed , Europe ’ s shift from the modest customs union of the European Economic Community to the single market and common currency of today ’ s European Monetary Union was itself a fundamentally political move , one with strategic implications , of course .
France wanted to tame German power by harnessing it to the European project , and Germany was prepared to sacrifice the Deutsche Mark for the sake of France ’ s acceptance of a united Germany , the nightmare of Europe ’ s recent past .
An economically robust Germany is , without doubt , vital to the European project , if only because history has shown how dangerous an unhappy Germany can be .
Indeed , it was thanks to the euro – and the captive European market that goes with it – that Germany today is the world ’ s second-leading exporter ( China surpassed it in 2009 ) .
Europe , however , has always found it difficult to come to terms with an over-confident , let alone arrogant , Germany .
The current political turmoil in Europe shows that , regardless of how sensible Chancellor Angela Merkel ’ s austerity prescriptions for debt-ridden peripheral Europe might be in the abstract , they resemble a German Diktat .
The concern for many is not just Europe ’ s historic “ German problem , ” but also that Germany could end up exporting to the rest of Europe the same ghosts of radical politics and violent nationalism that its economic success has transcended at home .
Once the crisis became a sad daily reality for millions of unemployed – particularly for what appears to be a lost generation of young , jobless Europeans – EU institutions also became a target of popular rage .
Their inadequacies – embodied in a cumbersome system of governance , and in endless , inconclusive summitry – and their lack of democratic legitimacy are being repudiated by millions of voters throughout the continent .
Europe ’ s experience has shown that the subordination of society to economic theories is politically untenable .
Social vulnerability and frustration at the political system ’ s failure to provide solutions are the grounds upon which radical movements have always emerged to offer facile solutions .
A concomitant of such Kurzschluss between mainstream leaders and voters has always been the politics of accentuated ethnic identity , ultra-nationalism , and outright bigotry .
Former French President Nicolas Sarkozy ended up trying desperately to appeal to those very sentiments in his last-ditch effort to avert his political demise .
What we have seen across Europe of late is a rebellion of voters against mainstream politics .
In the first round of French presidential elections , the extreme right and left received more than 30 % of the vote , with Martine Le Pen ’ s anti-EU National Front threatening to supplant the center-right Union for a Popular Movement as the country ’ s new mainstream rightist party .
In Greece , the party system ’ s dangerous fragmentation into a range of smaller groups , combined with the robust emergence of a new anti-austerity left , Alexis Tsipras ’ s Syriza , and a neo-Nazi right , has plunged governance into to a state of total paralysis .
Ironically , what the civilized protests of mainstream parties in peripheral Europe failed to achieve – a relaxation of the dogma of austerity – might come about as a result of the politics of brinkmanship proposed by the Greek radical left .
By its blatant rebellion against German-dictated austerity , and by making Greek withdrawal from the euro a credible possibility , Syriza is bringing closer than ever the euro ’ s chaotic collapse in Europe ’ s periphery , if not beyond .
By insisting that the choice is between new terms for the Greek bailout or a Doomsday scenario , Syriza could be creating the possibility for a quasi-Keynesian resolution of the European crisis .
Tsipras might be “ impetuous , ” as his mainstream adversaries from the center-left Pasok and the center-right New Democracy would say , but he is not irrational .
His is a rather sober reading of reality : the austerity plan has become a highway to social hell for his countrymen , and would likely condemn Greece to long years of ruinous depression within a permanent debt trap , and possibly to a breakdown of democracy .
Merkel ’ s now legendary obstinacy eventually might have to succumb to the imperatives of politics .
It is one thing to ignore European Commission President José Manuel Barroso ’ s call for a more flexible economic policy , and quite another to dismiss out of hand the powerful message coming from French and Greek voters .
Nor is it a minor political headache for Merkel to have to face an anti-austerity alliance of Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti and the new French president , François Hollande .
Spain ’ s capacity to withstand an austerity “ cure ” that only sinks it deeper into recession must also have its limits .
So now Germany ’ s finance ministry , the guardian of fiscal rectitude , is considering measures such as using the European Investment Bank to foster growth , issuing EU “ project bonds ” to finance infrastructure investment , and allowing wages in Germany to rise at a faster pace than in the rest of Europe .
The imminent – indeed , inevitable – victory of politics over recalcitrant economics may well be at hand .
