Whither Putin \ u0027s Regime ?
Whenever I arrive in Moscow , I am impressed by its new shops and buildings .
But another key aspect of the Yeltsin era - its rollicking debates - has fallen silent .
Part of the explanation for this is increased official control , part is declining public interest , and part is that Russia 's problems nowadays simply seem less urgent .
After the government seized influence over the independent television networks , NTV and TV6 , Russia 's media became vastly duller .
The latest fad is for officials to sue newspapers for libel , demanding over $ 1 million .
Russian journalists are often corrupt , and tens of thousands of dollars are paid for a single defaming TV program or newspaper article .
Yet , systematic silencing of Russia 's media is unnecessary .
The reason for this is simple : the lives of ordinary people are improving , so they support Putin willingly .
Their main concern is the falling growth rate - from 9 % in 2000 to 3.5-4 % this year - yet output statistics keep rising .
Indeed , the only big macroeconomic debate concerns exchange rate policy , where Presidential advisor Andrei Illarionov argues that Russia 's real exchange rate is too high - indeed , is now as high as in 1998 .
But if the exchange rate is about to cause trouble , there is still good news on the money front .
At long last , Viktor Gerashchenko is out as Chairman of the Central Bank of Russia , replaced by First Deputy Minister of Finance Sergei Ignatiev .
Arguably , Gerashchenko was the most harmful office-holder during the transition .
He maintained Russia 's Central Bank as a bureaucratic and murky monster of 80,000 bureaucrats ( America 's Fed , by contrast , has only 10,000 employees ) .
Gerashchenko blocked all bank reforms ranging from restructuring , liberalization and privatization to deposit insurance .
He resigned because the State Duma adopted a new law on the Central Bank that introduced minimal accountability .
I have known Mr. Ignatiev since 1991 .
He arrived with Anatoli 's Chubais ' team from St. Petersburg in November that year , first becoming deputy minister of finance and soon deputy chairman of the CBR .
Gerashchenko sacked him as unsuitably competent , honest and reformist .
Hardly any Russian official has a more stellar reputation for honesty and integrity than Ignatiev .
He is an outstanding hard-working civil servant and a good reformer .
The question is whether the soft-spoken Ignatiev can undertake a major re-organization .
Ignatiev is likely to pursue a transparent and competent monetary policy and introduce deposit insurance .
He will probably privatize the large state Vneshtorgbank and clean up the state savings bank , Sberbank .
In December 2003 , Russia will hold its next parliamentary elections , and people are reviewing what reforms are possible before then .
The most significant reform is the introduction of real private ownership of agricultural land , expected this fall .
Limited pension reform has been passed .
Some insufficient tax improvements for small enterprises are under way .
A new labor code has been adopted , but delivers scant liberalization because it does not reduce the mandatory severance pay of three months ' salary and enhances the role of the official trade unions .
The biggest scandal is that reform of the collapsing public health care system is unlikely .
The social benefit system remains aimed at the privileged .
While reform loses prominence , steps are taken in the wrong direction .
In late March , the government adopted new measures to protect Russia 's car industry , proposed by the young oligarchs Oleg Deripaska and Alexei Mordashov .
Deripaska has acquired a monopoly of Russia 's aluminum and bus production .
Now he wants the car industry .
Import tariffs for cars will be raised from their current 25 % - the highest tariff - to a prohibitive 70 % for imported cars older then seven years , which compete with new Russian cars .
The import of hundreds of thousands of old Western cars each year has raised living standards for Russia 's new middle class .
President Vladimir Putin appears determined that Russia should enter the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) before the next Duma elections in December 2003 .
This new protectionism raises problems .
Deripaska is leading the campaign to slow Russia 's accession to the WTO .
Both chambers of the parliament are reformist .
The political problem lies within the government , which contains few reformers .
Any government decision needs to be signed by a score of senior officials with no political mandate but who maintain Soviet views .
Russia 's bureaucratic apparatus has grown after communism , extending its dead hand over society .
Public administration reform is vital , but cannot occur until after the next elections .
Putin is increasingly seen as isolated .
Focused on grand international politics , he is less involved in actual policy .
Still , his popularity remains undented .
Few Russians see him as a threat ; most see him as a hope .
Three forces of darkness are apparent .
The first is public complacency .
The second force is the Soviet bureaucracy .
The third is composed of new big businessmen pushing protectionism .
None of these forces is frightful , but each may stall reform for the next two years .
When leaving Moscow , I was reminded that since October , the green channel in the customs has effectively been abolished .
Previously , you could take out $ 1,500 without a customs declaration .
Every single dollar has to be documented - again .
Soviet bureaucracy is creeping back .
