Why is Rape Different ?
NEW YORK – As Swedish prosecutors ’ sex-crime allegations against WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange play out in the international media , one convention of the coverage merits serious scrutiny .
We know Assange by name .
But his accusers – the two Swedish women who have brought the complaints against him – are consistently identified only as “ Miss A ” and “ Miss W , ” and their images are blurred .
News organizations argue that the policy is motivated by respect for the alleged victims .
But the same organizations would never report charges of , say , fraud – or , indeed , non-sexual assault – against a suspect who has been named on the basis on anonymous accusations .
In fact , despite its good intentions , providing anonymity in sex-crime cases is extremely harmful to women .
The convention of not naming rape accusers is a relic of the Victorian period , when rape and other sex crimes were being codified and reported in ways that prefigure our own era .
Rape was seen as “ the fate worse than death , ” rendering women – who were supposed to be virgins until marriage – “ damaged goods . ”
Virginia Woolf called the ideal of womanhood in this period “ The Angel in the House ” : a retiring , fragile creature who could not withstand the rigors of the public arena .
Of course , this ideal was a double-edged sword : their ostensible fragility – and their assigned role as icons of sexual purity and ignorance – was used to exclude women from influencing outcomes that affected their own destinies .
For example , women could not fully participate under their own names in legal proceedings .
Indeed , one of the rights for which suffragists fought was the right to be convicted of one ’ s own crimes .
Nonetheless , even after women gained legal rights – and even as other assumptions about women have gone the way of smelling salts and whalebone stays – the condescending Victorian convention of not identifying women who make sex-crime charges remains with us .
That convention not only is an insult to women , but also makes rape prosecutions far more difficult .
Overwhelmingly , anonymity serves institutions that do not want to prosecute rapists or sexual harassers .
The United States military , for instance , hides rape accusers ’ identities , and the prevalence of rape in the US armed forces today is off the charts .
Maintaining anonymous charges enables the military authorities to avoid keeping comprehensive records , which in turn allows officials to evade responsibility for transparent reporting of assaults and of prosecutions – and thus not to prosecute sex crime in any serious , systematic way .
The same is true with universities .
My alma mater , Yale , used anonymity in reporting of sex harassment and rape to sweep sex-crime incidents and repeat offenders ’ records under the rug for two decades , thereby protecting its own interest in preventing systematic investigation .
Because of the prevalence of universities ’ anonymity policy , at least two alleged serial rapists – whose assaults were reported to their employers separately by more than one victim – are teaching at new universities , with no charges ever brought against them .
The lesson is clear : when charges are made anonymously , no one takes them as seriously as charges brought in public , resulting in institutionalized impunity for sexual predators .
Indeed , only when victims have stood up and stated their names – granted , a difficult and often painful thing to do – have institutional change and successful prosecutions been possible .
Anita Hill ’ s decision in 1991 not to make anonymous accusations against Clarence Thomas , now a US Supreme Court justice , spurred a wave of enforcement of equal-employment-opportunity law .
Hill knew that her motives would be questioned .
But , as a lawyer , she understood how unethical anonymous allegations are – and how unlikely they are to bring about real consequences .
In fact , the convention of anonymity merely allows rape myths to flourish .
When victims are not kept hidden , it becomes much clearer that rape can happen to anyone – grandmothers and students , homemakers and prostitutes .
Instead , we have stereotypes about how “ real ” rape victims must look and act in order to be taken seriously .
And we have the myth of higher false reporting of rape relative to other crimes ( in the US , the rate is no different : 2-4 % ) .
Feminists have long argued that rape must be treated like any other crime .
But in no other crime are accusers kept behind a wall of anonymity .
Treating rape so differently serves only to maintain its mischaracterization as a “ different ” kind of crime , loaded with cultural baggage and projections .
Finally , there is a profound moral issue at stake .
Though children ’ s identities should , of course , be shielded in sex-crime allegations , women are not children .
If one makes a serious criminal accusation , one must wish to be treated – and one must treat oneself – as a moral adult .
That is why justice systems – at least in democracies – typically demand that the accused be able to face his or her accuser .
Why , for example , in a case that is so dependent on public opinion – and on which so much depends – must Assange face allegations that may have grave consequences for him , while his accusers remain hidden ?
So-called “ rape shield ” laws should be used to protect alleged victims .
It is no one ’ s business whom a victim has slept with previously , or what she was wearing when she was attacked .
But preventing an accuser ’ s sexual history from entering into an investigation or prosecution is not the same as providing anonymity .
Nor should it be .
After all , motive and context are legitimate questions in any serious criminal allegation .
Hill , for example , knew that she would have to explain why she waited years to accuse Thomas , her former employer .
Likewise , adult accusers of Church-protected sex criminals knew that they would have to answer fundamental questions ( notably , many of them have identified themselves , which has helped get real prosecutions ) .
It is wrong – and sexist – to treat female sex-crime accusers as if they were children , and it is wrong to try anyone , male or female , in the court of public opinion on the basis of anonymous accusations .
Anonymity for rape accusers is long overdue for retirement .
