The Velvet Delusion
COLLEGE STATION , TEXAS – With the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the relatively non-violent overthrow of communism throughout Central and Eastern Europe , optimists predicted a new golden age of a world filled with peaceful democracies .
History , for some , seemed to have come to an end .
But the optimists have proved to be misguided , as the world ’ s powers , great and small , drew their own , often conflicting , lessons from the past .
For Americans , 1989 validated everything they already believed .
They had won the Cold War , or so they perceived , through hard force and conviction .
They saw demonstrators in East European capitals and Chinese crowds in Tiananmen Square chanting for freedom , and believed that those throngs wanted to be American .
As George H.W. Bush declared , “ We know how to secure a more just and prosperous life for man on Earth : through free markets , free speech , free elections , and the exercise of free will unhampered by the state . ”
Subsequent events seemed to validate this American recipe .
The Gulf War confirmed American military might and the age-old perils of appeasement .
The Clinton era gave us active democracy-promotion as the principle tool of American foreign policy , which George W. Bush ’ s administration took to unprecedented extremes .
Cold War victory provided the answer for each . “ America ’ s resolve and American ideals so clearly articulated by Ronald Reagan , ” Clinton said , “ helped to bring the Wall down . ”
The lesson was clear : “ we achieve our aims by defending our values and leading the forces of freedom . ”
Barack Obama ’ s words echo those of Clinton .
Despite his frequent avowals of change , his central articulation of American policy seems remarkably static .
“ Earlier generations faced down fascism and communism not just with missiles and tanks , ” Obama preached in his famous campaign speech in Berlin , “ but with sturdy alliances and enduring convictions . ”
This is why Obama ’ s America spends more on weaponry than the rest of the world combined , and why democracy-promotion remains the unquestioned foundation of American foreign policy , with debate possible only about its application .
History offers a recipe for success , so long as Americans adhere to the lesson of 1989 .
But the rest of the world learned different lessons .
European strategists largely dismissed America ’ s interpretation that force had won the Cold War , believing that cooperation had triumphed precisely because force was absent .
They heard in pleas for freedom from behind the Iron Curtain not a desire to become American , but to join the remarkably successful European experiment in collective security and prosperity that emerged after World War II .
For today ’ s European leaders , the central lesson of 1989 is that force is counterproductive ; what matters is consensus .
Russian leaders , not surprisingly , also drew their own conclusions .
When Mikhail Gorbachev spoke of a “ Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals , ” his conception was not of a continent under Soviet domination , as Josef Stalin once threatened .
Having demonstrated remarkable restraint in 1989 , Russian leaders expected to be embraced by the West .
Instead , NATO expanded to Russia ’ s doorstep , the European Union barred its doors , and membership in the World Trade Organization seemed out of reach .
The post-Soviet economy crumbled , crime skyrocketed , and life expectancy declined .
Russia ’ s voice in global affairs lost authority .
For Russian leaders , 1989 ’ s lesson was clear : trusting the West was foolish at best , dangerous at worst .
Gorbachev ’ s vision of European inclusion neglected centuries of Russian history ; the West did not want Russian participation .
Better that Russians rely on their own power , develop their own resources , and police their own borders .
The Kremlin trusted the West in 1989 . Subsequent Russian leaders refuse to be duped again .
Chinese leaders embraced 1989 ’ s most puzzling legacy . They recoiled at the Soviet bloc ’ s disintegration .
“ Every effort should be made to prevent changes in Eastern Europe from influencing China ’ s internal development , ” party officials concluded in March 1989 , and within months they violently crushed democratic protesters .
China took from 1989 the lesson that state stability was paramount .
Yet China ’ s leaders also recognized that they ignored popular demands at great peril .
The government thus made an implicit deal with its citizens : political dissent would not be tolerated , but , in exchange , the state would guarantee economic growth .
No one could question the government ’ s legitimacy so long as prosperity expanded .
Chinese foreign policy also prioritized legitimacy after 1989 , with the regime hoping to reassert its authority globally by expanding China ’ s participation in international organizations .
Chinese leaders embraced the cooperative nature of the post-1945 European process , but simultaneously took the Russian lesson to heart : the West would not yield merely to good intentions .
But , unlike Russia , China de-emphasized the relevance of traditional hard power to achieve its goals .
In fact , Chinese leaders have spent remarkably little , relative to China ’ s growing GDP , on the military .
Chinese power today comes not from its ability to match America ’ s blue-water navy , but from its holdings in US Treasury bonds .
The legacy of 1989 echoes even in Iran , whose leaders seem clearly to have learned from Tiananmen Square and the collapse of the Iron Curtain that a committed government can , indeed , demobilize a public demanding reform .
The world would not soon forget the horrors of Tiananmen , global protestors promised in 1989 .
But it did – and with extraordinary speed .
In looking back at 1989 , we are , in effect , looking forward from that year ’ s momentous events at the very different legacies that they produced .
