The Unreality of the “ Real ” Business Cycle
LONDON – Testifying recently before a United States congressional committee , former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan said that the recent financial meltdown had shattered his “ intellectual structure . ”
I am keen to understand what he meant .
Since I have had no opportunity to ask him , I have to rely on his memoirs , The Age of Turbulence , for clues .
But that book was published in 2007 – before , presumably , his intellectual structure fell apart .
In his memoirs , Greenspan revealed that his favorite economist was Joseph Schumpeter , inventor of the concept of “ creative destruction . ”
In Greenspan ’ s summary of Schumpeter ’ s thinking , a “ market economy will incessantly revitalize itself from within by scrapping old and failing businesses and then reallocating resources to newer , more productive ones . ”
Greenspan had seen “ this pattern of progress and obsolescence repeat over and over again . ”
Capitalism advanced the human condition , said Schumpeter , through a “ perennial gale of creative destruction , ” which he likened to a Darwinian process of natural selection to secure the “ survival of the fittest . ”
As Greenspan tells it , the “ rougher edges ” of creative destruction were legislated away by Franklin Roosevelt ’ s New Deal , but after the wave of de-regulation of the 1970 ’ s , America recovered much of its entrepreneurial , risk-taking ethos .
As Greenspan notes , it was the dot-com boom of the 1990 ’ s that “ finally gave broad currency to Schumpeter ’ s idea of creative destruction . ”
This was the same Greenspan who in 1996 warned of “ irrational exuberance ” and , then , as Fed chairman , did nothing to check it .
Both the phrase and his lack of action make sense in the light of his ( now shattered ) intellectual system .
It is impossible to imagine a continuous gale of creative destruction taking place except in a context of boom and bust .
Indeed , early theorists of business cycles understood this .
( Schumpeter himself wrote a huge , largely unreadable book , with that title in 1939 . )
In classic business-cycle theory , a boom is initiated by a clutch of inventions – power looms and spinning jennies in the eighteenth century , railways in the nineteenth century , automobiles in the twentieth century .
But competitive pressures and the long gestation period of fixed-capital outlays multiply optimism , leading to more investment being undertaken than is actually profitable .
Such over-investment produces an inevitable collapse .
Banks magnify the boom by making credit too easily available , and they exacerbate the bust by withdrawing it too abruptly .
But the legacy is a more efficient stock of capital equipment .
Dennis Robertson , an early twentieth-century “ real ” business-cycle theorist , wrote : “ I do not feel confident that a policy which , in the pursuit of stability of prices , output , and employment , had nipped in the bud the English railway boom of the forties , or the American railway boom of 1869-71 , or the German electrical boom of the nineties , would have been on balance beneficial to the populations concerned . ”
Like his contemporary , Schumpeter , Robertson regarded these boom-bust cycles , which involved both the creation of new capital and the destruction of old capital , as inseparable from progress .
Contemporary “ real ” business-cycle theory builds a mountain of mathematics on top of these early models , the main effect being to minimize the “ destructiveness ” of the “ creation . ”
It manages to combine technology-driven cycles of booms and recessions with markets that always clear ( i.e. , there is no unemployment ) .
How is this trick accomplished ?
When a positive technological “ shock ” raises real wages , people will work more , causing output to surge .
In the face of a negative “ shock , ” workers will increase their leisure , causing output to fall .
These are efficient responses to changes in real wages .
No intervention by government is needed .
Bailing out inefficient automobile companies like General Motors only slows down the rate of progress .
In fact , whereas most schools of economic thought maintain that one of government ’ s key responsibilities is to smooth the cycle , “ real ” business-cycle theory argues that reducing volatility reduces welfare !
It is hard to see how this type of theory either explains today ’ s economic turbulence , or offers sound instruction about how to deal with it .
First , in contrast to the dot-com boom , it is difficult to identify the technological “ shock ” that set off the boom .
Of course , the upswing was marked by super-abundant credit .
But this was not used to finance new inventions : it was the invention .
It was called securitized mortgages .
It left no monuments to human invention , only piles of financial ruin .
Second , this type of model strongly implies that governments should do nothing in the face of such “ shocks . ”
Indeed , “ real ” business-cycle economists typically argue that , but for Roosevelt ’ s misguided New Deal policies , recovery from the Great Depression of 1929-1933 would have been much faster than it was .
Equivalent advice today would be that governments the world over are doing all the wrong things in bailing out top-heavy banks , subsidizing inefficient businesses , and putting obstacles in the way of rational workers spending more time with their families or taking lower-paid jobs .
It reminds me of the interviewer who went to see Robert Lucas , one of the high priests of the New Business Cycle school , at a time of high American unemployment in the 1980 ’ s .
“ My driver is an unemployed Ph.D. graduate , ” he said to Lucas .
“ Well , I ’ d say that if he is driving a taxi , he ’ s a taxi-driver , ” replied the 1995 Nobel Laureate .
Although Schumpeter brilliantly captured the inherent dynamism of entrepreneur-led capitalism , his modern “ real ” successors smothered his insights in their obsession with “ equilibrium ” and “ instant adjustments . ”
For Schumpeter , there was something both noble and tragic about the spirit of capitalism .
But those sentiments are a world away from the pretty , polite techniques of his mathematical progeny .
