Why Is Physics Beautiful ?
CAMBRIDGE – The nineteenth-century physicist Heinrich Hertz once described his feeling that James Clerk Maxwell ’ s equations , which depict the fundamentals of electricity and magnetism , “ have an independent existence and an intelligence of their own , that they are wiser … even than their discoverers , that we get more out of them than was originally put into them . ”
Not long after , Albert Einstein called Niels Bohr ’ s atomic model “ the highest form of musicality in the sphere of thought . ”
More recently , the late Nobel laureate Richard Feynman , describing his discovery of new laws of physics , declared , “ You can recognize truth by its beauty and simplicity . ”
Similar sentiments are all but universal among modern physicists .
Wishful thinking could never produce working iPhones , photographs of Pluto , or atomic bombs .
Physics , as summarized in a handful of mathematically precise laws , indisputably works .
Yet many things that “ work ” do not inspire the kind of admiration that the fundamental laws of nature do .
Their beauty is rooted , first , in the laws ’ symmetry , here meaning the possibility of change without change – a precise yet almost mystical concept .
Just as a circle can be rotated about its center at any angle , changing the position of each of its points without changing its form , symmetric laws apply to changed situations without changing or losing validity .
For example , special relativity asserts that the fundamental laws of physics remain the same when we view the world from a platform moving at constant velocity .
Similarly , so-called time translation symmetry encodes the uniformity of physical law in time : Even as the universe ages , the laws remain the same .
The second source of beauty in the laws of physics is their productivity – what I call their exuberance .
Just a handful of basic principles generates an astonishing wealth of consequences – everything in the physical world !
You can write the equations of the core theories of physics – known as the standard model – quite comfortably on a T-shirt .
To paraphrase Hertz , they give back far more than we put in .
It is important to note that the laws of physics need not necessarily have such marvelous properties .
Consider this hypothetical situation : Developments in computer power , virtual reality , and artificial intelligence enable the creation of self-aware beings whose “ world ” is , from our perspective , a programmed simulation .
If a self-aware Super Mario began to analyze the laws of his world , he would find very little symmetry or productivity .
Instead , he would find a vast collection of loosely connected , quirky rules , reflecting the whims of the programmer .
The beauty of physical law is too impressive to be accidental .
It has led people throughout history to believe that some tasteful higher being created us , and that we inhabit a consciously designed world , like our notional Super Mario .
But this is an extravagant hypothesis , which goes far beyond the facts it is meant to explain .
Before adopting it , we should explore more economical alternatives .
The answer likely lies within us .
Beautiful things are those in which we find pleasure and seek out .
They are , in neurobiological terms , things that stimulate our reward system .
That explains why parents tend to find their young children beautiful , and adults are attracted to nubile models and their images .
It makes evolutionary sense to reward such feelings .
The evolutionary utility of the beauty of physical laws is somewhat less obvious , but no less real .
Given the usefulness of accurately assessing the consequences of our actions , our reward system has evolved so that we derive joy from making successful predictions .
Understanding the forces and patterns defining our world , and especially principles that apply ( without changing ) to a wide variety of situations , can help to improve our predictions .
The fact that we can often infer the behavior of complex objects or systems from knowledge of their parts – that we get back more than we put in – can help us to hone our predictions further .
In short , because evolution predisposes us to find beautiful those things that help us understand the world correctly , it is no accident that we find the correct laws of nature beautiful .
Viewed from this perspective , the apparent beauty of the laws of physics – our attraction to their symmetry and exuberance – is not surprising .
What remains mysterious is why they are comprehensible .
A profound link between beauty and comprehensibility is an increasingly important source of scientific progress .
Today ’ s frontiers of fundamental physics are far removed from everyday experience .
They are difficult and expensive to access experimentally , and we cannot rely on our intuition to fill in the blanks .
The patient accumulation of fact recommended by Francis Bacon , Isaac Newton , and Sherlock Holmes is thus no longer practical .
Instead , we reverse the process , using guesswork to motivate experiment .
We first construct beautiful equations , then derive their consequences , and , finally , craft experiments to test them .
In recent decades , that strategy has proved remarkably successful .
It has given us quantum chromodynamics , which resolves the central problem of nuclear physics , as well as predicting the Higgs particle and much else .
Rather than recognizing the beauty of laws otherwise discovered , we use principles of beauty – vast symmetry and a high ratio of output to input – to enable discovery .
When this works , we have an “ anthropic ” explanation of the laws ’ beauty : If they were not beautiful , we would not have found them .
