Avatar and Empire
NEW YORK – Do nations have psychological processes – even Freudian processes , such as collective egos that can be injured , and repressed guilt feelings that can well up from the collective unconscious – just as individuals do ?
I believe that they do .
I also believe that just as an individual ’ s dreams and slips of the tongue reveal his or her repressed knowledge , so a culture ’ s “ dreamwork ” – its films , pop music , visual arts , and even in the resonant jokes , cartoons and advertising images – reveal the signs of this collective unconscious .
Moreover , a nation ’ s “ irrational dreamwork ” often reflects its actual condition more truthfully than its “ ego ” – its official pronouncements , diplomatic statements , and propaganda .
So take this theory with you when you see James Cameron ’ s Avatar , and watch for two revealing themes : the raw , guilty template of the American unconscious in the context of the “ war on terror ” and late-stage corporate imperialism , and a critical portrayal of America – for the first time ever in a Hollywood blockbuster – from the point of view of the rest of the world .
In the Hollywood tradition , of course , the American hero fighting an indigenous enemy is innocent and moral , a reluctant warrior bringing democracy , or at least justice , to feral savages .
In Avatar , the core themes highlight everything that has gone wrong with Americans ’ view of themselves in relation to their country ’ s foreign policy .
The hero , Jake Sully , is crippled from combat in a previous American conflict , but is not well cared for by his own country ; if he does his job of genocide properly , “ the corporation ” will reward him with proper medical treatment .
He signs on , essentially , as a corporate contractor – shades of Blackwater ’ s massacre of civilians in Baghdad ’ s Nisour Square .
The enterprise is a “ mission ” in which the soldiers fight not “ for freedom ” but “ for a paycheck . ”
They take their direction from corporate bureaucrats in waging war against the indigenous people , whose sacred land is sited on vast reserves of “ unobtainium , ” which the corporation wishes to secure at all costs .
The soldiers are portrayed as being manipulated by their leaders – through vicious racism and religious derision – into brutal action against the non-aggressive “ hostiles . ”
When the villain , the American military leader of the attack , plans to bomb flat the indigenous people ’ s sacred tree , he boasts that he will blow such a massive hole in their “ racial memory ” that they won ’ t come “ within a thousand clicks ” of the place again .
Even the machinery of US military combat is portrayed non-heroically .
Instead of the classic images of the US Cavalry courageously sweeping down on the savages , or of decent American doughboys bravely clearing out nests of Nazis , bored technocrats , insulated by immense layers of technology , firebomb green valleys , slaughtering enemy warriors and defenseless women and babies while sipping coffee and casually fiddling with touch screens .
The characters ’ lines ( all quotes are approximate ) are those that never pierce the bubble of American self-regard with respect to Iraq and Afghanistan .
“ You should not be here ! ” exclaims the indigenous heroine , and eventual love interest , Neytiri , as if she is speaking of the entire US enterprise overseas .
“ You are like a baby . ” Gesturing at the mayhem caused by the destructive but self-regarding hero , before he “ goes native , ” she says , “ This is your fault .
They should never have had to die . ”
Later , as Sully starts to become sympathetic towards those whom he has been sent to betray , he tells the bureaucrats : “ If people are sitting on something you want , you call them the enemy . ”
When he has fully identified himself with their cause , he joins a movement that is essentially a counterinsurgency , even a jihad ( “ Let ’ s show the Sky People [ the US ] whose land this is ! ” ) .
He and his small band of Americans are even locked in a small Guantánamo-style cell and called “ traitors . ”
The indigenous people are an amalgam of echoes from all the great wars of empire that have troubled the recent American conscience .
Although they are physically a fantasy sci-fi mix of blue skin and cat-like movement , they are culturally a mix of Native Americans and Vietnamese , with Arabic accents thrown in .
They have qualities that Americans would do well to emulate .
They respect their environment , whereas the Americans must “ return to a dying planet , ” because , as the indigenous people put it , “ they have killed their own mother . ”
Sully ’ s journey is not one of conquest but of awakening to his and his people ’ s true relationship to others : “ What am I , the bad guy ? ” he laughs at first , as if that were impossible .
In the end , however , he tries to warn his own imperialist team of the futility of their brutal approach : “ What do we have to offer them ?
Light beer ?
Blue Jeans ?
They will never leave the Hometree [ their sacred land ] .
We have nothing that they want . ”
Ironically , Avatar will probably do more to exhume Americans ’ suppressed knowledge about the shallowness of their national mythology in the face of their oppressive presence in the rest of the world than any amount of editorializing , college courses , or even protest from outside America ’ s borders .
But I am not complaining about this .
Hollywood is that powerful .
But , in the case of Avatar , the power of American filmmaking has for once been directed toward American self-knowledge rather than American escapism .
