The World ’ s Biggest Shock Absorber
MUNICH – Since last autumn , Germany has been accused by a number of Anglo-American economists , above all by the 2008 Nobel laureate Paul Krugman , of not doing enough to combat the world economic crisis and of free-riding on other countries ’ stimulus programs .
Recently , The Financial Times asked where the German economists are who defend Germany ’ s policies , voicing the presumption that they disagree with their government ’ s policies but are too cowardly to say so publicly , thus conforming to the rituals of the German “ consensus society . ”
From a German point of view , this discussion is a ludicrous inversion of the truth .
At first glance , this is indeed less than the American program , which totals 6.2 % of GDP , of which 2 % will be spent in 2009 . But this impression is deceptive , since the German state , through the built-in flexibility of its extensive social-welfare system , already contributes to stabilizing the world economy .
Indeed , Germany ’ s generous unemployment insurance policies ensure that people are able to maintain their consumption standards even if they lose their jobs .
Germany even has short-time allowances that enable companies to reduce their employees ’ working hours , with the loss in earnings partly reimbursed by the state .
Without this short-time allowance , the average number of unemployed in 2009 would be 300,000 higher than it is now .
At the same time , more than 40 % of Germany ’ s adult population ( pensioners , social-welfare recipients , unemployed , accident victims , students ) receives some form of state transfer income , especially those in eastern Germany , while the burden of taxes and social security contributions on those in employment is high .
While this certainly impedes long-term economic growth and causes great structural problems , it also means that the state reacts extremely counter-cyclically and stabilizes the economy to a great extent , which benefits the entire world .
The German state recorded a budget deficit of just 0.1 % of GDP in 2008 , which , according to a recent OECD forecast , will soar to 4.5 % of GDP in 2009 .
Thus , the economic stimulus provided by the German state budget will amount to 4.4 % of GDP in 2009 .
In the United States , the budget deficit in 2008 stood at 5.8 % of GDP , and , according to the same OECD forecast , will amount to 10.2 % of GDP in 2009 , which translates into exactly the same economic stimulus as in Germany , 4.4 % of GDP .
In addition , Germany has much more inner stability than the US , because it does not have the problem of heavily indebted households that are now restricted in their borrowing .
German banks grant mortgages only to a maximum of 60 % of the value of a house , instead of the 100 % mortgages that were frequently seen in the US and United Kingdom .
Likewise , there is also virtually no credit card debt in Germany , or other reasons for US-style household indebtedness .
A normal German household is not on its last financial legs , and is therefore able to compensate for income losses by adjusting its savings .
This is an additional reason why private consumption in Germany , according to last week ’ s joint forecast by Germany ’ s leading economic institutes , will increase by 0.3 % in 2009 in the midst of the worst post-war economic crisis , whereas private consumption is in freefall almost everywhere else in the world .
Germany is the world ’ s second largest importer , closely behind the US .
Thus , the stability of German consumption is currently the world economy ’ s strongest economic pillar .
Whereas German exports are falling at an annual rate of 20 % , the portion of imports that does not consist of intermediate products for export goods is stable , helping the world as a whole .
The data clearly supports this view .
According to the OECD , the annualized flow of German goods exports from January 2008 to January 2009 declined by $ 173 billion more than the corresponding flow of imports fell , which means that Germany ’ s annualized trade surplus fell by the same amount .
This is the strongest decline in net foreign demand facing a single country , or , equivalently , the strongest increase in a country ’ s net demand for foreign goods .
Japan , for example , has confronted only a $ 157 billion decline in its annualized trade balance .
During the same period , annualized US imports declined by $ 284 billion more than US exports , and China ’ s annualized trade surplus increased by $ 249 billion .
In other words , from January 2008 to January 2009 , the US withdrew $ 284 billion and China $ 249 billion in annualized demand from the world economy , whereas Germany provided $ 173 billion and Japan $ 157 billion in annualized demand stimulus to the world economy .
For Europe ’ s bigger countries , the picture of annualized demand in the same period is mixed .
While Italy , like Germany and Japan , has added demand , totaling $ 6 billion , Spain has withdrawn $ 101 billion , the UK $ 50 billion and France $ 19 billion .
The $ 7 trillion decline in US house prices over the past two years was equivalent to the explosion of an atomic bomb .
Germany , Japan , and other countries absorbed and mitigated the shock waves .
So , instead of belittling German efforts , the world should show Germany a little more gratitude .
