Why Free Trade Helps Social Welfare Programs
SAN FRANCISCO : Nowadays , most discussions about social policy are muddled by the notion that free trade hurts society .
Everywhere you look , well-meaning groups see imports as a threat to their pet social programs , from welfare to environmental protection .
The result ?
Strange alliances between the romantic and nationalist right , the green left , and self-interested parties such as trade unions appear to oppose free trade .
In America , this new protectionist / social policy pact scored a big victory recently in derailing President Clinton ’ s request for so-called " fast-track " negotiating authority from Congress , which he intended to use in order to bring Chile into the North American Free Trade zone ( NAFTA ) .
The furious opposition of social policy advocates to free trade , however , cannot stand scrutiny .
Many U.S. environmentalists , for example , claimed that NAFTA would undermine American environmental standards .
Four years later , that heavily prophesied " race to the bottom " is scarcely to be sniffed .
Look to America ’ s northern border and you see that free trade is indeed compatible with divergent national welfare objectives .
The US / Canada trade agreement ( a precursor to NAFTA ) was once opposed by Canadians who worried that their country ’ s generous social welfare programs would be fatally undermined by it .
" I have an immense fear , " said Edward Broadbent , the leader of Canada ’ s Social Democrats back then , " that if the agreement is put in place , corporate pressures would mount to harmonize Canadian social policies , such as subsidized Medicare and pensions , with lower American standards . ’ "
But those fears proved groundless .
The U.S. / Canada free trade agreement has worked for a decade , yet Canadian welfare policy remains far more generous than America ’ s own .
One reason for this is that , to adjust for the higher social charges which Canada imposes on its goods , the Canadian dollar fell relative to the U.S. dollar over the course of these years .
Canada ’ s depreciated currency made American goods more expensive in Canada By doing so , a feared explosion of U.S. imports did not take place .
Self-appointed guardians of social policy should look not only to Canada for guidance , but to Northern Europe ’ s welfare states as well .
In Sweden , the Netherlands , and Denmark , social welfare programs literally exploded during the 1950s and 1960s .
Those decades just happen to be the time when the unwavering commitment to free trade of those small European welfare states held steady .
So if free trade undermines social welfare programs , as today ’ s new protectionists declare , why did social democracy flourish in Sweden , Denmark , and the Netherlands during that twenty-year period ?
The answer ?
Free trade helps , not hurts , social welfare programs .
Gains from international trade deliver big increases in national income to the trading partners .
In Northern Europe in the early postwar decades , part of this income financed fast expansions of welfare state programs .
The increase in economic growth brought about by open markets made it possible to provide more health services , more education , and more social security for Northern Europeans than otherwise would have been possible .
As a practical political matter , it is far easier to funnel tax monies to social programs when a nation ’ s economic pie is growing than when it is not , and free trade remains an engine of growth .
The dangers posed by today ’ s emerging protectionist coalitions cannot be discounted .
By identifying trade protection with protecting the environment , consumer rights , human rights , and social welfare benefits , protectionists claim the moral high ground undeservedly in the battle with free-traders .
Understanding in their bones the deep popularity of social causes , free trade ’ s enemies cleverly fuse trade protectionism with a defense of other social programs and values .
They do so not only by forming political coalitions with a wide variety of social groups , but by adopting the language and style of those groups , too .
In pursuit of protectionist objectives , for example , trade unions may wave the human rights banner of " high " labor standards , but in fact they are merely trying to boost wages to uncompetitive levels .
Perhaps unwittingly , some supporters of free trade give aid and comfort to protectionists by arguing that the welfare state is incompatible with free trade .
But if the general public is forced to choose between popular social causes and the seemingly arcane , often misunderstood , and now mud-splattered notion of free trade , the outcome will likely not be a happy one for Adam Smith ’ s followers .
No matter the merits of their case , supporters of a smaller welfare state everywhere must divorce their cause from the cause of free trade .
Until and unless they do , protectionists will posture – successfully if perhaps unjustly – as defenders of the poor and of the planet .
