The Secret Language of Central Bankers
“ If I seem unduly clear to you , ” Alan Greenspan said to his political masters in the United States Congress , “ you must have misunderstood what I said . ”
It was 1987 , and the newly-confirmed chair of the Federal Reserve was elaborating on how he had “ learned to mumble with great incoherence ” in the short months since he had “ become a central banker . ”
Mr. Greenspan was a strong believer , in practice if not in theory – for who could understand his theory ? – that central bankers should speak in an opaque and convoluted dialect .
In comparison , the Oracle at Delphi ’ s advice to the King of Lydia – “ If you attack Persia , you will destroy a great kingdom ” – is clarity itself .
There was an old argument for “ Greenspanese ” : voters or politicians or both are inherently short-sighted and myopic .
They would always see and want to grasp the benefits of lower interest rates and a little more demand pressure – more production , more employment , higher wages , and higher profits in the short run .
But they would either not see or be cynically indifferent to the problems of stagflation that would inevitably follow .
The job of the central bank , according to Greenspan ’ s distant predecessor , William McChesney Martin , was to “ take away the punchbowl [ of low interest rates ] before the party really gets going . ”
But , the argument went , the Fed could not say that this was what it was doing in clear and transparent language , for , if voters and politicians could understand central bankers , they would then force them into following destructive inflationary policies that would be worse for everyone , at least in the long run .
By using an opaque and convoluted idiom , the only outsiders – reporters , politicians , and academics – who would be able to understand what the central bank was saying would be those who had carefully studied the issues and the language .
This , in turn , would lead them all ( with the rare exception of a maverick critic like William Greider ) to understand and approve , and to agree that talking in “ Greenspanese ” is essential for enabling central banks to ensure price stability .
There seems to be general agreement today that this argument no longer applies , if it was ever truly valid .
Voters and politicians today , it seems , fear inflation and are willing to accept occasional economic recessions and unemployment above its natural rate as unfortunate but inevitable consequences of the necessary and beneficial pursuit of long-term price stability .
The debate about monetary policy can thus be fruitful and productive even if it is no longer restricted to those who have learned “ Greenspanese . ”
Thus , all across the North Atlantic core of the world economy , central banks have embarked on a “ transparency ” initiative to make their organization ’ s goals , guesses , procedures , and policies more widely and clearly known .
They are relying on economists ’ basic predisposition to believe that more information is always better than less , that individuals are good judges of what they need to know , and that they are able to evaluate and place in perspective what they know .
But recently – and increasingly so in recent months – central bankers ’ doubts about the utility of the transparency initiative have increased .
The more central banks talk , and the clearer they try to make their language , the more it seems that markets may be reacting excessively and inappropriately to statements that are not really news at all .
More information may be leading not to better knowledge , but to more confusion .
We economists have a hard time figuring out why there appears to be so much static on the communications line .
Why were so many people in financial markets so sure that the Fed ’ s late-March meeting statement heralded a likelihood of interest-rate hikes soon , rather than being simply an acknowledgement ( as the Fed explicitly stated ) that what had been very unlikely was now a possibility ?
Why are cable TV personalities so eager to overstate how quickly central banks change their view of the likely future ?
Why do participants in financial markets trade on the advice of cable TV personalities when a small amount of number-crunching reveals that the benefits must be lower than the transactions costs incurred by over-frequent trading ?
We don ’ t have answers to these questions .
So we really don 't know whether we should tell central bankers to brush up on their Greenspanese .
