Will the Iraq War Kill Globalization ?
The UN and NATO are widely perceived as damaged , if not broken , by their failure to agree on what to do about Iraq .
Will these cracks in the international political system now wound the world 's economic architecture , and with it globalization , as well ?
International economic agreements have never been easy to make .
Reaching consensus among the World Trade Organization 's 145 members , where one dissent can cause utter disarray , was difficult even before the world 's governments divided into pro- and anti-American camps .
Indeed , multilateral trade agreements were being eclipsed by bilateral deals , such as between the EU and various developing countries , long before the divisions over Iraq appeared .
Of course , the problem goes deeper and not everything that touches globalization has turned dark .
Immigration controls , for example , have been relaxed in several European countries ( notably Germany ) due to declining populations and educational shortcomings .
But bad economic times are rarely moments when governments push bold international economic proposals .
Economic fragility among the world 's leading economies is the biggest stumbling block .
The US and the EU have few fiscal and monetary levers left to combat weak performance .
Short-term interest rates in the US , at 1.25 % , are at a 40-year low .
Congress has pared $ 100 billion from the Bush administration 's 10-year $ 726 billion tax cut plan , and the US 's projected 10-year $ 2 trillion budget deficit will grow as the Iraq war 's costs mount , with President Bush submitting a supplemental request for $ 80bn ( 0.8 % of GDP ) in extra military spending this year .
Such spending risks absorb productive resources that could be employed more efficiently elsewhere .
This was demonstrated by the rapid growth of output and incomes that followed the arrival of the so-called " peace dividend " which came with the Cold War 's end .
Moreover , others ( Arab countries , Germany , and Japan ) will not cover America 's military costs , as in the 1991 Gulf War .
We are now back to the more usual situation where war is financed by government debt , which burdens future generations unless it is eroded by inflation .
In the Eurozone the scope for fiscal stimulus ( lower taxes and / or higher public spending ) was constrained until war blew a hole in the Stability Pact , which caps member budget deficits at 3 % of GDP .
The limit will now be relaxed due to the " exceptional " circumstances implied by the Iraq war-providing relief , ironically , to the war 's main European opponents , France and Germany .
But the European Central Bank remains reluctant to ease monetary policy .
In Japan , there seems little hope that the world 's second-largest economy can extricate itself from its homemade deflation trap to generate the demand needed to offset economic weakness elsewhere in the world .
Four years of deflation and a drawn-out banking crisis offer little prospect of economic stimulus .
Higher oil prices and lower trade turnover aggravate the problem .
But high oil prices threaten the health of the entire $ 45 trillion world economy .
Oil prices have flirted with their highest level since the Gulf War and will go higher if Iraq 's oil infrastructure ( or that of neighboring countries ) is damaged .
The adverse effects on growth will be felt everywhere , but nowhere more , perhaps , than in the energy-dependent South Korea and China .
Although China 's official growth rate reached 8 % in 2002 , its high budget deficit and large stock of non-performing loans ( about 40 % of GDP ) mean that it cannot afford any slowdown if it is to keep people employed , especially in rural areas .
Some poor economies will be directly damaged by the loss of the Iraq market , which accounts for roughly 40 % of Vietnam 's tea exports and 20 % of its rice exports .
For others , weakness in the world 's big economies may be compounded by political risks .
Turkey has suffered from rising oil prices , falling tourism income ( its second-largest source of foreign exchange ) , and declining foreign investment .
Now the Erdogan government 's lukewarm support for US policy on Iraq exposes Turkey to doubts about America 's commitment to its economic well being , and global markets may question its ability to service its $ 100 billion public-sector debt in 2003 and 2004 .
The test of whether multilateral cooperation can be put back on track , and reconciled with America 's war against terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass destruction , may come with Iraq 's reconstruction .
With the costs of ousting Saddam Hussein and occupying Iraq likely to run at anywhere from $ 100 to $ 600 billion over the next decade , the US will want to " internationalize " Iraq 's reconstruction .
Iraq 's $ 20 billion annual oil revenues cannot meet such costs .
Indeed , those revenues will scarcely cover the costs of rebuilding basic infrastructure , feeding and housing displaced populations , and paying for the country 's civil administration .
After the ouster of the Taliban last year , the $ 4.5 billion of reconstruction aid pledged to Afghanistan 's new government demonstrated that a multilateral approach to reconstruction is possible .
But the poisoned atmosphere that followed the UN debates on Iraq may prevent the US from getting its way here .
Already , French President Jacques Chirac has promised to veto any Security Council resolution on reconstruction that seeks to justify the war .
If the world economy is to recover , the diplomatic failures and name-calling must end .
