What Role for the State ?
WASHINGTON , DC – The financial crisis of 2008 has spurred a global debate on how much government regulation of markets – and what kind – is appropriate .
In the United States , it is a key theme in the upcoming presidential election , and it is shaping politics in Europe and emerging markets as well .
For starters , China ’ s impressive growth performance over the last three decades has given the world an economically successful example of what many call “ state capitalism . ”
Brazil ’ s development policies have also accorded a strong role to the state .
Questions concerning the state ’ s size and the sustainable role of government are central to the debate over the eurozone ’ s fate as well .
Many critics of Europe , particularly in the US , link the euro crisis to the outsize role of government there , though the Scandinavian countries are doing well , despite high public spending .
In France , the new center-left government faces the challenge of delivering on its promise of strengthening social solidarity while substantially reducing the budget deficit .
Alongside the mostly economic arguments about the role of government , many countries are experiencing widespread disillusionment with politics and a growing distance between citizens and government ( particularly national government ) .
In many countries , participation rates in national elections are falling , and new parties and movements , such as the Pirate Party in Germany and the Five Star Movement in Italy , reflect strong discontent with existing governance .
In the US , the approval rating of Congress is at a record-low of 14 % .
Many there , such as my colleague Bruce Katz at the Brookings Institution , believe that the only solution is to bring a larger share of governance and policy initiation to the state and municipal level , in close partnership with the private sector and civil society .
But that approach , too , might have a downside .
Consider Spain , where too much fiscal decentralization to regional governments contributed significantly to weakening otherwise strong public finances .
A crucial problem for this global debate is that , despite the realities of twenty-first-century technology and globalization , it is still conducted largely as if governance and public policy were almost exclusively the domain of the nation-state .
To adapt the debate to the real challenges that we face , we should focus on four levels of governance and identify the most appropriate allocation of public-policy functions to them .
First , many policies – including support for local infrastructure , land zoning , facilitation of industrial production and training , traffic ordinances , and environmental regulations – can largely be determined at the local or metropolitan level and reflect the wishes of a local electorate .
Of course , defense and foreign policy will continue to be conducted primarily at the second level – the nation-state .
Most nation-states maintain national currencies , and must therefore pursue fiscal and economic policies that support a monetary union .
As the eurozone crisis has starkly reminded us , decentralization cannot extend too far into the budgetary sphere , lest it threaten the common currency ’ s survival .
The US system is manageable , because the American states are largely constrained to running balanced budgets , while the federal government accounts for most fiscal policy .
Moreover , banking regulation and deposit insurance are centralized in the US , as they must be in a monetary union .
The eurozone has finally recognized this .
So , governance at the nation-state level remains hugely important and is intimately linked to monetary sovereignty .
The key problem in Europe today is whether eurozone members will advance towards something resembling a federal nation-state .
Unless they do , it is difficult to see how the common currency can survive .
There is also a third , regional or continental , level of governance , which is most advanced in the European Union ( and is being tested in Latin America , Africa , and Asia ) and can be very useful .
Customs unions , free-trade areas , or a single market , as in Europe , allow greater mobility of goods and services , which can lead to benefits from economies of scale that remaining trade impediments at the global level do not permit .
Europe ’ s borderless Schengen Area is another example of regional supra-national governance .
There are also aspects of infrastructure that can best be addressed at the continental level .
Finally , there is the global level .
The spread of infectious disease , global trade and finance , climate change , nuclear non-proliferation , counterterrorism , and cyber security are just some of the issues that require broad international cooperation and global governance .
In today ’ s interdependent world , the debate about the role of public policy , the size and functions of government , and the legitimacy of public decision-making should be conducted with the four levels of governance much more clearly in focus .
The levels often will overlap ( infrastructure and clean energy issues , for example ) , but democracy could be greatly strengthened if the issues were linked to the levels at which decisions can best be taken .
As Pascal Lamy , the director of the World Trade Organization , has said , it is not only the “ local ” that has to be brought to the “ global ” ; the inherently “ local ” political sphere has to internalize the global or regional context .
That is a huge challenge for political leadership and communication , but , if it is not met , democracy and globalization will be difficult to reconcile .
How to conduct democratic debate with reference to these local , national , continental , and global levels , and to structure a political space that better reflects economic and social space , will be the great challenge of the decades ahead .
