Uniting Western Policy Toward Russia
JERUSALEM : Relations between the West , primarily the United States , and Russia are currently running on two parallel , and completely distinct , tracks : the economic and the political .
This is absurd , for both Russia and the West .
On the economic track , the structural crisis and eventual reform of the Russian economy are at the center of Western concerns .
Over the last few years , Western governments and institutions like the IMF provided tens of billions of dollars in assistance and credits to help the faltering reforms in Russia and to sustain its political system - basically Boris Yeltsin ’ s semi-authoritarian regime .
That Yeltsin ’ s government used tanks to suppress opposition from a legitimate , though deeply flawed , Duma and has been involved in what , under different circumstances , would have been viewed in the West as a genocidal war in Chechnya , was basically overlooked .
The attempt at economic reform and relative political stability took precedence - as certainly it is not in the West ’ s interest to see Russia descend into chaos .
As the recent financial and political crisis in Moscow suggests , Russia will continue to be dependent for many years to come on Western economic support .
Politically , however , Russia behaves differently in the international arena .
Repeatedly , Russia has undermined American resolve and ability to put effective pressure on authoritarian and tyrannical regimes which have ben engaged in aggression , ethnic cleansing , genocide , and the internal repression of minorities .
During the war in Bosnia , the Serbs were effectively shielded by Moscow , with the ability of the US to threaten the use of force severely curtailed by Russia .
The same happens in Kosovo , where Nato is effectively blocked by Russia from humanitarian intervention aimed at protecting a civilian population brutally oppressed by Belgrade .
In the repeated crisis with Iraq , the ability of the UN to enforce agreed and effective control over Saddam Hussein ’ s attempts at non-conventional development has been frustrated again and again by Russian diplomatic manoeuvres .
And now President Yeltsin vehemently denounces America ’ s retaliation against the arch-terrorist Osama bin Ladin and his terrorist camps in Afghanistan .
These two parallel tracks are beginning to resemble a theatre of the absurd .
A country in deep economic crisis , unable to pay its civil servants , workers , and military , gets to dictate the policies of the one superpower that exists , the power on whose largesse it depends .
The reason for this is that the two tracks are dealt with separately - the one by financiers and economists , the other by foreign policy experts .
This must stop .
What is needed is clear leadership from Washington that will develop an overall strategic concept of how to deal in an integrated way with the economic and political challenges posed by Russia .
The Kremlin ’ s economic woes have to be used as a lever to make Russian foreign policy less obstructionist .
This should be done gently , but firmly .
No need to humiliate Russia publicly .
The Russian people have suffered to many humiliations in the last decade .
But there should be no free lunches either .
It is in the clear interest of the West to support Russian attempts at economic reform and democratization .
There must , however , be a clear Russian quid-pro-quo .
It should be made clear to Russian leaders - again , gently , avoiding triumphalist tones and ultimatums - that in return for generous financial aid , Moscow most rescind its implicit veto on American attempts to help the ethnic Albanians in Kosovo , or impose painful costs on Iraq , including the measured threat of the use of force .
Iraq ’ s regime is a threat to all its neighbours , and in no way should it be allowed to benefit from a Russian protective umbrella .
Being the sole superpower , America should be aware of its responsibility .
The Cold War is over and should not be renewed .
Russia , despite its weaknesses , continues to be a major power , and should be treated accordingly .
Its financial dependence is an opportunity that the West , headed by America , must use judiciously to ensure that ethnic cleansing and the irresponsible proliferation of non-conventional weapons are not tolerated .
Besides , a more modern and responsible foreign policy by Russia may also help its economy , as investors will note that responsibility as a sign of maturation in Russia ’ s democracy .
