Why Greece Will Default
CAMBRIDGE – Greece will default on its national debt .
That default will be due in large part to its membership in the European Monetary Union .
If it were not part of the euro system , Greece might not have gotten into its current predicament and , even if it had gotten into its current predicament , it could have avoided the need to default .
Greece ’ s default on its national debt need not mean an explicit refusal to make principal and interest payments when they come due .
More likely would be an IMF-organized restructuring of the existing debt , swapping new bonds with lower principal and interest for existing bonds .
Or it could be a “ soft default ” in which Greece unilaterally services its existing debt with new debt rather than paying in cash .
But , whatever form the default takes , the current owners of Greek debt will get less than the full amount that they are now owed .
The only way that Greece could avoid a default would be by cutting its future annual budget deficits to a level that foreign and domestic investors would be willing to finance on a voluntary basis .
At a minimum , that would mean reducing the deficit to a level that stops the rise in the debt-to-GDP ratio .
To achieve that , the current deficit of 14 % of GDP would have to fall to 5 % of GDP or less .
But to bring the debt-to-GDP ratio to the 60 % level prescribed by the Maastricht Treaty would require reducing the annual budget deficit to just 3 % of GDP – the goal that the eurozone ’ s finance ministers have said that Greece must achieve by 2012 .
Reducing the budget deficit by 10 % of GDP would mean an enormous cut in government spending or a dramatic rise in tax revenue – or , more likely , both .
Quite apart from the political difficulty of achieving this would be the very serious adverse effect on aggregate domestic demand , and therefore on production and employment .
Greece ’ s unemployment rate already is 10 % , and its GDP is already expected to fall at an annual rate of more than 4 % , pushing joblessness even higher .
Depressing economic activity further through higher taxes and reduced government spending would cause offsetting reductions in tax revenue and offsetting increases in transfer payments to the unemployed .
So every planned euro of deficit reduction delivers less than a euro of actual deficit reduction .
That means that planned tax increases and cuts in basic government spending would have to be even larger than 10 % of GDP in order to achieve a 3 % -of-GDP budget deficit .
There simply is no way around the arithmetic implied by the scale of deficit reduction and the accompanying economic decline : Greece ’ s default on its debt is inevitable .
Greece might have been able to avoid that outcome if it were not in the eurozone .
If Greece still had its own currency , the authorities could devalue it while tightening fiscal policy .
A devalued currency would increase exports and would cause Greek households and firms to substitute domestic products for imported goods .
The increased demand for Greek goods and services would raise Greece ’ s GDP , increasing tax revenue and reducing transfer payments .
In short , fiscal consolidation would be both easier and less painful if Greece had its own monetary policy .
Greece ’ s membership in the eurozone was also a principal cause of its current large budget deficit .
Because Greece has not had its own currency for more than a decade , there has been no market signal to warn Greece that its debt was growing unacceptably large .
If Greece had remained outside the eurozone and retained the drachma , the large increased supply of Greek bonds would cause the drachma to decline and the interest rate on the bonds to rise .
But , because Greek euro bonds were regarded as a close substitute for other countries ’ euro bonds , the interest rate on Greek bonds did not rise as Greece increased its borrowing – until the market began to fear a possible default .
The substantial surge in the interest rate on Greek bonds relative to German bonds in the past few weeks shows that the market now regards such a default as increasingly likely .
The combination of credits from the other eurozone countries and lending by the IMF may provide enough liquidity to stave off default for a while .
In exchange for this liquidity support , Greece will be forced to accept painful fiscal tightening and falling GDP .
In the end , Greece , the eurozone ’ s other members , and Greece ’ s creditors will have to accept that the country is insolvent and cannot service its existing debt .
At that point , Greece will default .
