The Nuclear Beast Reborn
NEW YORK : Rejection by the US Senate of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was a torpedo aimed at the fragile global nuclear arms control regime built in the final decades of the Cold War .
It comes after a series of recent blows to that regime , including : reports that China may be planning to expand and modernize its strategic nuclear arsenal by using information obtained through spying on America ; second , the successful test by the US a few weeks ago of a prototype national missile defense ( NMD ) system ; third , reports that India and Pakistan are proceeding to " weaponize " their nuclear arsenals ( meaning that the intend to mate their bombs with delivery vehicles ) ; fourth , the recommendation to the Indian government that it create forces to sustain a policy of nuclear deterrence ; and , fifth , the takeover of Pakistan by armed forces favoring a hardline with India .
Taken together , these events have the potential to sweep aside today 's nuclear arms control regime -- something that the Republican majority in America 's Senate would not be sorry to see .
That arms control regime , like the arsenals of the US and Russia , is a triad .
The most important leg is the Nonproliferation Treaty of 1969 .
It is , in fact , a slow-motion nuclear abolition treaty , under which nations lacking nuclear weapons agree to renounce them forever , while those that possess nuclear weapons ( consisting in 1968 of America , the USSR , England , France , and China ) agree , over time , to reduce and ultimately eliminate their nuclear arsenals .
Today , 185 nations are signatories to the Treaty .
The second leg is the bipolar Strategic Arms Reduction Talks ( START ) between Moscow and Washington .
Begun during the Cold War , they paradoxically ground to a halt when that conflict ended .
If the aim of the NPT is to rein in " horizontal " proliferation , the aim of START is to reverse " vertical " proliferation -- to progressively reduce the twin mountains of nuclear weapons that were heaped up in the US and the Soviet Union for purposes of the Cold War .
The third leg is the Test-ban Treaty , which , like the NPT , is universal in scope .
Its aim is qualitative disarmament , placing modest limits on technical improvements of nuclear arms .
Although each leg originated independently of the other , they are now interdependent .
None is likely to survive without the other two .
Today , all are in jeopardy .
A breakdown of the test ban undermines the NPT , to whose renewal the world 's nuclear have-not nations agreed in 1985 on condition that the test ban would be ratified .
Continued stalemate of the START talks , whose progress was another condition of the NPTs renewal , will have the same undermining effect .
But these talks , stalled since the end of the Cold War , are threatened by America 's bid to establish National Missile Defense , which Russia regards as menacing and contrary to the US / Soviet Treaty banning most missile defenses .
The strategic framework of START is the doctrine of deterrence , which holds that each of the two former superpowers must be able to destroy the other after suffering a first strike .
If the US can defend itself against nuclear attack , the Russians argue , their retaliatory capacity will be eroded and deterrence undone .
China adds that if the US deploys anti-nuclear defenses in Asia to protect Taiwan and Japan , as America threatens to do , China will have to build up its offense nuclear arsenal -- perhaps making use of information that China obtained from the US through spying .
In that case , China , needing to test its new warheads , is likely to drive through the gap in the testing regime just blasted by America 's Senate .
The fruits of spying are not very useful to China , but the combination of spying and testing could be .
National Missile Defense works against the entire project of arms control : in the minds of the system 's supporters , it provides safety against nuclear attack for a US that has washed its hands of nonproliferation by scuttling the test ban .
Deployment of the NMD and rejection of the test ban are the twin pillars of the Republican vision of the nuclear future .
The first will give America a shield ; the second will keep its nuclear sword sharp .
The US , these people believe , will maintain overwhelming nuclear superiority by nuclear testing while swatting down attacks by " rogue " proliferators with missile defenses .
The fact that fifty years of the Cold War show nuclear superiority to be a chimera and that the defenses are not yet known to be technically feasible somehow leaves the minds of these strategists unaffected .
In the words of Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas , " We have never been able to have peace through paper .
It 's always been peace through strength that the United States has put forward . "
Meanwhile , in South Asia , the world 's first full-scale nuclear arms race independent of the Cold War receives fresh impetus from local events .
When India and Pakistan exchanged volleys of nuclear tests in May of 1998 , Western observers suggested that nuclear standoff between the two countries would have a sobering influence , as it allegedly did upon the Soviet Union and the United States during the Cold War .
Instead , India and Pakistan fought their first hot war in twenty-five years in Kashmir .
The recommendation that India create a nuclear arsenal , the reported weaponization there and in Pakistan , and the military coup in Pakistan point to an acceleration of South Asia 's arms race .
East and West no longer have a monopoly on nuclear folly ; the South has joined in .
But India and Pakistan are not separated from the rest of the world any more than the US Senate is .
If these countries return to testing , will China be far behind ?
If China tests , will Russia and the US maintain unilateral restraint ?
The arms control agreements of the Cold War were never more than gossamer threads thrown over a nuclear beast never truly under anyone 's control .
They were mere outlines for more serious measures , that , even when the Cold War ended ten years ago , were never put in place .
Now , the beast is reawakening , the threads are snapping one after another , and the world faces the task , neglected for ten critical years , not so much of restoring as of reinventing the control of nuclear arms .
