The Battle Cry of the Non-Oppressed
TEL AVIV – Nobody should be surprised that Scotland ’ s recent referendum on independence left the United Kingdom intact .
In the past , regions or communities have achieved statehood almost exclusively after a struggle against colonial subjection and oppression , galvanized by an appeal to a distinctive religious , cultural , or ethnic identity .
Complaints about economic dynamics , social policies , or governance inefficiencies – the basis of Scotland ’ s “ yes ” campaign – are not the cris de coeur of a successful independence movement .
That is bad news for secessionists elsewhere in the West .
Of course , Scotland ’ s technocratic nationalism made sense .
As the movement ’ s leader , Alex Salmond , acknowledged in a 2012 consultation document , “ Scotland is not oppressed and we have no need to be liberated . ”
The struggle for independence , he explained , was aimed at creating the kind of efficient administrative and economic structures that would enable Scotland to reach its potential .
The “ yes ” campaign hoped to win supporters with a utopian vision of an independent Scotland that included European Union and NATO membership ; a currency union with England , but no fiscal union ; improved public services and social benefits ; and lower taxes .
In other words , Scotland would have everything it has now , only better , and on its own terms .
This vision was undoubtedly appealing to many Scots .
But it proved significantly less compelling than the economic doomsday scenarios advanced by its unionist opponents , including former US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan , former World Bank President Robert Zoellick , and Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne .
In other words , many people ’ s votes were driven by risk aversion , fear , and intimidation , rather than hope , passion , or deep emotional attachment to a common identity .
This contrasts sharply with the motivations espoused by Scotland ’ s nobles in the fourteenth century , when they succeeded in preserving their country ’ s independence from English rule .
“ It is in truth not for glory , nor riches , nor honors that we are fighting , ” they declared , “ but for freedom alone , which no honest man gives up but with life itself . ”
In fact , the “ no ” campaign ’ s victory might have been even more resounding if the Westminster establishment ’ s desperate , last-minute offer to grant Scotland more powers on taxation , spending , and welfare had been included as an option in the ballot .
National movements driven by a historical mission or an uncompromising quest to assert group identity against a dominant power normally do not succumb to economic considerations and last-minute economic bait .
It was none other than the founder of the Zionist fundamentalist right , Ze ’ ev Jabotinsky , who warned in 1924 against “ the naive assumption that the aspiration of the Palestinians & hellip ; will be paralyzed by such means as subsidies , economic advantages , or bribery . ”
Recognizing that their “ natural patriotism is pure and noble , ” he knew that they could not be “ bought off . ”
Now , Salmond is probably re-thinking his avoidance of nativist identity politics .
What Edmund Burke defined as & nbsp ; a group ’ s attachment to “ the inns and resting places of the human spirit ” – that is , ethnic , religious , and community ties – would have been a much more powerful mobilizing force for an independence movement .
The “ yes ” campaigners would not have had to look far for inspiration .
James Joyce – himself not devoid of traces of Irish nationalism – wrote that “ nationality , language , religion ” are “ the nets ” into which “ a man is born . ”
Similarly , George Orwell distinguished between Celtic nationalism and Anglophobia , stating that the former is belief “ in the past and future greatness of the Celtic peoples . ”
True , Scotland ’ s great minds in the age of Enlightenment , such as David Hume , Adam Smith , and even the national poet , Robert Burns , were all fervent advocates of “ Britishness , ” whatever that might mean today .
Yet an identity-based campaign could have resorted to the heritage of the Scottish Renaissance of the mid-twentieth century or to the Celtic Revival and Celtic Twilight movements , which awakened a spirit of cultural nationalism among Scots in the late nineteenth century .
In the run-up to the referendum , Scotland ’ s independence movement became an important point of reference for Catalans and Basques in Spain , the Flemish in Belgium , the Veneto and South Tyrol regions in Italy , Corsicans and Bretons in France , and the secessionists of Quebec .
All hoped that Scotland would pave the way for the peaceful breakup of their own states .
With the defeat of Scotland ’ s independence movement – not to mention Québécois voters ’ stunning rejection of the province ’ s largest separatist party in last April ’ s election – that hope may be waning .
And with good reason .
There is little historical precedent for the peaceful breakup of a state , with an exception like Czechoslovakia ’ s consensual split in 1993 occurring in unique circumstances .
A state is far more likely to go to war to defend its unity .
The United States and Spain did it in their civil wars , and today ’ s Spain would go to the outer limits of its capacity to prevent a Catalan or Basque referendum , let alone independence .
Nationalist groups in Western democracies are not subjugated people .
Theirs is the nationalism of free , liberated people , who can expect the most generous devolution deals possible to protect their singular legacies and address their grievances .
And perhaps that is why federal arrangements like those in Australia and Canada – essentially what Westminster grudgingly offered Scotland – could be their best option .
