Who \ u0027s to Blame for Britain \ u0027s Euro Allergy ?
Forty years ago , Charles de Gaulle said " Non " to Britain 's request to join the European Community .
By June 9 , British Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown will offer his own " No " to Europe .
But Britain 's decision whether to join the single European currency , the Euro , was taken long ago , and it was always going to be some version of " No . "
When France first invited Britain to join the infant European enterprise , a decade before General de Gaulle barred the door , the supercilious mandarins in Britain 's Treasury ensured that Britain would indignantly reject the offer .
Treasury bureaucrats have remained predictably anti-European ever since .
Like the courtiers who surrounded Louis XVIII , they have forgotten nothing and learned nothing .
The only question now in doubt is whether Brown 's verdict on the Euro will be " Not quite yet , " " Not before the next election , " or just plain " No . "
It is a decision being taken virtually independently of Prime Minister Tony Blair , and even against his wishes .
Blair believes that Britain ought to join the Euro , because he wants Britain to be , as he puts it , " at the heart of Europe " .
Most commentators tended to assume that , if that 's what Tony Blair wants , then sooner or later that is what will happen , because , after all , he is the Prime Minister .
The flaw in this reasoning is that Blair surrendered control of the single currency decision to the Treasury early in his first term , and he has never had the courage or political strength to take it back .
It is sometimes said that Tony Blair is instinctively European ( though that is said less often since the Iraq war ) .
But when he came to power , in 1997 , he was not able or willing to face down Britain 's traditional anti-Europeanism ; in particular , he was not prepared to commit his government to eventual Euro membership .
Blair 's solution to his Euro dilemma was to pretend that adopting the Euro was not a major political decision , but a technical question , to be decided on " purely " economic grounds .
So , in October 1997 , Gordon Brown announced that he had devised five tests to see whether Britain and the Euro were suited to each other .
In due course , the Treasury would reach a judgment that would be technically expert , economically impartial , and politically neutral .
If Tony Blair ever believed any of this , he was a fool .
Brown claimed that his five tests would produce answers that were plain and unambiguous .
Yet , because they were all questions about the future , they would inevitably be based entirely on speculation .
Where Gordon Brown himself really stands on the issue is unclear , because he is a deeply secretive man .
Many believe that his primary concern in the Euro debate is over how it affects his power vis-à-vis Blair .
In any event , once the decision of principle had been subordinated to ostensibly technical economic tests , it was unavoidable that Treasury mandarins , who are institutionally opposed to European integration , would conduct them .
So the verdict was always going to be " No , " which is why the only freedom of movement for Blair and Brown was going to be " Not yet . "
Of course , there is not and cannot be an overpowering economic case for joining the Euro , at any time .
Imagine that the British government decides one day to go for Euro membership , and to put the issue to the test of a referendum .
At the moment , the electorate is hostile to Euro membership by a large margin ; if the government is to persuade the voters to change their minds on purely economic grounds , it must deploy a powerful case .
Voters will not be impressed by the Treasury 's mumbo-jumbo ; they will need strong , simple arguments that Britain will be better off by joining .
If the British economy and the Euro-zone economy are both doing well , the economic case for British membership is obviously weak .
The same is true if the British economy and the Euro-zone economy are both doing badly .
If the British economy is doing well and the Euro-zone economy is doing badly , there is no economic case whatsoever for British membership .
That is the current situation .
The only scenario in which there could be a strong , purely economic case for Euro membership is one in which the Euro-zone is doing very well , the British economy is doing very badly , and membership looks like the best way to deliver long-term recovery .
But if the British economy were doing very badly , the other member states might snub Britain .
Obviously , " doing well " and " doing badly " are clumsy notions ; but we are talking about a referendum , not about higher mathematics .
A referendum on joining the Euro probably cannot be won unless a British government is willing to say three things : first , that it favors closer EU political integration ; second , that the single currency is but one expression of that integration , and third , that it is committed to Euro membership .
Curiously , many voters who oppose Euro membership nonetheless believe that it will happen .
No doubt they would prefer the government to tell them the truth first .
