Twilight of the Chancellor ?
Chancellor Gerhard Schröder 's resignation as chairman of Germany 's Social Democratic Party ( SPD ) will deeply affect the distribution of forces within the German government and its slim " Red-Green " majority in Parliament .
While it seems to be premature to speak , as some in Germany now do , of a " Twilight of the Chancellor " or to call Schröder 's surprising step " the beginning of the end " of his tenure , it is perfectly correct to describe it as a dramatic loss of power .
The immediate winner is Franz Müntefering , age 64 , the SPD 's parliamentary floor leader who will succeed Schröder , as party chairman .
Both politicians will constitute a tandem , but Schröder will be more dependent on Müntefering 's loyalty than Müntefering is dependent on Schröder 's success .
Schröder has been representing a moderately left political platform and agenda , one comparable to British Prime Minister Tony Blair 's New Labour philosophy or former US President Bill Clinton 's centrism .
Müntefering , however , is more attached to traditional Social Democratic ( or Old Labour ) values .
In terms of leadership style , Schröder is a soloist ; Müntefering a team player .
In Germany , the Chancellor holds the strongest position among the key political players .
However , the main source of any German Chancellor 's strength is not to be found in the legal powers conferred upon him by the constitution ; it is the actual support he holds within his own party .
With one notable exception in the 1950 's , none of Germany 's two main political parties - the Social Democrats and the moderately conservative Christian Democrats - has ever managed to win an absolute majority in Parliament .
As a consequence , German Chancellors usually preside over coalition governments , and their effective authority is based on the loyalty of the party forces they command within such political alliances .
Although the Social Democrats never really liked Schröder ( they certainly do not love him in the way they did the unforgettable Willy Brandt ) , they willy-nilly followed him so long as they saw him as the only guarantor of electoral success after 16 frustrating years ( 1982-1998 ) in opposition to Helmut Kohl .
But this is no longer the case . Since the end of 2002 , Schröder and the SPD have been facing unusually low public approval ratings - and this pattern is not likely to change soon .
In 2003 alone , almost 40,000 Social Democrats left their party , a hemorrhaging previously unheard of .
If national elections had , say , been held last Sunday , February 8 , a centre-right coalition consisting of the Christian Democrats and the Liberals would have won 57 % of the vote , according to " Infratest dimap , " one of Germany 's main polling institutes .
With no more than 35 % of the vote , Schröder 's " Red-Green " coalition would have suffered a disaster .
At the beginning of what has been dubbed a " super election year " in Germany - with 14 elections , one at the European , five at the regional , and eight at the local levels - this is hideously bad news for the SPD .
Several times before , Schröder had been thoroughly energized by desperate situations when he stood with his back to the wall .
This quality is his greatest strength , and it seems he has now embarked on his riskiest counteroffensive ever .
It is based on the bet that there will be a considerable economic upswing from mid-2004 onwards until the next national elections in autumn 2006 - and that voters will attribute the expected recovery to the economic , labour market and welfare state reforms , called " Agenda 2010 , " that Schröder has made the hallmark of his chancellorship .
For a long time , Schröder 's reformist rhetoric had not been matched by his politics .
Only after his re-election in autumn 2002 , did he give up his previous populist stance , short-term responses and neo-corporatist ways of trying to talk trade unions and employers ' associations into compromise .
In view of Germany 's most pressing problems - an accelerating demographic decline , an overregulated labour market , and a cloudy and confusing tax system - Schröder 's reform agenda may look far too timid , but many cuts have been perceived as extremely cruel by the SPD 's core constituency , especially the powerful labour unions .
But , given Germany 's economic distress , which looks likely to worsen given the country 's demographic problems , the Social Democrats are now condemned to give wealth creation priority over redistribution .
Germany cannot afford to slow down or , worse yet , stop the reform process .
In the best case scenario , Schröder will therefore stick to the " Agenda 2010 " philosophy , and Müntefering will patiently explain to a reluctant SPD that you have to cross the desert in order to make it to the Promised Land .
In the worst case , Schröder will lapse back into populism for the sake of short-term electoral success , and Müntefering will confirm that method so as to save the wounded Social Democratic soul from total despair .
Schröder 's tragedy is that his power may further erode whatever way he chooses .
At the end of this current " super election year , " we will know the answer .
