The Obama Doctrine ’ s First Term
ASPEN – Public-opinion polls in the United States indicate a close presidential election in November .
While President Barack Obama outpolls the Republican challenger , Mitt Romney , on foreign policy , slow economic growth and high unemployment – issues that are far more salient in US elections – favor Romney .
And , even on foreign policy , Obama ’ s critics complain that he has failed to implement the transformational initiatives that he promised four years ago .
Are they right ?
Obama came to power when both the US and the world economy were in the midst of the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression .
Indeed , some of Obama ’ s economic advisers counseled him that unless urgent steps were taken to stimulate the economy , there was a one-in-three chance of entering a full-scale depression .
Thus , although Obama also inherited two ongoing wars , nuclear-proliferation threats from Iran and North Korea , and the continuing problem of Al Qaeda ’ s terrorism , his early months in office were devoted to addressing the economic crisis at home and abroad .
His efforts were not a complete success , but he managed to stave off the worst outcome .
Obama ’ s rhetoric during his 2008 campaign and the first months of his presidency was both inspirational in style and transformational in objective .
His first year in office included a speech in Prague in which he established the goal of a nuclear-free world ; a speech in Cairo promising a new approach to the Muslim world ; and his Nobel Peace Prize speech , which promised to “ bend history in the direction of justice . ”
In part , this series of speeches was tactical .
Obama needed to meet his promise to set a new direction in foreign policy while simultaneously managing to juggle the issues left to him by George W. Bush , any of which , if dropped , could still cause a crisis for his presidency .
Nonetheless , there is no reason to believe that Obama was being disingenuous about his objectives .
His worldview was shaped by the fact that he spent part of his youth in Indonesia and had an African father .
In the words of a recent Brookings Institution book , Obama had an “ activist vision of his role in history , ” intending to “ refurbish America ’ s image abroad , especially in the Muslim world ; end its involvement in two wars ; offer an outstretched hand to Iran ; reset relations with Russia as a step toward ridding the world of nuclear weapons ; develop significant cooperation with China on both regional and global issues ; and make peace in the Middle East . ” But his record of achievement on these issues has been mixed .
“ Seemingly intractable circumstances turned him from the would-be architect of a new global order into a leader focused more on repairing relationships and reacting to crises – most notably the global economic crisis , ” the report continued .
And while he eliminated Osama bin Laden and weakened Al Qaeda , some counterterrorism policies ended up undercutting his appeal in places like the Middle East and Pakistan .
Some of the half-empty glasses were the result of intractable events ; some were the product of early naiveté , such as the initial approaches to Israel , China , and Afghanistan .
But Obama was quick to recover from mistakes in a practical way .
As one of his supporters put it , he is a “ pragmatic idealist . ”
In this sense , though Obama did not back away from rhetorical expressions of transformational goals regarding such issues as climate change or nuclear weapons , in practice his pragmatism was reminiscent of more incremental presidential leaders like Dwight Eisenhower or George H. W. Bush .
Despite his relative inexperience in international affairs , Obama showed a similar skill in reacting to a complex set of foreign-policy challenges .
This was demonstrated by his appointments of experienced advisers , careful management of issues , and above all , keen contextual intelligence .
This is not to say that Obama has had no transformational effects .
He changed the course of an unpopular policy in Iraq and Afghanistan ; embraced counter-insurgency tactics based on less costly uses of military and cyber power ; increased American soft power in many parts of the world ; and began to shift America ’ s strategic focus to Asia , the global economy ’ s fastest-growing region .
With respect to Iran , Obama struggled to implement United Nations-approved sanctions and avoid a premature war .
And , while the Arab Spring revolutions presented him with an unwelcome surprise , after some hesitation he came down on what he regarded as the side of history .
In a new book , Confront and Conceal , David Sanger describes what he calls an “ Obama Doctrine ” ( though he faults the president for not communicating it more clearly ) : a lighter military footprint , combined with a willingness to use force unilaterally when American security interests are directly involved ; reliance on coalitions to deal with global problems that do not directly threaten US security ; and “ a rebalancing away from the Middle East quagmires toward the continent of greatest promise in the future – Asia . ”
The contrast between the killing of Bin Laden and the intervention in Libya illustrates the Obama Doctrine .
In the former case , Obama personally managed a unilateral use of force , which involved a raid on Pakistani territory .
In the latter case , where national interests were not as clear , he waited until the Arab League and the UN had adopted resolutions that provided the legitimacy needed to ensure the right soft-power narrative , and then shared the leadership of the hard-power operation with NATO allies .
The long-term effect of the Obama Doctrine will require more time to assess , but , as he approaches the November election , Obama appears to have an edge over his opponent in foreign policy .
Obama has not bent the arc of history in the transformational way to which he aspired in his campaign four years ago , but his shift to a pragmatic approach may turn out to be a good thing , particularly if voters continue to have doubts about the economy .
