Autumn ’ s Known Unknowns
NEW YORK – During the height of the Iraq war , then-US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld spoke of “ known unknowns ” – foreseeable risks whose realization is uncertain .
Today , the global economy is facing many known unknowns , most of which stem from policy uncertainty .
In the United States , three sources of policy uncertainty will come to a head this autumn .
For starters , it remains unclear whether the Federal Reserve will begin to “ taper ” its open-ended quantitative easing ( QE ) in September or later , how fast it will reduce its purchases of long-term assets , and when and how fast it will start to raise interest rates from their current zero level .
There is also the question of who will succeed Ben Bernanke as Fed Chairman .
Finally , yet another partisan struggle over America ’ s debt ceiling could increase the risk of a government shutdown if the Republican-controlled House of Representatives and President Barack Obama and his Democratic allies cannot agree on a budget .
The first two sources of uncertainty have already affected markets .
The rise in US long-term interest rates – from a low of 1.6 % in May to recent peaks above 2.9 % – has been driven by market fears that the Fed will taper QE too soon and too fast , and by the uncertainty surrounding Bernanke ’ s successor .
So far , investors have been complacent about the risks posed by the looming budget fight .
They believe that – as in the past – the fiscal showdown will end with a midnight compromise that avoids both default and a government shutdown .
But investors seem to underestimate how dysfunctional US national politics has become .
With a majority of the Republican Party on a jihad against government spending , fiscal explosions this autumn cannot be ruled out .
Uncertainties abound in other advanced economies as well .
Germany ’ s general election appears likely to produce a repeat of the current government coalition of Chancellor Angela Merkel ’ s Christian Democratic Union and the Free Democrats , with opinion polls suggesting that a grand coalition between the CDU and the Social Democrats is less likely .
In the former case , current German policies toward the eurozone crisis will not change , despite austerity fatigue in the eurozone ’ s periphery and bailout fatigue in its core .
Political risks in the eurozone ’ s periphery include the collapse of Italy ’ s government and a fresh election as a result of former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi ’ s criminal conviction .
Greece ’ s ruling coalition could collapse as well , and political tensions may rise even higher in Spain and Portugal .
On monetary policy , the European Central Bank ’ s forward guidance – the commitment to keep interest rates at a low level for a long time – is too little too late and has not prevented a rise in short- and long-term borrowing costs , which could stifle the eurozone ’ s already-anemic economic recovery .
Whether the ECB will ease policy more aggressively is also uncertain .
Outside of the eurozone , the strength of the United Kingdom ’ s recovery and the Bank of England ’ s soft forward guidance have led to similar “ unwarranted ” increases in interest rates , which the BoE , like the ECB , seems unable to prevent in the absence of more muscular action .
In Japan , the policy uncertainty concerns whether the third arrow of Abenomics – structural reforms and trade liberalization to boost potential growth – will be implemented , and whether the expected rise in the consumption tax in 2014 will choke economic recovery .
In China , November ’ s Third Plenum of the Communist Party Central Committee will show whether China is serious about reforms aimed at shifting from investment-led to consumption-led growth .
Meanwhile , China ’ s slowdown has contributed to the end of the commodity super-cycle , which , together with the sharp rise in long-term interest rates ( owing to the scare of an early Fed exit from QE ) , has led to economic and financial stresses in many emerging-market economies .
These economies – the BRICS ( Brazil , Russia , India , China , and South Africa ) and others – were overhyped for too long .
Favorable external conditions – the effect of China ’ s strong growth on higher commodity prices and easy money from yield-hungry advanced-economy investors – led to a partly artificial boom .
Now that the party is over , the hangover is setting in .
This is especially true in India , Brazil , Turkey , South Africa , and Indonesia , all of which suffer from multiple macroeconomic and policy weaknesses – large current-account deficits , wide fiscal deficits , slowing growth , and above-target inflation – as well as growing social protest and political uncertainty ahead of elections in the next 12-18 months .
There are no easy choices : defending the currency by hiking interest rates would kill growth and harm banks and corporate firms ; loosening monetary policy to boost growth might push their currencies into free-fall , causing a spike in inflation and jeopardizing their ability to attract capital to finance their external deficits .
There are two major geopolitical uncertainties as well .
First , will the looming military strikes by the US and its allies against Syria be limited in scope and time , or will they trigger a wider military confrontation ?
The last thing that a fragile global economy needs now is another round of peak oil prices .
Second , a year ago the US convinced Israel to give its non-military approach to Iran ’ s nuclear-weapons ambitions time to bear fruit .
But , after a year of economic sanctions and negotiations with no result , Israel ’ s patience on what it regards as an existential issue is wearing thin .
Even short of an actual military conflict – which could double oil prices overnight – the resumption of saber-rattling by Israel and the war of words between the two sides could lead to a sharp rise in energy costs .
The looming known unknowns are plentiful .
Some outcomes may be more positive , or at least less damaging , than expected .
But the realization this autumn of even some of the risks described here could derail the global economy ’ s still-wobbly recovery .
And the meta-risk of policy mistakes and accidents remains very high .
