Venezuela \ u0027s High Noon
CAMBRIDGE : On December 15th , Venezuela will vote in a referendum on a new Constitution .
A landslide YES will demonstrate strong support for President Chavez , a resounding NO may bring chaos as it will restore the powers of Parliament recently stripped by President Chavez .
A No-vote , indeed , may open the door to a coup .
Venezuela faces not only political problems but severe economic ones .
Everybody has been holding their breath to see how the political story is resolved ; everybody is holding their breath to see the kind of economics Chavez opts for .
Will he surprise by opening up and running an efficient , stable and outward-oriented economy ?
Or will he be a repressive statist , papering over holes in a flimsy economy , not tackling big problems ?
Given Chavez ’ strutting political style and military background , and his Jurassic Park team of advisors , people assume the worst .
Today Venezuela is not a basket case .
It is only at the cliff ’ s edge , poised to go over .
In fact , there are only two critical , unresolved issues facing its economy : a high domestic debt ( including restrictions that keep the financial sector as a forced holder of domestic debt ) and an overvalued currency . ( See Table ) .
There is also the awful cyclical situation B a harsh recession following a year of no growth .
This suggests the need for state spending , which is usually the beginning of a bad financial story .
On the other side Venezuela produces oil , and if prices stay above $ 20 the current account situation looks cheerful even at today ’ s real exchange rate .
The budget is not great , but certainly not atrocious .
Venezuela ’ s Macroeconomics
------------
1997 1998 1999 2000
Inflation
Growth
Non-Oil GDP
Budget ( % of GDP )
Curr . Acc = t ( % of GDP )
50
5.9
4.6
1.5
4.6
37
-0.7
-0.6
-2.8 -1.7
30
-8.5
-9.1
-1.9
4.6
20
2.7
2.9
-3.5
0.8
Source : R.Espinasa
The best outcome , of course , is for Chavez to shift the economy in to a less exposed external position with a large ( 50 % at least ) depreciation .
Most high-unemployment economies have shown little feedback from currency collapse into inflation .
In Venezuela , with unemployment at 20 % , the same is expected .
Of course , such measures will be unpopular with labor and the right response here is to eliminate large taxes on wages so that money wages can rise without an offsetting decline in competitiveness .
In the budget this is paid for by the favorable effect of devaluation on government oil revenues .
This policy package would make a direct contribution to growth and at the same time reduce external vulnerability .
In time , interest rates could be reduced and a repressed banking system opened .
If accompanied by a shift to a currency board , confidence and growth would be even better .
Of course , there s more to do in cleaning up all the restrictions throughout the economy , but the above package would do much to move toward a viable economy .
It would free Chavez ’ s hands for his longer run domestic agenda of economic development .
The worst scenario is one where populism takes over and restrictions on capital flows and trade play their usual demagogic role .
In this scenario the exchange rate s kept overvalued , expenditures balloon , and a deteriorating external balance is contained by more controls , particularly on the financial sector and capital account .
Bad news , indeed .
It can last for awhile but will create increasing friction with economic realty and an increasing incentive for Chavez to be authoritarian .
There is no imminent crisis about to happen , but Chavez must choose Venezuela ’ s future .
If he opens the economy and adjusts the exchange rate , there will be a path for growth and stability .
If he goes statist / populist , 2001 will be a crisis year .
So far , Venezuela ’ s elite , and much of the investment community , has assumed the worst and behaved accordingly : no blueprints for Chavez , no options , just badmouthing .
Not surprisingly , the Chavez economic team is a group of off-center players with agendas far from stabilization and keen on social engineering with Marxist twists .
It is time to offer Chavez options and the price tag ; it is a mistake to believe that he has already decided on the bad path .
In his political initiatives , Chavez has been immensely canny and successful .
Maybe there is a chance that he will opt for winning the battle rather than engaging in hopeless and protracted guerrilla warfare with the market .
Of course , all this may be far too optimistic or , indeed , totally wrong .
But given the single-minded assessment of Chavez given so far , there is room for a fresh look .
