Why Castro Survives
In a rehearsal studio , a young Cuban ballet dancer turns through the air , pivoting as though some invisible power has unfurled him in an arc .
Then , without pause , he leaps once , twice , and I gasp at the height of his grandes jetés and then gasp again because his pointed toe is heading right for a barre .
Welcome to Cuba , a country that dazzles and disappoints , where one finds miracles and monsters , but no easy answers .
Cubans recognize the contradictions as readily as any outsider .
Yet even as inflation rises and the 77-year-old dictator tightens Internet access and closes the economic openings that encouraged self-employment in the mid-1990 's , it is unlikely that Cubans will turn Castro out before he dies .
The rabidly anti-Castro Cuban exiles clustered in Miami argue that it is fear that holds Cubans back , but that 's not true .
A visitor in Cuba finds many ready to complain , but the palpable fear and visceral hatred rampant in El Salvador and Chile in the 1980 's is absent in today 's Cuba .
Instead there is a kind of paralysis - born of a mix of loyalty , fear , and indoctrination - as they grudgingly wait for Castro to expire .
Unlike many of Latin America 's freely elected governments , Castro has actually provided his constituents with public services - and without earning a reputation for corruption .
" All the free education and health care gives a certain balance , " said a prominent writer .
" Their work is less valuable , " he said referring to the pesos Cubans earn in an economy sustained by dollar remittances from the foreign diaspora .
But " it 's not a total disaster because people have this balance . "
So , unlike the East Europeans who overthrew their corrupt political leaders in 1989 , and some Latin Americans who did so more recently in Bolivia , Argentina , and Ecuador , Cubans have failed to rally against Castro .
Yes , Castro jailed 75 independent journalists and others in an April sweep - that is the monster in him .
But other dissidents remain free .
That is the contradiction .
Moreover , unlike other luxury-loving Latin American leaders , Cuban officials do not flaunt lavish lifestyles .
Among Latin American countries , only Chile and Uruguay rate better than Cuba in Transparency International 's corruption index .
But this could change as dollars become hard to resist and Cubans use them to cut through ridiculous bureaucratic hurdles .
Already , the dollar has created a divide in living standards between those who have greenbacks and those who don 't .
Despite a moribund economy , Castro still delivers what the majority of Latin American residents fail to get - free health care and education and a relatively drug- and crime-free environment .
With more than 40 % of Latin America 's population living in poverty , Cuba stands out as an example of a country where being poor does not mean a life of squalor .
Even World Bank president James Wolfensohn acknowledged in 2001 that Cuba had done a " great job " on education and health care .
More recently , in discussing the Bank 's 2004 report Making Services Work for Poor People , officials put Cuba among countries like Sri Lanka , Costa Rica , and China that " managed to achieve a level of outcomes in health and education that are extremely favorable . "
This winter , the Cuban government reinvested some of its income from tourism in upgrading schools that deteriorated in the years following the loss of Soviet aid .
" Cubans are still endeared by that , " said one Western diplomat .
Amazingly , many Latin America leaders fail to make the connection between reducing poverty and their own popularity .
Compare Castro 's campaign to improve schools to a poverty reduction program waged by Mexico 's Institutional Revolutionary Party during a six-year period in the 1990 's .
Mexico spent 1.2 % of GDP per year to provide basic services to communities in Mexico .
According to Santa Deverajan , the director of the World Bank 's World Development Report 2004 , some studies showed that the program could have reduced poverty by as much as 64 % .
Instead , the money was doled out to municipalities based on political loyalty , so poverty fell by only 3 % .
" If they had just given it out equally to the entire Mexican population , " Deverajan says , " it would have reduced poverty by 13 % . "
Examples like this abound in Latin America , but it is a mistake for Castro to think that Latin America is the competition .
Cubans don 't think it is .
Their touchstones are Madrid , Paris , and New York .
An educated professional with a wife and two children takes a breath when he recalls a trip to Spain .
" It 's hard to explain how I felt when I went there .
It wasn 't like another world or another planet ; it was like another galaxy . "
With family in Spain , he could immigrate , but he doesn 't consider that option seriously .
" This is where I want to live , but 5 % of the way things are run has got to change .
They blame everything on the embargo .
We have a self-imposed embargo .
We limit ourselves . "
More precisely , Castro limits Cubans .
They want to breathe , but life with a patriarchal tyrant can be suffocating .
Younger Cubans often sound like well-educated teenagers with parents who are too strict .
They want to travel , publish what they want , dance when and where they want , and experience the world as Castro experienced it .
" It 's not my fight , " says one 28-year-old Cuban , referring to the political battle of communism versus capitalism that keeps him trapped on the island .
" I 'm a new generation .
I want to see as they had the chance to see . "
