The Resistible Rise of Asia ?
NEW DELHI – A favorite theme in international debate nowadays is whether Asia ’ s rise signifies the West ’ s decline .
But the current focus on economic malaise in Europe and the United States is distracting attention from the many serious challenges that call into question Asia ’ s continued success .
To be sure , today ’ s ongoing global power shifts are primarily linked to Asia ’ s phenomenal economic rise , the speed and scale of which have no parallel in world history .
With the world ’ s fastest-growing economies , fastest-rising military expenditures , fiercest resource competition , and most serious hot spots , Asia obviously holds the key to the future global order .
But Asia faces major constraints .
It must cope with entrenched territorial and maritime disputes , such as in the South China Sea ; harmful historical legacies that weigh down its most important interstate relationships ; increasingly fervent nationalism ; growing religious extremism ; and sharpening competition over water and energy .
Moreover , Asia ’ s political integration badly lags behind its economic integration , and , to compound matters , it has no security framework .
Regional consultation mechanisms remain weak .
Differences persist over whether a security architecture or community should extend across Asia , or be confined to an ill-defined “ East Asia . ”
One central concern is that , unlike Europe ’ s bloody wars of the first half of the twentieth century , which made war there unthinkable today , the wars in Asia in the second half of the twentieth century only accentuated bitter rivalries .
Several interstate wars have been fought in Asia since 1950 , when both the Korean War and the annexation of Tibet started , without resolving the underlying Asian disputes .
To take the most significant example , China staged military interventions even when it was poor and internally troubled .
A 2010 Pentagon report cites Chinese military preemption in 1950 , 1962 , 1969 , and 1979 in the name of strategic defense .
There was also China ’ s seizure of the Paracel Islands from Vietnam in 1974 , and the 1995 occupation of Mischief Reef in the Spratly Islands , amid protests by the Philippines .
This history helps to explain why China ’ s rapidly growing military power raises important concerns in Asia today .
Indeed , not since Japan rose to world-power status during the reign of the Meiji Emperor ( 1867-1912 ) has another non-Western power emerged with such potential to shape the global order .
But there is an important difference : Japan ’ s rise was accompanied by the other Asian civilizations ’ decline .
After all , by the nineteenth century , Europeans had colonized much of Asia , leaving in place no Asian power that could rein in Japan .
Today , China is rising alongside other important Asian countries , including South Korea , Vietnam , India , and Indonesia .
Although China now has displaced Japan as the world ’ s second largest economy , Japan will remain a strong power for the foreseeable future .
On a per capita basis , Japan remains nine times richer than China , and it possesses Asia ’ s largest naval fleet and its most advanced high-tech industries .
When Japan emerged as a world power , imperial conquest followed , whereas a rising China ’ s expansionist impulses are , to some extent , checked by other Asian powers .
Militarily , China is in no position to grab the territories that it covets .
But its defense spending has grown almost twice as fast as its GDP .
And , by picking territorial fights with its neighbors and pursuing a muscular foreign policy , China ’ s leaders are compelling other Asian states to work more closely with the US and each other .
In fact , China seems to be on the same path that made Japan an aggressive , militaristic state , with tragic consequences for the region – & nbsp ; and for Japan .
The & nbsp ; Meiji Restoration created a powerful military under the slogan “ Enrich the country and strengthen the military . ”
The military eventually became so strong that it could dictate terms to the civilian government .
The same could unfold in China , where the Communist Party is increasingly beholden to the military for retaining its monopoly on power .
More broadly , Asia ’ s power dynamics are likely to remain fluid , with new or shifting alliances and strengthened military capabilities continuing to challenge regional stability .
For example , as China , India , and Japan maneuver for strategic advantage , they are transforming their mutual relations in a way that portends closer strategic engagement between India and Japan , and sharper competition between them and China .
The future will not belong to Asia merely because it is the world ’ s largest , most populous , and fastest-developing continent .
Size is not necessarily an asset .
Historically , small , strategically oriented states have wielded global power .
In fact , with far fewer people , Asia would have a better balance between population size and available natural resources , including water , food , and energy .
In China , for example , water scarcity has been officially estimated to cost roughly $ 28 billion in annual industrial output , even though China , unlike several other Asian economies , including India , South Korea , and Singapore , is not listed by the United Nations as a country facing water stress .
In addition to its growing political and natural-resource challenges , Asia has made the mistake of overemphasizing GDP growth to the exclusion of other indices of development .
As a result , Asia is becoming more unequal , corruption is spreading , domestic discontent is rising , and environmental degradation is becoming a serious problem .
Worse , while many Asian states have embraced the West ’ s economic values , they reject its political values .
So make no mistake .
Asia ’ s challenges are graver than those facing Europe , which embodies comprehensive development more than any other part of the world .
Despite China ’ s aura of inevitability , it is far from certain that Asia , with its pressing internal challenges , will be able to spearhead global growth and shape a new world order .
