Diplomacy and Double Standards
CANBERRA – When does acceptable diplomatic caution and realism become indefensible abdication of moral standards ?
Not everyone on the foreign-policy frontline cares , but those who do often face deeply uncomfortable choices .
Negotiating a life-saving peace may mean giving amnesty to the murderously guilty .
Living with tyranny might be less life-threatening than embracing anarchy .
Calming a volatile situation may mean not publicly denouncing behavior that cries out for condemnation .
Making the right call is more difficult in the real world than in a philosophy classroom .
But sometimes the line really is crossed , all relevant players know it , and the consequences are potentially profound .
The United States ’ failure so far to cut off its military aid to Egypt in response to the regime ’ s massacre of hundreds of Muslim Brotherhood supporters , in the streets and in prisons , is as clear a recent case as one can find .
Former President Mohamed Morsi ’ s government was a catastrophic failure – ruthlessly ideological , economically illiterate , and constitutionally irresponsible .
It deeply polarized a society yearning for a new inclusiveness .
But , had the army held its nerve – and triggers – there is every reason to believe that Morsi would have been voted out in the next election .
If the Muslim Brotherhood denied a ballot , or refused to accept defeat , tougher measures could then have been contemplated .
As it is , the army ’ s coup was indefensible , and its slaughter of mostly unarmed protesters ranks in infamy with the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989 , and those of Libya ’ s former leader , Muammar el-Qaddafi , and Syria ’ s Hafez and Bashar al-Assad .
It is not as if maintaining its $ 1.3 billion in annual military aid gives the US any leverage over Egypt ’ s behavior .
It might have once , but the amount now pales in significance next to the $ 12 billion in economic assistance recently rushed to the generals by Saudi Arabia , Kuwait , and the United Arab Emirates .
Certainly , the regime would resent withdrawal of this aid , as would most of the Brotherhood ’ s civilian opponents ; but that matters less than the impact on American credibility , in the Middle East and the rest of the world , of not doing so .
Unless political leaders know that tearing up the rule book on the scale seen in Egypt will expose them to more than rhetorical consequences , the tacit message – that regimes that pick the “ right ” targets can repress at will – will resonate in Bahrain , Yemen , and Saudi Arabia , not to mention Syria .
Farther afield , the US risks reinforcing the perception that it is comfortable with double standards .
For a country whose global leadership depends as much on its soft power as on its military might , that is dynamite .
The charge sheet here is already rather full , with multiple instances in recent years of America being almost universally regarded as not practicing what it preaches .
For starters , there was the invasion of Iraq in 2003 : Embracing the United Nations Security Council when you get your way , but bypassing it when you don ’ t , does not do much to encourage a cooperative rule-based international order .
Then there was the Palestinian election of 2006 : Promoting democracy generates ridicule when it extends only to elections that produce palatable winners , as Gaza ’ s vote for Hamas did not .
Or , again in the Middle East , there has been the blind eye endlessly turned to Israel ’ s actual possession of nuclear weapons , in contrast to the response to Iran ’ s possible early moves in that direction .
And there was the 2008 agreement to trade nuclear material and technology with India , despite its unwillingness to accept serious new disarmament or non-proliferation commitments .
To be fair to the US , such double standards abound among other major powers as well .
Russia ’ s invocation of the “ responsibility to protect ” to justify its 2008 invasion of Georgia was met with incredulity at the time , and rendered even more cynical by its resolute failure since 2011 to condemn the Syrian regime for mass-atrocity crimes against its own people .
China ’ s strategic aspirations in the South China Sea , and its unwillingness to embrace a maritime code of conduct there , sit uncomfortably with its stated concern for sovereign boundaries and the peaceful resolution of territorial disputes .
And every one of the nuclear-armed states has been guilty of “ do as I say , not as I do ” in insisting on non-proliferation while making no serious commitment to disarmament .
To be fair to diplomatic policymakers everywhere , it is often the case that hard choices between competing moral values – for example , justice and peace – simply have to be made .
And positions that are claimed to embody double standards are often nothing of the kind .
A good example is the allegation that the “ responsibility to protect ” principle is inherently flawed , because the major powers will always be immune from intervention , not only because five of them can exercise a Security Council veto , but also because of their inherent military strength .
But this ignores the principle that no military intervention will ever be legitimate unless it satisfies , among other criteria , the test of diminishing , not augmenting , human suffering . & # 160 ;
And going to war against any of the major powers to protect a suffering minority would certainly trigger a much wider conflagration .
The bottom line is that values matter in international relations , and states that place great emphasis on the promotion of values are extremely vulnerable to charges of hypocrisy .
No state that aspires to win the support or cooperation of others can afford to be seen to be comfortable with unambiguous double standards .
And worst of all is to be perceived as being soft on those who , like Egypt ’ s current military rulers , commit mass-atrocity crimes against their own citizens .
