The Phantom Middle East Peace Process
TEL AVIV – Twenty years after the Madrid Peace conference , and ten years after President Bill Clinton ’ s heroic efforts at Camp David failed to yield a settlement between Israelis and Palestinians , one cannot escape the conclusion that the Israeli-Palestinian peace process has become one of the most spectacular deceptions in modern diplomatic history .
The process fell victim to the parties ’ inability to bridge the gap between what was politically feasible for them and what was required for a settlement .
Trapped between the possible and the necessary , Israelis and Palestinians simply learned to live without a solution .
However obsessed international opinion may be with Gaza ’ s agony , to most Israelis the Palestinian “ problem ” seems to be happening on the dark side of the moon .
The wall / fence in the West Bank and Ariel Sharon ’ s disengagement from Gaza have practically done away with daily friction between Jews an Arabs .
Absorbed by their booming economy , reassured by President Barack Obama ’ s recent commitment never to let Israel down , and convinced of their success in defeating Palestinian terrorism in the West Bank and deterring Hamas from venturing into another war , Israelis have lost any sense of urgency concerning the Palestinian problem .
Israelis also find satisfaction in the relative prosperity of the West Bank , where order and stability are being secured by well-trained security forces , in line with Prime Minister ’ s Salam Fayyad ’ s meticulous bottom-up construction of Palestinian statehood .
Moreover , massive inflows of international aid make Israel ’ s occupation one of the most convenient in world history ; the Israelis control the land and its population without having to bear the financial burden of direct rule .
It is as if Moshe Dayan ’ s old existential political philosophy is being brought back to life .
When asked in November 1970 to spell out his views of a possible peace deal with the Palestinians , Dayan ’ s answer was one that could easily be endorsed by most of the ministers in Binyamin Netanyahu ’ s government .
Dayan said : “ The only peace negotiations are those where we settle the land and we build , and we settle , and from time to time we go to war . ”
With peace plans and envoys coming and going , Israelis and Palestinians alike have finally become blasé about the chances of a final settlement .
The two-state solution is rapidly losing its appeal .
For , if a two-state solution really is the future , a social and political earthquake of untold dimensions awaits Israelis : a massive evacuation of settlers and a desperate need for a difficult political realignment to deal with the threat of civil strife and perhaps even military disobedience .
All this in order to go back to the 1967 borders , for which few Israelis feel nostalgic .
As for the Palestinians , the gap between the colossal tragedy of the Nakbah ( the lost war at Israel ’ s founding ) and the poverty of a territorial solution that sandwiches their demilitarized mini-state between Israel and Jordan – neither suffering from excessive love for Palestinian statehood – is bound to remain an open wound .
And Palestinians would view any solution to the refugee problem that Israel might accept as a betrayal of the ethos of Palestinian nationalism , namely the Right of Return .
The state of Palestine would lack legitimacy among Palestinians themselves .
True , Hamas has been indicating recently a readiness to contemplate a solution based on the 1967 borders , but it is doubtful that its leaders and members could live with the betrayal of the refugees .
Then again , the idea of Palestinian statehood is not central to Hamas ’ s worldview , in which the strategic objective is the ultimate victory of Islam .
For Hamas , Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas is a “ transitional figure , ” to be swept away together with his secular PLO in the revolutionary drive to an Islamic society .
It is the resulting sense of paralysis that explains the proliferation of new political paradigms in both Israel and Jordan .
Jordanians of the caliber of Former Prime Ministers Abdelsalam Al-Majali and Taher al-Masri , as well as a former adviser of King Hussein , Adnan Abu-Odeh , have been advancing schemes for a Jordanian-Palestinian solution .
Their argument is essentially that the peace process ’ s troubles stem from its deviation from the original intention of the architects of the Madrid Peace Conference , where a Jordanian-Palestinian delegation sat representing the two peoples .
Conspicuously , notable figures on the Israeli right – among them Former Defense and Foreign Minister Moshe Arens , who is also a political mentor of Netanyahu , and Knesset Speaker Rubi Rivlin – mirror the Jordanians ’ s position .
Whereas the latter champion the concept of one political space that would include the two banks of the Jordan River , the Israelis respond with their own concept of one political space between the Mediterranean and the Jordan River .
Never truly convinced of the viability of the two-state solution , and encouraged by the failure of the peace process so far , the Israeli right is going back to toying with the most dangerous scenario of all , the bi-national state .
As always , they want the best of all worlds : an emphatically Jewish state in which Palestinians would have citizenship rights , but no national rights whatsoever .
That is not a bad formula for a state of permanent civil war .
Trapped in their contradictions and zero-sum national dreams , Israelis and Palestinians cannot expect a perfect solution .
Their task is to embrace the least imperfect solution before they decline into Doomsday scenarios , such as a hostile Israeli unilateral disengagement , or a one-state reality of unending conflict .
