What McCain and Obama Ignore
PRINCETON – Barack Obama worked for three years as a community organizer on Chicago ’ s blighted South Side , so he knows all about the real poverty that exists in America .
He knows that in one of the world ’ s richest nations , 37 million people live in poverty , a far higher proportion than in Europe ’ s wealthy nations .
Yet Obama ’ s campaigning has focused on “ Main Street ” and tax cuts for the middle class , bypassing the issue of what to do about poverty .
It ’ s not as if Obama has no policies for helping the poor .
Go to his Web site , click on “ The Issues ” and then on “ Poverty . ”
There you will find a set of thoughtful proposals ranging from raising the minimum wage to establishing model “ Promise Neighborhoods ” that will attempt to turn around areas with high levels of poverty and low levels of educational achievement by providing services such as early childhood education and crime prevention .
( Go to John McCain ’ s Web site , and you won ’ t even find “ poverty ” among the list of issues to click on – although “ Space Program ” is there . )
So why isn ’ t Obama speaking up about an issue on which he has so much more first-hand experience than his opponent , and better policies , too ?
Perhaps not enough of the poor vote , or they will vote Democratic anyway .
Moreover , his researchers presumably have told him that independent middle-class voters are more likely to be won over by appeals to their wallets than to concern for America ’ s poor .
If America ’ s poor don ’ t rank high among voters ’ concerns , it is no surprise that the poor abroad are virtually invisible .
Again , Obama has both the background – with his family ties to Kenya – and a promising policy , to increase America ’ s foreign assistance to $ 50 billion by 2012 , using the money to stabilize failing states and bring sustainable growth to Africa .
( Currently , of all the OECD donor nations , only Greece gives a lower percentage of its gross national income than the United States does . )
But when Obama ’ s running mate , Joe Biden , was asked , in his debate with his Republican counterpart , Sarah Palin , what proposals an Obama-Biden administration might have to scale back as a result of the $ 700 billion Wall Street bailout , the only specific proposal he mentioned was the increase in foreign assistance .
McCain has never gotten down to specifics about how much foreign aid he would like the US to give .
Both candidates refer to deaths of American military personnel in Iraq , but there has been less attention to the war ’ s civilian causalities .
In her debate with Biden , Palin actually attacked Obama for saying that , in her words , “ All we ’ re doing in Afghanistan is air-raiding villages and killing civilians . ”
She called that comment “ reckless ” and “ untrue , ” because , “ That ’ s not what we ’ re doing there .
We ’ re fighting terrorists , and we ’ re securing democracy . ”
Of course , killing civilians is not all that the US and its NATO allies are doing in Afghanistan , and if Obama implied that it was , his rhetoric was careless .
But what is extraordinary about Palin ’ s comment is that , despite being a strong proponent of the sanctity of human life , in criticizing Obama she did not pause to deplore the serious loss of innocent human life that American air strikes in Afghanistan have caused .
Afghanistan ’ s president , Hamid Karzai , has repeatedly expressed outrage at American air strikes that have killed civilians – most recently in August , when he said that 95 Afghans , including 50 children , were killed in the bombing of a village .
The global ethical challenge that has been most prominent in the campaign is climate change .
Here , the candidates ’ goals are virtually identical : they both support a cap-and-trade system to make deep cuts in US greenhouse-gas emissions by 2050 .
Obama wants the goal to be an 80 % reduction and McCain says 66 % , but , since the next president will leave office no later than 2016 , that difference is irrelevant .
Interestingly , one ethical issue on which neither candidate has campaigned has been shown to have the potential to move voters .
A group called Defenders of Wildlife has been running an ad graphically highlighting Palin ’ s support for shooting wolves from aircraft .
A study of Republicans , Democrats , and independents showed that viewing the ad led to greater support for Obama .
According to Glenn Kessler , the head of HCD research , which conducted the study with the Muhlenberg College Institute of Public Opinion , whereas recent ads from both parties have had little impact among voters , “ This is the first ad in over a month that seems to have broken through . ”
Consistent with that finding , an historic ballot initiative in California to ban cruel forms of animal confinement on factory farms , including the battery cage system of keeping hens , is also showing strong support .
