Waiting for the Bombs to Fall
PRISTINA : War is a dirty thing and that is something I didn 't find out only today as Kosovo awaits NATO 's bombs .
I first learned of it when I saw the faces of refugees in all of the wars of the former Yugoslavia .
I was aboard the last flight from Croatia before war exploded there , and although I had a regular plane ticket , I found myself at the end of the queue to get on a plane .
Men pushed women and children out of the way to get aboard .
Everyone wanted to flee war , even if that meant leaving anonymous women and children behind .
I write seated in my office in Pristina , virtually hours before NATO strikes will hit Serbian positions .
War today seems no better looking than before in Zagreb .
I know that the fighting here ( slaughter , really ) will end sooner than I had thought , because , for the first time , Milosevic 's war machine confronts a much stronger one , the NATO alliance .
I know that one of the results of the coming air strikes will be the destruction of Milosevic 's war machine , to the extent that it will never arise again as did the Serb machinery in this century .
I also know that this fact itself may change the Balkan people 's behaviour towards war ; we in Southeastern Europe will be confronted by the fact that there is a security umbrella over them created by NATO .
The warfare of the past centuries , in particular the bloody ethnic cleansings of the past decade , is not valid anymore .
Given technology , war here may be over in a matter of weeks , and it may bring a dramatic change in our society .
As a negotiator on the Kosovar side during the recent talks in France , I have signed an agreement that will give Kosovo three years of self-rule guaranteed by NATO , with the possibility of the people of Kosovo deciding their future status after that period of interim rule has finished .
NATO has sufficient power to impose such a settlement .
What worries me now is that these kinds of political arrangements need war both to catalyse them , and to drive them forward .
Only war 's bloodshed , sad to say , can seal such a diplomatic bargain .
The need of Kosova to be freed from Milosevic 's grip has been so evident for a whole decade .
Two million Kosovars suffered from Milosevic 's rule in every aspect of their lives , from basic security to education .
For years they tried to express their grievances through peaceful means .
As a political activist in the final days of Yugoslavia , I tried to build upon the philosophy of nonviolence , leading demonstrations and other forms of peaceful forms of dissent .
But the powers who made decisions in the former Yugoslavia had contempt for such restraint .
They did not deal with Kosovo precisely because Kosovo had not taken arms .
Only when the first guns were heard from the Kosovar side did the Big powers react .
As was demonstrated in Daytona few short years ago : a problem is dealt with only when it becomes an armed one .
And , yet , despite Bosnia , Kosovo only drew blanks in the minds of the leaders of the world 's democracies until violence spread .
No need to explain what was behind the act of women and children fleeing in their villages in tractors ; there was a vicious force from which these people were escaping .
An additional lesson : a problem is recognised as a problem if it is preceded by one that is similar . ( After Rwanda , it will be difficult to see similar cases of tribal slaughter in Africa and not think the very worst possible . )
So here I sit , expecting Kosovo 's problems to be solved through arms , arms more powerful than those Milosevic possesses .
Differing from Bosnia , the solution to the Kosovo problem in the next hours is the line of confrontation now drawn in the air .
Serbian forces , squatting right outside my office can be defeated by NATO planes .
Whenever I leave for home , if I do , I will be fully unprotected , as well as all of my compatriots here who do not have arms .
I have chosen to be here at this historic moment , for I was out of the country until three days ago and had plenty of invitations to continue my trip abroad .
Having signed the Peace agreement in Paris last week , I also agreed that there would be consequences for the people of Kosovo .
If the Serbian side did not agree to it , the agreement would have to be imposed , and that act of imposition would certainly endanger the civilian population .
Since we signed the agreement , indeed , there have been more than 30 thousand new refugees .
Only God knows how many civilians will be hurt in the days ahead .
Having assumed responsibility for my signature , I think that it is only right to be here in these critical days , trying to expand on the list of arguments which explain , by virtue of nature , why war is a dirty thing .
