The New Middle East Order
Sometime this month , President George W. Bush will – reluctantly – announce a new policy for the United States in Iraq .
A new policy is needed not only in order to halt America ’ s drift into impotence as it tries to prevent Iraq from spiraling into full-scale civil war , but also because the map of power in the Middle East has changed dramatically .
That map has been in constant flux for the last 60 years , during which the main players – Egypt , Iraq , Saudi Arabia , Syria , Israel , and Iran – have formed and broken alliances .
Now , something like a dividing line is emerging , and if Bush finally begins to understand the region ’ s dynamics , he may be able to craft a policy with a chance of success .
This regional realignment is typified by the emergence of a de facto alliance that dare not speak its name .
Israel and Saudi Arabia , seemingly the most unlikely of allies , have come together to contain their common enemy : Iran , with its mushrooming influence in Iraq , Lebanon , and Palestine .
Iran not only threatens Israel ( and the region ) with its desire for a nuclear capability and its Shi ’ a proxy militants ; it is also seeking to usurp the traditional role of moderate Sunni Arab regimes as the Palestinians ’ defenders .
After decades of using concern for the Palestinian cause to shore up popular support for their own ineffective and undemocratic regimes , these moderate Arab leaders have now been put on the defensive by Iran ’ s quest for hegemony . If Iran succeeds in being seen as the genuine patron of Palestinian national aspirations , it will also succeed in legitimizing its claim for dominance in the Middle East .
Israel , a country in shock following its failure to destroy Hezbollah last summer , and humiliated by Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejhad ’ s vow to “ wipe Israel off the map ” – a threat backed up by Iran ’ s support of Hamas and Hezbollah – now talks about a “ quartet of moderates ” as the region ’ s only hope .
Indeed , Israel now sees its security as relying not so much on a US guarantee , but on Egypt , Jordan , Saudi Arabia , and Turkey ( which is seeking regional influence in fear of rejection by the European Union ) restraining Iran and its paid proxies .
According to Israeli Vice Premier Shimon Peres , Israel hopes to isolate and contain the Shi ’ a / Farsi spheres of power by forging open cooperation with the Sunni / Arab domain .
Saudi Arabia is just as eager to contain the Iranian threat and the growing “ Shi ’ a crescent ” that , with the empowerment of the Shi ’ a in Iraq , has moved westward to begin to include the Shi ’ a regions of the Kingdom .
So it should be no surprise that the Saudi regime was the first to condemn Shi ’ a Hezbollah at the start of the war with Israel , and that it announced in December that it would support Iraq ’ s Sunnis militarily should a precipitate US withdrawal incite a Sunni / Shi ’ a civil war there .
The Shi ’ a threat to the Saudi government is ideological .
Indeed , it goes to the heart of the Saudi state ’ s authority , owing to the Al Saud royal family ’ s reliance on Wahhabi Islam to legitimate its rule .
Since the Wahhabis consider the Shi ’ a apostates , the challenge from the Shi ’ a – both within and without Saudi Arabia – represents a mortal threat .
So Saudi Arabia is ready to cooperate with Israel not only against Iran , but also against other “ radicals , ” such as Hamas .
Remarkably , Palestine ’ s Hamas prime minister , Ismael Haniyeh , was not received in Saudi Arabia in December , when he was traveling through the region pleading for support for his beleaguered government .
Conservative Saudi Arabia prefers dealing with traditional and predictable leaders , such as Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas and Lebanon ’ s premier , Fouad Siniora , rather than firebrand populist leaders like Hezbollah ’ s Hassan Nasrallah , Hamas ’ Khalid Meshal , and Iran ’ s Ahmadinejhad .
Last year , Saudi Arabia ’ s King Abdullah , worried by Shi ’ a expansionism , was persuaded by Prince Bandar bin Sultan , the head of his National Security Council , to coordinate policy with Israel to counter Iran ’ s growing influence .
Israel , after all , is a “ reliable enemy ” for Saudi Arabia , having destroyed Nasser ’ s Egyptian army in 1967 – a time when the Saudis were fighting Egypt by proxy in Yemen .
So Prince Turki al-Faysal , the long time head of Saudi intelligence , has met with Meir Dagan , the head of Israel ’ s Mossad , while Bandar met with Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert in Jordan the same month .
Yet covert support from Israel , America , and the Saudis for Abbas and Siniora does little to help them in their domestic battles .
From Morocco , Algeria , Libya , and Sudan to Bahrain and Yemen – indeed , throughout the Muslim world from Jakarta to Nigeria – Islamic radicals have won the popularity sweepstakes .
A recent poll in Egypt ranked Nasrallah , Meshal , and Ahmadinejhad as the three most popular figures .
This leads to an unavoidable dilemma : Bush will have to choose between supporting democracy and backing those who want to fight Islamic radicalism .
Yet Israel , America , and the region ’ s moderates can benefit from the deepening schism in the Arab / Muslim world .
That schism is being consolidated by Saudi support of all the region ’ s Sunni Muslims .
It is this sense of “ Sunni solidarity ” that is becoming the decisive factor in the war for the soul of Islam , and in the struggle for mastery in the Middle East that is now underway .
