Obama ’ s Rocky Path to Success in Syria
NEW YORK – In my experience , if you are attacked for your diplomacy from both left and right , by doves and hawks , and by internationalists and isolationists , you probably have it just right .
In the avalanche of commentary on this month ’ s US-Russia deal on Syria ’ s chemical weapons , few have been prepared to call it a “ win-win-win ” outcome for the United States , Russia , and the Syrian people .
But – at least so far – that is what it is .
President Barack Obama and his team , despite some missteps , deserve most of the credit .
The charge sheet against Obama over Syria is long .
The US , it is said , took no decisive action while 100,000 Syrians were dying , and it had no strategy to end the conflict .
Obama created expectations that the US would act if chemical weapons were used , only to stall when the time came .
Then , when a response became unavoidable , he threatened both too much and too little military force .
He paid too little , then too much , attention to domestic opponents of intervention .
Above all , he allowed an ever-cynical Kremlin to outplay the US diplomatically .
But consider the constraints .
There was never a time in the crisis , until the chemical-weapons issue erupted , when US military intervention in any form seemed likely to save more lives than it would endanger .
The increasing influence of jihadists in the rebel ranks made support for an outright opposition victory increasingly untenable .
There simply was not enough hard evidence of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad ’ s use of chemical weapons , at least before the Ghouta massacre in August , to pressure Russia – either in the United Nations Security Council or the court of global opinion – to reconsider its reflex support of the regime .
Moreover , while the Obama administration remained determined to preserve US leadership in responding – with force , where necessary – to mass atrocity crimes ( the global “ responsibility to protect ” agenda ) , a decade of fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan has left Americans desperately war-weary .
That is true in the West generally , as shown by the United Kingdom ’ s parliamentary vote against participating in any intervention .
For almost everyone , George W. Bush ’ s “ decisiveness ” made vacillation seem like a better option .
Against this background , consider what Obama has achieved .
A descent into chemical-weapons hell has been averted , almost certainly permanently : the Assad regime knows that it has no friends or protectors left should it cross that red line again .
Military intervention , with all of its problems , has been avoided for now ; but Assad knows that the US will have no option but to attack – with or without explicit Security Council and Congressional resolutions – should he perpetrate another such horror .
Above all , diplomatic cooperation on chemical weapons has opened the door at last to a negotiated settlement of the underlying conflict in Syria .
And the UN is back at center stage , as a rules-based international order demands that it should be on such issues , with both its weapons inspectors and the Security Council regarded as central to future developments .
Yes , there were some things that could and should have been done differently .
There always are .
If the justified intervention in Libya by the US , the UK , and France had not later been conducted with such cloth-eared indifference to Russian , Chinese , and developing-country concern about mandate overreach , greater unity on Syria could have been achieved in the Security Council in 2011 , when a united message might have stopped Assad cold .
Going to Congress for approval was always going to involve more risks than rewards .
Secretary of State John Kerry ’ s description of the planned US military response to the Ghouta massacre as likely to be “ unbelievably small ” almost derailed the utility of the US threat in concentrating Syrian and Russian officials ’ minds .
And the administration could have helped itself by better explaining that a cooperative response to the Assad regime ’ s use of chemical weapons had long been on the table , and was not just the result of deftly opportunistic Russian diplomacy in response to a Kerry thought-bubble .
What has trumped these missteps , and enabled each side to focus on opportunities rather than excuses , is that both the US and Russia now understand that they have common interests in Syria .
Both sides want not only to preclude the Assad regime ’ s further use of chemical weapons , but also to find a route to sustainable peace in Syria , and to reestablish the authority and utility of the UN in these situations .
Of course , optimism must be tempered .
Plenty can go wrong in the period ahead .
Either a beleaguered Assad or an increasingly desperate opposition might destroy the deal on the ground .
The fragile rapprochement between the US and Russia may not hold , particularly if the US again insists – breaking its recent helpful silence – that Assad has no place at the negotiating table .
But when the major powers cooperate in a just cause , the world is a safer and saner place .
That is where both the US and Russia – and on this issue China as well – want to be .
If Obama ’ s caution and flexibility have been the key to getting us here , let us give praise where it is due .
