The Sinai Powder Keg
TEL AVIV – The crisis in the Sinai Peninsula seems to have been dwarfed by Sunday ’ s drama in Cairo .
But Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi ’ s civilian coup , in which he dismissed General Mohamed Hussein Tantawi , the leader of the army ’ s supreme command , has not diminished the importance of the trouble there .
Earlier this month , jihadi terrorists ambushed an Egyptian military base in Sinai , killing 16 Egyptian soldiers .
They then hijacked two armored personnel carriers and sped toward the frontier with Israel .
One vehicle failed to break through the border crossing ; the other penetrated Israeli territory , before being stopped by the Israel Defense Forces ( IDF ) .
In response , Egypt ’ s military and security forces launched an offensive against Bedouin militants in Sinai , while Morsi forced the General Intelligence Service ’ s director to retire and dismissed the governor of Northern Sinai .
These episodes highlight the complexity of the Middle East ’ s changing geopolitical landscape , the fragility of Egypt ’ s post-Mubarak political order , and the explosive potential of Sinai , which , though sparsely populated , includes Egypt ’ s borders with Israel and the Palestinian enclave of Gaza .
Indeed , since Hosni Mubarak ’ s ouster last year , security in Sinai has deteriorated , and the region has become fertile ground for Islamic extremism .
The 1979 Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty mandated that Sinai be largely demilitarized in order to serve as a buffer zone between the two former enemies .
Tourism and natural-gas pipelines linking the two countries provided economic resources for the local Bedouin .
But , as Mubarak ’ s regime declined , so did the government ’ s control over the Bedouin .
Palestinian militants from Gaza – an active arena of Israeli-Palestinian confrontation since Hamas gained control in 2007 – and jihadi terrorists affiliated with Al Qaeda and the larger “ global jihad ” network penetrated Sinai , exploiting the government ’ s neglect of the region and inflaming the local population ’ s feelings of disenfranchisement .
Israelis complained about Mubarak ’ s “ cold peace , ” but they appreciated that he adhered to the treaty ’ s fundamental provisions .
Now the behavior of his successors from the military and the Muslim Brotherhood has revived security challenges and raised difficult questions about the region ’ s future .
For example , in August 2011 , a jihadi group from Gaza seized control of an Egyptian outpost on Israel ’ s border and killed eight Israeli civilians .
Their objective was to damage further the Israeli-Egyptian relationship , which is already more fragile than ever , and they succeeded : the IDF accidentally killed several Egyptian soldiers during the incident .
The Egyptian security forces ’ subsequent failure to prevent demonstrators from storming Israel ’ s embassy in Cairo brought matters to the brink of calamity .
The uncertainty and disorder that have plagued Egypt for the last 18 months are fueling increasing lawlessness in Sinai .
Last month , a pipeline carrying Egyptian natural gas to Israel and Jordan was bombed – the 15th such attack since Mubarak ’ s regime was toppled – and remains out of commission .
There are four principal actors in this arena : Israel , Egypt , Hamas , and the Sinai jihadis .
Israel wants , first and foremost , peace and stability .
To this end , Israeli leaders expect Egypt ’ s government to reestablish its authority in Sinai , and , despite the peace treaty ’ s provisions , have agreed to Egyptian requests to increase its military presence in the region .
Moreover , Israel has practically abandoned any hope of receiving agreed gas supplies from Egypt , and has not pressed its demand that Egypt block the passage of sophisticated weapons to Gaza .
Israel is determined not to act against terrorist groups and infrastructure on Egypt ’ s territory .
And , in view of Hamas ’ s close links with Egypt ’ s Muslim Brotherhood , whose political party backed Morsi ’ s successful presidential run , Israel has restrained its response to terrorist and rocket attacks from Gaza .
But Egypt ’ s divided government has not established a correspondingly coherent policy .
Relations with Israel are managed by the defense minister , now Lieutenant General Abdul Fattah al-Sisi , and the military security establishment , whose leaders are determined to maintain a peaceful relationship with Israel and to secure Egyptian sovereignty in the Sinai .
For them , the lawless Bedouin , the Sinai jihadis , and Hamas and other groups in Gaza threaten Egypt ’ s national security .
But their will and ability to translate this view into policy are limited .
Meanwhile , Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood are playing a double game .
While Morsi denounced the recent violence ( particularly the deliberate killing of Egyptian policemen ) and issued an implicit threat against Hamas , the Brotherhood published a statement accusing Israel ’ s Mossad of perpetrating the attack – a claim that Hamas ’ s Prime Minister of Gaza , Ismael Haniyeh , has repeated .
In fact , Hamas , too , is playing a double game .
Having lost Syrian backing , it is hoping that the Egyptian Brothers will provide its kindred movement with political and logistical support .
Yet it allows radical Palestinians and jihadi groups in Gaza to conduct operations in Sinai .
The fourth actor , the Sinai jihadis , comprises primarily Bedouins , whose distinct origins and long-time marginalization have led some to identify with radical Islamist groups ( often while working in the Arabian Peninsula ) .
While this group ’ s primary goal is to undermine Israel-Egypt relations , they do not shy away from operating directly against the Egyptian state .
Given their strategic location , Sinai jihadis could easily be used by larger terrorist networks to target strategically vital locations , such as the Suez Canal .
Egypt ’ s government was humiliated and incensed by the recent terrorist provocation .
But it is too early to tell whether its security crackdown in Sinai is a one-time operation , intended to placate angry citizens , or the beginning of a serious effort to address the interconnected problems in Sinai and Gaza .
It is also too early to tell whether Morsi ’ s shakeup in Cairo was related to , or expedited by , the Sinai events .
But Sinai ’ s explosive potential clearly has been increased by the Muslim Brotherhood ’ s takeover .
Israel ’ s longstanding channel of communication with Egypt through the military has disappeared , and may or may not be replaced by a similar channel .
Hamas and the Bedouins in Sinai have most likely been emboldened by the latest developments in Cairo .
But , as Egypt ’ s domestic politics take their course , Israel , which has had to tread softly in its relationship with Egypt and in Sinai since January 2011 , will have to behave with even greater sensitivity in the days ahead .
