The Enigma of European Defense
PARIS – While Europe ’ s citizens largely support the establishment of a common security and defense policy , most European leaders have demonstrated a clear lack of interest in creating one – including at last month ’ s European Council meeting .
What accounts for this paradox ?
One possible explanation is that financially strained European governments lack the means to fulfill their citizens ’ expectations .
But that is unconvincing , given that the issue was framed in almost identical terms three decades ago , when budgetary constraints were not a problem .
In fact , it could be argued that such constraints should spur , not impede , the creation of a European defense structure .
After all , member countries would then be able to pool their resources , harmonize programs , and rationalize costs , thereby reducing individual governments ’ financial burden .
Another , far more credible explanation is that Europeans ’ interpretations of “ a more active and stronger security policy ” differ widely .
Indeed , current discussions in Europe concerning the use of force are dominated by three main perspectives , championed by France , the United Kingdom , and Germany .
France , which has once again intervened in Africa – this time to restore order in the Central African Republic – is the only European Union country that seems genuinely interested in satisfying popular demand for more robust European security structures .
The French consider Europe to be a kind of superpower – a status that implies a corresponding military capacity .
While this view probably stems from France ’ s historical political and military prowess , it also reflects the country ’ s current interests .
As Europe ’ s greatest military power ( despite the UK ’ s larger defense budget ) , France would play a key role in any wide-ranging European military operation .
The UK , for its part , shares France ’ s belief that military power is a prerequisite to strategic effectiveness .
It claims that its opposition to a European defense structure stems from its belief that NATO – and thus the United States – is critical to European defense .
But , given that no other EU country has seriously considered excluding NATO , this argument seems to be little more than an excuse .
The truth is that the only kind of defense the British accept is that conducted by a coalition of European states acting under their national flags , as occurred in Libya .
In the UK ’ s view , “ European ” operations should be limited to humanitarian and peacekeeping objectives .
While it supported the fight against piracy off the Horn of Africa , that was more a policing operation than a military one , and it was guided by a shared interest in protecting trade routes from the Middle East and Asia .
Germany ’ s vision of European defense is very different from the French and British perspectives .
Unlike the UK , Germany supports a European security and defense policy , proudly highlighting its consistent military budget and major presence in European missions ( larger than that of the overstretched French ) .
And , though Germany shares the UK ’ s belief that NATO bears primary responsibility for protecting Europe , its view of European engagement is even more restrictive .
In Germany ’ s view , European military intervention should be limited to the continent , and should not include combat operations .
In fact , a majority of Europe ’ s citizens prefer that European forces be deployed only for non-combat missions .
And , so far , virtually all European military operations have been aimed at evacuating European nationals , delivering humanitarian aid , or maintaining peace in the aftermath of conflict .
These differing views explain the uncertainty surrounding France ’ s recent interventions in Africa .
The French have lamented the miniscule support offered by the rest of Europe for its operations in Mali and the Central African Republic – exemplified by Germany ’ s refusal to create a fund for EU member-state operations .
But , given the urgency of the situations in Libya , Mali , and the Central African Republic , this lack of support has not undermined France ’ s efforts as much as prior consultation with European leaders would have done .
Had the Germans been consulted , they probably would have rejected the interventions anyway .
This conflict between the need for rapid response and the requirement for deliberation explains why the EU ’ s much-discussed “ battlegroups ” are unlikely ever to be deployed .
The fact that most Europeans are satisfied with limited political and military involvement outside of Europe makes increased defense cooperation even less likely .
A pessimist would say that Europeans are unable – or at least unwilling – to rethink their defense policy , because the US ultimately ensures their security through NATO .
According to this view , France ’ s efforts to encourage both transatlantic integration and autonomous political action are insufficient to change most Europeans ’ minds .
A more optimistic interpretation is that Europe needs defense structures that account for the role of member states – not just for that of the EU .
From this perspective , Europe does have a significant military presence , whether in Afghanistan and Libya or Mali and the Central African Republic .
That is a start .
