The Road from Crony Capitalism
BRATISLAVA : In the ten years of postcommunist transition , political reform has often been reduced to the issue of holding free elections .
Economic reform was often simplistically understood as only ( or at least above all ) encompassing macroeconomic stabilisation as promoted by the so-called ' Washington consensus , ' now being condemned by demonstrators in the streets of Washington .
It is no surprise that the results of so simplistic a policy prescription were often illiberal democracy and crony capitalism .
The transition in my country , Slovakia B and , indeed , across Central and Eastern Europe B has turned out to be a more complicated , complex , and longer process than originally expected .
The basic problem lies in the fact that the heritage of communism is a much greater burden than the majority of people , including experts , ever imagined , and was much more about the inheritance in people 's heads than the inherited economic structure .
At a recent conference in Moscow , however , IMF Deputy Managing Director Stanley Fisher continued to stress the importance of the ' Washington consensus ' - ie , macroeconomic stabilisation based on liberalizing prices and trade , currency convertibility , tight budgetary and monetary policy and rapid privatisation B for the success of reform .
That consensus remains important , but it is insufficient for success .
Building effective institutions is equally important .
For illiberal democracy and crony capitalism flourish where the institutional framework is lacking or corrupted .
Both have the same poisoned roots , so it is not surprising that they go hand in hand .
The higher the degree of a democracy 's illiberality , the higher the degree of corruption , moral hazard , opportunism and rent seeking behaviour ; the more corrupted the economy , the more stunted democracy is likely to be .
By illiberal democracy I mean a system where , though governments are elected in free ( but not always fair ) elections , they still fail to respect the basic principles and values of " constitutional liberalism , " including the rule of law , division of power , an independent judiciary , and respect and protection of human rights and freedoms .
Crony capitalism can be understood as a system , which , though based on some market relations and private ownership , fails to respect such important rules as the enforce-ability of law , free and fair competition , equality of opportunity , protection of ownership , transparency , and public control .
Crony capitalism is a system that gives free rein to phenomena such as hidden connections between political and economic power , corruption , clientelism , and embezzlement .
As it takes hold , the fairness of the political process shrivels .
Can this vicious circle - which is not just a theoretical threat but an unfortunate reality in many countries - be broken ?
The first step is to identify its main causes which , in my opinion , reside in a society 's shared values and patterns of behaviour , its so-called informal rules .
Unlike formal rules , such as laws , these informal strictures do not need to be enforced because in principle , in every democracy ( including illiberal ones ) , politicians only do what people allow them to do .
In the postcommunist democracies , however , these informal societal values and principles are only dimly perceived , if they are perceived at all , by a majority of the population .
In developed countries , such values have been nurtured by decades of functioning " constitutional liberalism , " including , as the author Fareed Zakaria noted , regimes that can be called " liberal autocracies , " such as the Austro-Hungarian Empire .
In this regard , history 's heritage in Central Europe is extraordinarily tangled .
People in the territory of what is now Slovakia have lived in seven different states and under five different political systems in the 20th century , from the liberal autocracy of the Austro-Hungarian Empire ( 1901-1918 ) , through the liberal democracy of the inter-war Czechoslovak Republic ( 1918-1939 ) , to the fascist wartime Slovak state ( 1939-1945 ) , back to a Czechoslovak liberal democracy ( 1945-1948 ) , then to the communist Czechoslovak Socialist Republic ( 1948-1989 ) , the liberal democracy of the Czechoslovak Federative Republic ( 1989-1992 ) .
Since the " Velvet Divorce " which separated Slovakia and the Czech Republic , there have been liberal democratic periods as well as the illiberal democracy of Vladimir Meciar 's regime of 1994-1998 .
Patterns from that seesawing past inevitably influence the present .
By examining the voting patterns of people in individual regions of Slovakia in the 1918-1939 and 1990-1998 periods , the Slovak sociologist Vladimir Krivy revealed that municipalities and regions that inclined towards liberal parties in the inter-war period continued to be so disposed when freedom was restored after 1989-1998 .
In other municipalities and regions the majority continued to support authoritarian parties and reject classic liberal principles , under both liberal and illiberal regimes .
Is it possible to break the cycle of illiberal democracy and crony capitalism ?
Slovakia offers a positive example of such a rupture .
The 1998 elections that saw the defeat of Vladimir Meciar 's regime clearly demonstrated that a break can be made .
Six factors played a key role here :
-- a change of generations ;
-- improved education ;
-- availability of information ;
-- a unified opposition respecting classic liberal values ;
-- growth in the influence of civil society .
Many of these forces for change grew in direct opposition to Meciar 's misrule .
I believe that they are necessary factors for the success of truly liberal democracies and modern market economies to take root even in countries such as Russia , Ukraine , Belarus , and the Balkan States .
They are also needed if reform in the countries of Central Europe is to be accelerated .
Developed countries and international institutions should focus their attention and support on nourishing their growth .
