The Decline of US Military Innovation
NEW YORK – The United States is at risk of losing its military edge .
America ’ s armed forces may still be the most advanced in the world ; after all , the US spends more than twice as much on military research and development as major powers like France and Russia , and nine times more than China and Germany .
But America ’ s continued technological leadership is far from assured .
Since 2005 , the US Department of Defense has cut R & amp ; D spending by 22 % .
In 2013 , as part of a deal to avert a showdown over the debt ceiling , the US Congress mandated some $ 1.2 trillion in automatic spending cuts .
The move , which requires reduced spending in numerous programs , including many defense research initiatives , was described by US President Barack Obama ’ s administration as “ deeply destructive to national security . ”
If US defense innovation continues to erode , not only will America ’ s defense capabilities suffer ; the country will also risk slipping in terms of commercial innovation and competitiveness .
Budget limitations pose some of the greatest challenges to the US military ’ s efforts to maintain its technological edge .
The Army and the Missile Defense Agency have been particularly hard hit , with R & amp ; D spending nearly halved since 2005 . The Navy ’ s research budget has been cut by some 20 % , and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ( DARPA ) – the organization tasked with keeping the US military ahead of the technological curve – has had to slash R & amp ; D spending by 18 % .
Even the Air Force , where research spending has traditionally been a congressional priority , has been forced to cut its budget by roughly 4 % .
When money does get allocated , cost pressures too often encourage investment in projects that promise quick results – a bias that comes at the expense of long-term innovation that could provide a strategic advantage .
Even DARPA has fallen prey to pressure for research that can demonstrate immediate progress .
To make matters worse , the US military ’ s innovation efforts face several structural problems .
Six decades of attempts to reform the defense acquisition process have yet to yield fruit .
Most of the design , development , and production of military systems is carried out by civilian industry , but decision-making remains firmly in the hands of military officials , who may not be able to strike the right balance between cost-cutting and innovation .
Rivalries within and among the military services once mimicked the role of competition in the private sector : they drove innovation .
But with the end of the Cold War , the pressure to remain a step ahead has waned , depriving the defense sector of a crucial engine of progress .
Moreover , top defense contractors ’ R & amp ; D spending as a proportion of sales plummeted by nearly a third from 1999 to 2012 .
By contrast , America ’ s technology giants invest 4-6 times as much in R & amp ; D.
Meanwhile , the US is suffering from the hollowing out of its defense industrial base .
Increased competition from China and other large emerging economies has eroded US manufacturing capabilities , jeopardizing America ’ s ability to develop the most technologically sophisticated defense platforms .
The defense industry once created the new technologies – lasers , GPS , and the Internet , for example – that helped drive the American economy .
Today , in most fields , civilian technology is likely to be leading the way .
The result can be seen in the rise of foreign competition in the international arms market .
American manufacturers are finding themselves increasingly vulnerable in areas that they once dominated – including unmanned aerial platforms , intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance , missiles , and satellites – as low-cost competitors gain market share .
In 2013 , Russia ’ s weapons exports surpassed America ’ s by more than $ 2 billion .
In November , US Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel announced a new initiative to “ sustain and advance America ’ s military dominance for the twenty-first century . ”
In a time of shrinking budgets and shifting strategic challenges , he focused on innovation .
“ Continued fiscal pressure will likely limit our military ’ s ability to respond to long-term challenges by increasing the size of our force or simply outspending potential adversaries on current systems , ” he said .
“ So to overcome challenges to our military superiority , we must change the way we innovate , operate , and do business . ”
Nine days later , Hagel handed in his resignation , which will take effect as soon as the US Senate confirms his replacement .
A policy aimed at restoring defense innovation and production in America would ensure that the US upholds its global technological leadership and commercial competitiveness .
Unfortunately , Hagel ’ s successor is likely to find that , in an era of limited budgets and automatic spending cuts , the type of comprehensive innovation strategy that Hagel envisioned may simply not be viable .
