What \ u0027s Wrong with Europe \ u0027s Right ?
WARSAW : Everywhere in Europe , traditional right wing parties are in crisis .
Britain 's Tories appear on a suicidal march to isolating themselves in an imaginary little England .
A civil war grips the French right , with a Euro MP grandson of Charles de Gaulle abandoning the Gaullists to join Jean-Marie Le Pen 's National Front .
Even Germany 's rock solid Christian Democrats are poised over an abyss of scandal .
Only the extreme right-wing Freedom Party of Austria 's Jörg Haider is on the march .
Is Europe 's right doomed to extinction or extremism ?
I am neither a man of the left , nor of the right .
Still , the troubles of the right should worry all thinking democrats ; and these troubles are not confined to Europe 's western half .
Two years ago I admired the professionalism with which Poland 's and Hungary 's rightist parties came to power .
Since then , like Western Europe 's conservatives , they managed to – at least in political terms – botch nearly everything .
Both movements now garner only around 20 % of support in opinion polls .
So-called post-communists are flying high with around 70 % .
Perhaps the collapsing popularity of the right in our new democracies tells something about the right in Europe 's old democracies .
For like their Western counterparts , the Polish and Hungarian conservatives are caught between their increasingly unappealing neo-liberalism and their increasingly anachronistic communitarian traditions .
Fidesz in Hungary and the Solidarity Electoral Alliance ( AWS ) in Poland gained power two years ago because of a reaction to their post-communist predecessors .
During their tenures , neither post-communist party rocked the reform boat very much , nor did they threaten democracy .
Yet the voters were ready to move away from the old ties – the electorate had become much younger in the 1990s and the improvements over the old regime , after the recession of the early 1990s had run its course and the reform policies began to pay off , became palpable .
In fact , people may have been somewhat ashamed at having allowed the post-communists to win the second round of democratic elections in mid-1990s .
The right always saw the post-communist interlude as a type of locust years – a time when the seeds of reform withered .
So the rightist rhetoric hardened .
No longer was it neo-liberal .
What we heard was a robust form of Christian conservatism unheard since the days of de Gaulle , Adenauer , and de Gasperi – and the communitarian tone helped sweep the post-communists away .
The right in Poland and Hungary used the communitarian rhetoric of Christian conservatism , but once in power , they reverted to their original programs and governed like neo-liberals .
The outcome was positive economically but a disaster politically .
For people ask : if growth is strong , why is unemployment high ? Why are state schools and health services so bad ?
Why do we suddenly have an underclass of the kind we used to see in the American cities portrayed in communist propaganda films ?
As the rigors of the transition continued , fatigue set it .
And that fatigue with liberal economics found resonance in our memories .
We remember something called " Solidarity , " which promised that we were equal brethren ; that everyone would be taken care of .
The common good , civil society : all were to be nourished in our post-communist democracies .
Although few seriously question the free market economy and liberal individualism in manners and customs , we feel uneasy about forsaking these values .
Two years ago our new right governments promised to tame the coldness of the market with the warmth of human understanding .
But in keeping to the reform path they failed to discover a language which reconciled their policies with these goals .
Their warmth seemed nothing but political hot air .
The so-called left , both in Poland and in Hungary , has a language which ( coming from ex-communists ) is breathtakingly cynical , yet effective .
It is a carbon copy of the language of the social-democrats who are so successful in Western Europe .
Because our right-leaning governments have been too decent to use the populist language of the radical right , they are helpless in appealing to mass emotions .
Their words appear to have nothing to do with their deeds .
They talk of family , morality , nation , but their policies lead to NATO , the European Union , massive foreign investment , international capital , and globalization – all things that appear to undermine the communitarian values of the right .
Here our right confronts much the same dilemma as that facing the right in Western Europe – how to bridge the gulf between the market and the community .
Unlike in the English-speaking world , liberalism has never been really popular on the European continent , and the conservatives have always appealed to the patriotic and religious feelings of their supporters .
The traditional right is therefore caught between a populist line that still appeals to the voters and the liberalizing policies that are the stuff of modern government everywhere .
The choice that the Austrian conservatives now face appears to confirm this stark dichotomy .
In this light , Haider may not be a historical leftover somehow unearthed in the mountains and valleys of Carinthia , but an augury of the future of the right across the European continent .
There was much talk recently about the " crisis of the left , " as the Labor party in Britain , the Social-Democrats in Germany , and the Democrats in America had to struggle between their old socialist and New Deal traditions and the imperatives of a modern economy , with the fading labor unions and other political bastions of the old left .
The left may have not found any real answers to its predicaments , but through a pragmatic patchwork of policies and rhetoric it managed to reclaim the center stage .
All the while , the seemingly unstoppable march of the market , globalization , and individualism that had propelled the right since Thatcher and Reagan came to an abrupt halt .
And the communitarian traditions of the right , with their nationalist past lurking behind , may not be any easier to revitalize than the old fashioned socialism or New Deal populism .
