Tony Blair ’ s Poisoned Legacy
Tony Blair has a powerful claim to being one of the most successful British politicians of any recent generation , at least in domestic economic and social policy .
But history will remember him mainly for his strategic error in going to war in Iraq .
During his ten years in power , Blair and his Chancellor of the Exchequer , Gordon Brown , gave Britain one of the longest periods of economic stability , relatively high growth , and low unemployment that it had ever known .
In this respect , Blair ’ s premiership marked a fundamental break with the Labor Party ’ s tax-and-spend tradition .
It also established a new tradition of stability in economic policy , continuing and reinforcing the previous Conservative government ’ s commitment to fiscal discipline and low inflation .
Stable economic policy and rapid growth , in turn , enabled Blair ’ s government to pour extra money into education and the National Health Service .
Yet Blair ’ s domestic legacy is a mood of disillusion and mistrust , especially of Blair himself .
One reason is that a significant portion of Blair ’ s party ( which he renamed “ New Labor ” ) never reconciled itself to the primacy that he gave to free-market principles over its old Socialist or Social Democratic values .
Another is that Blair consistently seemed to pay much less attention to Parliament than to the right-wing tabloid press : the spin and media manipulation to which his office devoted so much effort worked wonders at first , but soon generated deep skepticism and mistrust .
But the main reason for Britain ’ s popular disillusion with Blair comes down to his role in the Iraq war , which was launched with the ostensible aim of pre-empting Iraq ’ s use weapons of mass destruction ( WMD ) .
Of course , as we now know , WMD were never found , and , worse , evidence came to light showing that Blair was aware that the Bush administration was committed to regime change , regardless of their existence .
The infamous Downing Street memorandum of July 23 , 2002 , eight months before the outbreak of war , stated explicitly that “ The intelligence and the facts were being fixed around the policy . ”
In short , when Blair took Britain to war , he deliberately misled Parliament and the electorate about the ostensible rationale for it .
When no WMD were found , Blair fell back on the previously unavowed justification that the removal of Saddam Hussein was the “ right thing to do . ”
Unfortunately , the Bush administration did not foresee that Saddam ’ s removal would precipitate a multi-sided insurgency and civil war .
These dangers were predictable , and the world now knows that the war has proved a terrible failure of American strategy , and may yet have even more catastrophic consequences .
So why did Blair support it ?
Part of the answer goes back to Blair ’ s first big foreign policy adventure , NATO ’ s intervention in Kosovo in 1999 .
In 1998-1999 Serbia had embarked on violent repression of Kosovo ’ s ethnic Albanian majority , driving roughly 400,000 Kosovars from their homes .
Diplomatic efforts by the outside world proved ineffective , so in March 1999 , NATO began a 78-day bombing campaign against the Serbs .
Blair was at the forefront among Western leaders in pressing for NATO action , and to justify this innovation in outside intervention he proclaimed “ a new doctrine of international community ” that made it a “ just war , ” because it was based on superior Western values .
One of Blair ’ s character flaws is self-righteousness , an excessive confidence – perhaps an extrapolation of his Christian faith – that he knows what is correct , and is therefore entitled to act accordingly .
In the case of the Iraq war , Blair has never conceded that the war was mistaken in conception or disastrous in practice : for him , it was still “ the right thing to do . ”
Blair leaves office before the full consequences of the Iraq war have been played out .
There is no sign of an end to the sectarian violence , and little prospect that Iraq can become a peaceful , unitary democracy .
Moreover , the convulsions in Iraq may well have incalculable repercussions throughout the Middle East .
One consequence , from a British perspective , is that it is now virtually impossible to imagine that any future prime minister could engage in another big military adventure primarily out of loyalty to an American president .
Indeed , it is possible that Blair , through his complicity in the Iraq war , has inflicted major damage on the very idea of a “ special relationship ” between Britain and the United States .
This relationship was always more special for the British than for the Americans , who scarcely recognize its existence .
But if it has now been discredited in the minds of the British people , the result may be a new element of independence into British strategic thinking .
Another consequence is that Britain ’ s moral standing has been damaged alongside that of the US .
But the damage to America ’ s moral position is more serious for the health of the world .
It is uncertain whether Tony Blair could have dissuaded George Bush from waging war in Iraq .
Nevertheless , by enthusiastically backing Bush ’ s war , his legacy will forever remain deeply compromised .
