Bad Money , Good Money
London – The British comic genius Spike Milligan once observed that he would love to have the opportunity to discover that money wouldn ’ t make him happy .
Big lottery winners , it is claimed , end up miserable , though real-life research suggests that they are as happy as you and I would be with a check for a million dollars .
Money , however , can trigger all sorts of other emotions – like rage , for example .
That is pretty much how most people reacted to the stories about bankers ’ bonuses , when the great crash of 2007-2008 wiped out banks , businesses , shareholders ’ savings , growth , and jobs .
There was , as one banker charmingly conceded , a bit of asymmetry between what bankers were being paid and what their banks had lost .
The Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen notes in his latest magisterial book The Idea of Justice that most people understand that a process is fair when they can detect a connection between effort and reward .
The bankers failed this test dismally .
We gritted our teeth and for the sake of our national economies supported our governments as they bailed out the banks with public money .
It was a necessary , if infuriating , act of salvation to avoid economic disaster .
Having socialized banks ’ losses after we had seen the privatization of their gains , our rage quotient has shot up once more at the news that the banks we saved are again filling the troughs into which all those snouts are enthusiastically dipped .
The sheer unseemliness of what is happening raises blood pressure as well as eyebrows . How do they have the nerve ?
We should not , however , allow this sentiment to turn into an all-purpose rant against personal wealth . Sometimes its owners use it in hugely generous amounts for great public gain .
George Soros , the enormously successful investor , has used much of his own wealth to establish the Open Society Institute , which has helped to underpin the democratic revolution in Central and Eastern Europe and to press for human rights worldwide .
Mo Ibrahim is one of Africa ’ s most distinguished entrepreneurs .
He built a business empire on technology , software , and mobile telecommunications . Ibrahim has established a foundation whose main purpose is to raise standards of governance in Africa .
The continent certainly needs to pay heed .
With a billion people living in more than 50 countries , Africa is wracked by poverty and , in too many places , torn apart by war .
The Oxford development economist Paul Collier reckons that 75 % of the poorest people in the world live in countries that have only recently recovered from conflict or are still in conflict .
Most of them are in Africa . These are countries where it sometimes seems easier to start an uprising than to start a business .
Guinea , with a nasty military junta in power , is on the brink of disaster .
In Sudan , the Darfur conflict is unresolved and divisions between the north and the south once again threaten peace , with a promised referendum on southern independence due by 2011 .
Hundreds of thousands of displaced people huddle in camps in Somalia , where warlords rule . The list , alas , goes on .
It is not as though Africa lacked resources or the ability to govern itself well . Peaceful Botswana is a good example of what can be achieved .
While climate , geography , and the colonial past share some of the blame for today ’ s misery , most of the responsibility belongs to those African governments that have behaved so badly .
Ibrahim wants to stamp out corruption , to see the rule of law applied everywhere , to foster policy environments that encourage businesses to start up and thrive , and to strengthen the role of women .
He wants to reward those who support pluralist democracy and is a champion of civil society and a free press , and the Ibrahim Foundation is also deeply involved in the fight against global warming .
He also points out that less than 5 % of total trade in Africa is undertaken between African countries .
There is a powerful argument for regional economic integration on the continent , abolishing trade barriers , sharing infrastructure like power generation , and allowing free movement of people , goods , money , and jobs .
Some countries in East Africa are now trying to do something about that for themselves .
We shouldn ’ t allow our exasperation with bankers to morph into an assault on the creation of wealth . As Spike Mulligan was unable to discover for himself , money really can make people happier , producing a more just world with greater opportunity for the poor and disadvantaged .
Let ’ s hope that we move in that direction in 2010 .
