The Liquidity Puzzle
We increasingly hear that “ the world is awash with liquidity , ” and that this justifies expecting asset prices to continue rising .
But what does such liquidity mean , and is there really reason to expect that it will sustain further increases in stock and real estate prices ?
Liquid assets are assets that resemble cash , because they can easily be converted into cash and used to buy other assets .
The idea seems to be that there are a lot of liquid assets lying around , and that they are being used to get money to bid up the prices of stocks , housing , land , art , etc .
That theory sounds as general and fundamental as the theory that global warming is melting glaciers and raising sea levels around the world .
Rising sea levels would explain a lot of geological and economic events .
Is rising financial liquidity really a similar force ?
What is this theory anyway ?
Traditionally , “ awash with liquidity ” would suggest that the world ’ s central banks are expanding the money supply too much , causing too much money chasing too few goods .
But if that were the problem , one would cause all prices – including , say , clothing and haircuts – to rise .
That is what the Federal Reserve Chairman Arthur Burns meant when he said that the United States was “ awash with liquidity ” in 1971 , a period when the concern was general inflation .
But the recent popular use of the term “ awash with liquidity ” dates to 2005 , a time when many central banks were tightening monetary policy .
In the US , the Fed was sharply raising rates .
Central banks worldwide clearly have been behaving quite responsibly with regard to general inflation since 2005 .
According to the IMF , world inflation , as measured by consumer price indices , has generally been declining since 2005 , and has picked up only slightly in 2007 .
So it is something of a puzzle why people started using the term so much in 2005 .
It may have had something to do with the near-total lack of response of long-term interest rates to monetary tightening .
If central banks are tightening and long-term rates aren ’ t rising , one needs some explanation .
Liquidity is just a nice-sounding word to interpret this phenomenon .
Another interpretation is that people are saving a great deal , and that all this money is chasing investment assets , bidding up prices .
Current Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke raised this idea a few years ago , alleging a world “ saving glut . ”
But , once again , the data do not bear this out .
The IMF ’ s world saving rate has maintained a fairly consistent downward trend since the early 1970 ’ s , and , while it has picked up since 2002 , it is still well below the peak levels attained in the previous three decades .
True , savings rates in emerging markets and oil-rich countries have been increasing since 1970 , and especially in the last few years , but this has been offset by declining saving rates in advanced countries .
Another interpretation is that “ awash with liquidity ” merely means that interest rates are low .
But interest rates have been increasing around the world since 2003 .
Hardly anyone was saying the world was “ awash with liquidity ” in 2003 .
The use of the term has grown in parallel with rising , not falling , interest rates .
Yet another theory is that changes in our ways of handling risk have reduced risk premia .
The growth of the financial markets ’ sophistication has allowed risks to be sliced and diced and spread further than ever before .
Indeed , the much-vaunted market for collateralized debt obligations , which divides risks into tranches and places the different risk levels in different places according to the willingness to accept them , has plausibly played a role in boosting asset prices .
But this is really a theory about risk management for certain kinds of products , not “ liquidity ” per se .
Hyun Song Shin of Princeton University proposed a theory of excess liquidity in a paper with Tobias Adrian that he presented last month at the Bank for International Settlements in Brunnen , Switzerland .
He says that it merely reflects a feedback mechanism that is always present : any initial upward shock to asset prices strengthens the balance sheets of financial institutions , so in response they borrow more and bid up prices even more .
But if that is what the term “ awash with liquidity ” means , then its widespread use today is simply a reflection of the high asset prices that we already have .
It could even be called an approximate synonym for “ bubbly . ”
The term “ awash with liquidity ” was last in vogue just before the US stock market crash of October 19 , 1987 , the biggest one-day price drop in world history .
The reasons for that crash are complex , but , as I discovered in my questionnaire survey a week later , it would appear that people ultimately did not trust the market ’ s level .
As a result , they were interested in strategies – such as the portfolio insurance strategies that were popular at the time – that would allow them to exit the market fast .
The term “ awash with liquidity ” was also used often in 1999 and 2000 , just before the major peak in the stock market .
So its popular use seems not to reflect anything we can put our finger on , but instead a general feeling that markets are bubbly and a lack of confidence in their levels .
Under this interpretation , the term ’ s popularity is a source of concern : it may indicate a market psychology that could lead to downward volatility in prices .
