The “ New Normal ” for Growth
Cambridge – Markets are bubbling over signs of “ green shoots ” in the global economy .
An increasing number of investors see a strong rebound coming , first in China , then in the United States , and then in Europe and the rest of the world .
Even the horrible growth numbers of the last couple quarters don ’ t seem to discourage this optimistic thinking .
The deeper the plunge , the stronger the rebound , some analysts say .
Perhaps these optimists are right .
But how strong an expansion can one reasonably expect when the worst is finally over ?
Is the “ new normal ” going to be the same as the “ old normal ” of the boom years from 2002 to 2007 ?
I have trouble seeing how the US and China , the main engines of global growth for two decades , can avoid settling on a notably lower average growth rate than they enjoyed before the crisis .
Let ’ s start with the US , the epicenter of the financial crisis , and still the most important economy in the world .
In the best of worlds , the US financial sector will emerge from the crisis smaller and more heavily regulated .
Not to worry , some economists , say .
The US grew rapidly in the 1950 ’ s and 1960 ’ s with a relatively heavily regulated banking system .
Why not again ?
Sure , but the early post-war financial sector wasn ’ t called upon in those days to support nearly as diverse and sophisticated an economy as it is today .
If authorities set the clock back several decades on banking regulation , can we be so sure they will not also set the clock back on income ?
US consumption , the single biggest driver of global growth , is surely headed to a lower level , on the back of weak housing prices , rising unemployment , and falling pension wealth .
During the boom , US consumption rose to more than 70 % of GDP .
In the wake of the crisis , it could fall down towards 60 % .
And what about the major political shift the US has experienced ?
Tired of go-go growth , voters now look for more attention to addressing environmental concerns , health-care issues , and income inequality .
But achieving these laudable goals will be expensive , coming on top of the giant budget deficits the US is running to counter the financial crisis .
Higher taxes and greater regulation cannot be good for growth .
True , there is room to run the government more efficiently , especially in the areas of education and health care .
But will these savings be enough to offset the burden of a significantly larger overall government ?
I hope so , and certainly the Obama administration is a breath of fresh air after the stunning ineptness of the Bush-Cheney years .
But governments all over the world are always convinced that their expansions can be substantially financed by efficiency gains , and that dream usually proves chimerical .
Chinese growth is set to slow over the longer run , as well .
Even before the financial crisis , it was clear that China could not continue indefinitely on its growth trajectory of 10 % or more .
Environmental and water problems were mounting .
It was becoming increasingly clear that as China continued to grow faster than almost anyone else , the rest of the world ’ s import capacity ( and tolerance ) could not keep up with China ’ s export machine .
China was becoming too big .
With the financial crisis , the Chinese economy ’ s necessary adjustment towards more domestic consumption has become far more urgent .
True , even as exports have collapsed , the government has managed to prop up growth with a huge spending and credit expansion .
But , while necessary , this strategy threatens to upset the delicate balance between private- and public-sector expansion that has underpinned China ’ s expansion so far .
The growing role of the government , and the shrinking role of the private sector , almost surely portends slower growth later this decade .
Europe , too , faces challenges , and not just from the fact that it now has the worst downturn of the world ’ s major economic regions , with Germany ’ s government warning of a surreal 6 % decline in GDP for 2009 .
The ongoing financial crisis will almost surely slow the integration of the accession countries in Central and Eastern Europe , whose young populations are the single most dynamic source of growth in Europe today .
Not all regions will necessarily have slower economic expansion in the decade ahead .
Assuming continuing reforms in countries such as Brazil , India , South Africa , and Russia , emerging markets could well fill some of the growth gap left by the largest economies .
But , in all likelihood , after years of steadily revising up its estimates of trend global growth , the International Monetary Fund will start revising them down .
Even after the crisis , global growth is almost certain to remain lower than the pre-crisis boom years for some time to come .
This change may be good for the environment , for income equality , and for stability .
Governments are right to worry about the quality of growth , not just its speed .
But when it comes to tax and profit estimates , investors and politicians need to reorient themselves to the “ new normal ” – lower average growth .
