The New “ Two Chinas ” Question
NEW YORK – To anyone over the age of 60 who follows world affairs , the term “ two Chinas ” recalls the post-1949 competition for diplomatic recognition waged by mainland ( “ Red ” ) China and Taiwan , or , more formally , the People ’ s Republic of China and the Republic of China .
By the early 1970s , just about every country fell in line with the People ’ s Republic ’ s demand that it alone be recognized as the legitimate sovereign government of China .
The mainland was simply too large and too important economically and strategically to alienate .
Today , a new , but very different , “ two Chinas ” question is emerging .
It centers on whether China is best understood as a strong country , with a promising future despite some short-term difficulties , or as a country facing serious structural problems and uncertain long-term prospects .
In short , two very different Chinas can now be glimpsed .
But which one will prevail ?
Until recently , there was little reason to ask such a question .
China ’ s economy was growing at an astounding average annual rate of 10 % or higher for more than three decades .
China had overtaken Japan as the world ’ s second largest economy .
Hundreds of millions of Chinese had entered the middle class .
China ’ s model of authoritarian efficiency seemed attractive to many other developing countries , particularly in the wake of the 2008 global financial crisis , which began in the United States and thus seemed to discredit American-style liberal capitalism .
But the question of China ’ s future has become unavoidable .
Officially , economic growth has slowed to near 7 % ; but many believe the real number is below 5 % .
The slowdown should come as no surprise ; all developing economies experience something similar as they grow and mature .
Nonetheless , the speed and degree of change have caught the authorities off guard , and have stoked official fears that growth will fall short of the rate needed for the country to modernize as planned .
The government ’ s alarm at the sharper-than-expected economic slowdown was reflected in its heavy-handed intervention in July to freeze stock markets in the midst of a dramatic price correction .
That move was followed this month by a surprise devaluation of the renminbi , which suggests that the shift away from export-led growth is not working as hoped .
Meanwhile , President Xi Jinping ’ s anti-corruption campaign increasingly looks like a strategy to consolidate power , rather than an effort to reform China ’ s state for the benefit of its economy and society .
Corruption is pervasive , and Xi ’ s campaign remains broadly popular .
But the wave of prosecutions that Xi has unleashed is discouraging Chinese officials from making decisions , owing to their fear that they could face criminal charges in the future .
As a result of these developments , one hears much less of late about the Chinese model and more about the Chinese reality .
Aside from slowing growth , that reality includes severe environmental damage , one result of decades of rapid , coal-fueled industrialization .
According to one estimate , air pollution is killing 1.6 million Chinese per year .
China ’ s aging population , an unintended consequence of its draconian one-child policy , poses another threat to long-term prosperity .
With the dependency ratio – the proportion of children and pensioners relative to working-age men and women – set to rise rapidly in the coming years , economic growth will remain subdued , while health-care and pension costs will increasingly strain government budgets .
What is increasingly apparent is that China ’ s leaders want the economic growth that capitalism produces , but without the downturns that come with it .
They want the innovation that an open society generates , but without the intellectual freedom that defines it .
Something has to give .
Some observers , fearing a rising China , will breathe a sigh of relief at its current difficulties .
But that may prove to be a shortsighted reaction .
A slow-growth China would undermine the global economic recovery .
It would be a less-willing partner in tackling global challenges such as climate change .
Most dangerous of all , a struggling China could be tempted to turn to foreign adventurism to placate a public frustrated by slower economic growth and an absence of political freedom .
Indeed , there are some signs that the authorities are doing just this in the South China Sea .
Nationalism could become the primary source of legitimacy for a ruling party that can no longer point to a rapidly rising standard of living .
The US and others will need to push back to ensure that China does not act on such a temptation .
But these countries would be equally wise to signal to China that it is welcome to take its place among the world ’ s leading countries if it acts responsibly and according to the rules set for all .
But the bigger policy choices will be China ’ s to make .
The government will need to find the right balance between government interests and individual rights , between economic growth and environmental stewardship , and between the role of markets and that of the state .
The choices China faces are as difficult as they are unavoidable .
Major social unrest cannot be ruled out .
The one certainty is that the next three decades will not mirror the last three .
