World Finance After Robert Rubin
CAMBRIDGE : The US Treasury and Alan Greenspan receive great credit for restoring stability in global markets after the Asian , Russian , Brazilian and other financial tremors of last fall .
So should we now be alarmed that a key man steering the boat is getting off , making the world economy much more vulnerable if trouble hits again ?
Of course , the Treasury which Robert Rubin came to lead was vital early on in the Clinton administration in countering the spend-and- tax- happy liberals on the Clinton White House team .
Mr Rubin and his proteges taught the lesson that bond markets are supreme and they succeeded beyond anyone 's imagination thus training the White House to that new view .
Today , Asia 's emerging markets are on the road to recovery , China is not devaluing its currency ( and nobody now really expects it to ) , and Brazil has become the capital market 's new best friend .
What , then , is there to fear from Mr. Rubin 's departure ?
The world seems set for smooth sailing .
In America , there seems little left for the Treasury to do except bring about a tax cut if and when the U.S. economy begins to slip .
The world can trust Mr. Rubin 's long time deputy , the economist Larry Summers , to keep the ship afloat : he knows better than anyone that timely and decisive tax cuts are the way to keep the economy from tumbling .
But the most important role now lies clearly with the chairman of the U.S. Federal Reserve , Mr Alan Greenspan ; he is essential if and when a confidence crises hit asset markets ; he is essential to keeping credit lines open and markets from freaking out .
Markets hope that he will stay , somehow forever .
So , even with a key member of the American economic leadership team leaving , the world 's largest economy seemingly is in very good shape to confront any of the small troubles of every day finance .
But is this too good to be true ?
Of course , another emerging market might fall into crisis .
But by now we know that , given the right policy mix , emerging markets mend almost faster than they falter .
Nor is there much crisis potential in Western Europe in a shootout between socialist governments and a near-deaf central bank .
Even Eastern Europe , with erratic Russia at its center , will not likely make the world hold its breath -- at least for financial reasons .
The two trouble spots that may erupt and disturb harmony around the world , surprisingly , are its two greatest economies : America and Japan .
US stocks are overpriced for a world in which inflation is not totally dead and Japanese bonds are overpriced for the simple reason that the country 's debt is huge and the budgets deficits on its horizon seemingly stretch forever .
Japan 's is a debt that cannot be paid and its government bonds deserve junk bond rating .
The US problem is simple : stocks are in the stratosphere .
That they should be high is obvious - America 's economy has been expanding for 100 months without interruption , technology and competition abound , initiative is plentiful and consumers spend everything they get in pay and more .
But there is no reason for stocks to rise forever : at the slightest sign of inflation trouble stock prices will implode fast .
Inflation trouble , in a small way , is now on the horizon .
US wage inflation and productivity are not the problems but commodity prices are .
World expansion means sharply higher prices for raw materials and manufactures and from there it is a short step for Mr. Greenspan to raise interest rates and stop America 's long-running party .
No recession , no meltdown will result , but a very serious jolt to world capital markets will take place , especially on the periphery , where the lack of stabilization and reform is covered up by capital inflows .
The Japan problem is far more serious .
Today Japan is the world 's biggest debtor , ahead of the US and Europe , even though Japan 's economy is barely half their size .
Lack of recovery in Japan means that budget deficits are huge , too , and so are pension payments to a rapidly aging population . The total bill is already 2509 % of GDP and rapidly rising .
Japan is bound to have a debt crisis and when it does we will face the biggest world financial crisis since the 1930s .
There remains an open question as to whether Japan will go into depression or into pervasive controls .
The safe assumption is that it will kiss good bye to any thought of further financial opening or restructuring and , instead , move sharply into reverse .
If Japan , and with it surely much of Asia , clamps down on free markets and reverts to the statist model that got it into the trouble in the past , the rest of the world will face a huge challenge .
Can Europe , Latin America , and the US go it alone , cultivate market forces and the free flow of goods and capital with Asia in a tailspin incited by a Japanese collapse ?
Or will it , too , succumb and revert to a belief in state controls and protected national economies .
The right bet , surely , is that in the West markets have a good name and the State as the center of economic activity does not .
Mr. Rubin 's cool head , advocating such a stance , might well be missed should Japan implode in such a way .
