The Ozone Mafia
Now that the Kyoto Protocol has been ratified , with even Russia belatedly signing on , a threat is emerging against an earlier landmark in international environmental protection – the Vienna Convention and the Montreal Protocol for defending the stratospheric ozone layer .
The threat comes from an unlikely source : organized crime .
The reason is simple .
To protect the stratospheric ozone layer , international agreements have been reached to ban the use and trade of the ozone-destroying chemicals called chlorofluorocarbons ( CFC ’ s ) .
In order to replace these chemicals with others that are more benign , the equipment in which they are used – like freezers , coolers , and units for foam plastic production – must be substituted for new ones .
But it ’ s much cheaper , although forbidden , to use the old equipment and refill them with CFC ’ s when needed than to buy new machines and use the more environmentally benign but more costly alternatives .
As with any ban , a market was thus created – and with it a business opportunity for well organized and environmentally reckless criminals .
Organized crime is constantly on the lookout for such opportunities , and it continues to find them .
So it is no surprise that CFC or freon smuggling has developed without much attention , and risks jeopardizing the Vienna Convention and the Montreal Protocol .
These agreements are hailed as great successes , and annual reports summarizing official statistics are published showing that the use of CFC continues to decrease .
The content of chlorine ( from decay of CFC ’ s ) in the stratosphere has leveled off , and two years ago the ozone hole over the Antarctic was the smallest in decades ( and broken up into two ) .
However , new reports show a thinning of the ozone layer over the Arctic , and last year ’ s Antarctic ozone hole was as large and deep as ever .
There is no way of telling yet whether these represent mere fluctuations in a slow recovery process or a break in the positive trend .
Is the volume of illicit CFC trading so large that it is now a factor of real importance ?
As with illicit drugs , it is difficult to estimate the extent of smuggling operations .
A number of extensive catches have been made by national customs agencies , the largest in Japan , in recent years .
In most cases , the forbidden CFC ’ s have been labeled as permitted HFC ’ s ( hydrogenfluorocarbons ) , but labels like “ spray paint ” and “ lubricants ” also have been used .
Ships and airplanes have been used for transport in this black-market trade .
The shipments caught by customs authorities mostly originate from free industrial zones , also called export-processing zones , in China , Vietnam , Thailand , and Egypt .
In most parts of the world , customs agencies are not especially focused on CFC ’ s , and the compounds are not easy to distinguish from HFC ’ s without sophisticated analytical equipment .
So it is reasonable to assume that the proportion of the total smuggled volume that is discovered is smaller than for narcotic drugs .
Complicated lines of transport using transit countries are often used .
One such line , which is presumed to be significant , goes from Europe ( Spain ) via Singapore or Dubai , through India to Nepal or Bangladesh and back again to the market in India .
Some features in the conventions for protecting the ozone layer constitute holes of a legal kind .
One is that industrial and developing countries march at different speeds when it comes to phasing out CFC ’ s .
This means that what is banned in one country is permitted elsewhere .
Another problem is that there are no restrictions on the sale of old equipment that runs only on the banned substances .
For example , freezers that require CFC ’ s can be freely exported from , say , Sweden , where they can no longer legally be refilled when required , to Egypt , where refilling is allowed .
The rapid increase of foam plastic production in export processing zones is thought to be based on their purchase of CFC-dependent production units from OECD countries .
So , do such practices constitute a real threat to the conventions for protecting the stratospheric ozone , or are they “ only ” a factor that will delay the final phase-out of CFC ’ s within years or a decade ?
If the latter , that is bad enough , but the answer is not self-evident , and the whole question of organized crime and the illegal trade with CFC ’ s demands attention .
Customs officials all over the world and fighters of organized crime have a new battle – this time for the environment – on their already busy hands .
