Women for Integration
COPENHAGEN – The past decade has proven again and again that empowering women worldwide holds the key to solving many seemingly intractable issues that have otherwise stymied policymakers .
Poverty in the developing world seemed ineradicable until micro-lenders saw millions of low-income , destitute women as potential entrepreneurs .
Involving African women in decision-making about crop production turns out to enable environmentally sustainable farming practices .
Runaway population growth becomes controllable when women have access to literacy and business opportunities as well as to contraception .
Could the tensions and conflicts surrounding the issue of immigration in Europe be yet another issue for which the empowerment of women holds a solution ?
In a recent visit to Copenhagen to commemorate International Women ’ s Day , I took part in many conversations that duplicate others throughout Europe : citizens from across the political spectrum were struggling with the issue of non-European immigration and the cultural tensions that have ensued .
What does it mean to be Danish , German , or French in the presence of these millions of newcomers , most of whom come from non-democratic societies ?
Some of this anxiety is pure racism ; but some is not .
What would “ integration ” mean , and how is it achieved without the loss of cherished civil-society values ?
These are not necessarily xenophobic questions : a post-enlightenment civil society , with a free press and due process , is a precious thing , and those values should not be sacrificed to politically correct moral relativism .
This issue has been given new urgency by the arrests in Ireland of alleged jihadists from several countries who are accused of plotting to murder a Swedish cartoonist who drew an image of the prophet Mohammed as a dog .
Across Europe , the discussions are growing more intense as anti-immigration platforms gain supporters in otherwise liberal countries , from Germany to France to traditionally inclusive and tolerant Denmark itself .
Then I witnessed the prototype of a true solution .
I met Elisabeth Møller Jensen , the director of KVINFO , “ the Danish center for information on gender , equality and ethnicity ” – an extraordinary organization funded by Denmark ’ s Ministry of Culture .
One of its many innovative programs is already showing results in terms of genuinely integrating immigrant families into Danish society .
By addressing immigrant women – and by viewing them as potential leaders , rather than as quiescent potential maids or service workers – KVINFO is enabling their families to witness the benefits of an open civil society in their own lives .
KVINFO began a “ mentor network ” aimed at immigrant and refugee women in 2002 .
By 2010 , it had 5,000 participants , had won awards and international acclaim for best integrative practices , and is being replicated throughout Denmark – and observers are exploring programs or partnerships modeled upon it in Canada , Spain , Portugal , and Norway .
The program pairs refugee and immigrant women in a one-to-one mentoring relationship with women who are established leaders at all levels of Danish society .
The pairing is not cursory .
A careful matchmaking process unites the interests and goals of the women on both sides , and already has paid amazing dividends .
Women who were journalists , engineers , or scientists in their countries of origin – and who could not get jobs as checkout cashiers in Denmark – have been paired with Danish counterparts and are now back in school , or working in research .
But even women who arrive with no higher education or professional skills create an “ action plan . ”
They learn from their mentors what options there are , how to proceed , and what to do to reach their objectives .
As they enter the workforce , their language skills improve , their household income soars , and their children see firsthand a woman in a respected , economically valued role .
Their loved ones thus learn how to thrive in a European context – occasionally coming to KVINFO events and benefiting from their mothers ’ expanding network of contacts .
So , rather than feeling exploited and condemned indefinitely to the fringes of a Northern European society – and thus vulnerable to the stirrings of demagogues and extremists – these women ’ s children grow up fully familiar with Danish civil society , well informed about higher education and professional opportunities , and hopeful rather than cynical .
By empowering women , the whole family is lifted up and , in a supportive rather than a colonizing way , “ Europeanized ” in the best sense .
I am often struck by the way many Europeans use arms-length euphemisms when talking about immigrants : they want immigrants to feel “ welcome ” or “ comfortable . ”
I always wonder , “ But do you want them to feel French , or German , or Norwegian ? ”
To be fully integrated , Muslim and other newcomers to European countries must be welcomed not as perpetual visitors – even if , ideally , as nicely treated visitors – but rather as family members , as the American model does ( or aspires to do ) .
As Møller Jensen put it , “ I want these children to feel Danish . ”
These young people and Denmark itself will benefit , as this “ KVINFO generation ” grows up with a genuine stake in Danish civil society , and seeing the world as Danes , not as guests .
