Taksim and the Left
ISTANBUL – The small park in Taksim Square in the sprawling metropolis of Istanbul is one of the few green spaces left in the city center .
On May 28 , a handful of Turkish environmentalists started a peaceful protest against a redevelopment plan for the park that would replace the greenery with a replica of an Ottoman-era army barracks , a shopping mall , and apartments .
But heavy-handed police repression launched a massive civic movement that has spread to the entire country .
The redevelopment plan for the park triggered a huge protest against what a large segment of the Turkish public , particularly young people , considers paternalistic and authoritarian political leadership .
The movement ’ s rapid growth was fueled by widespread opposition to what many regard as official efforts to regiment lifestyles , as well as by frustration over perceived economic inequities .
Indeed , though environmentalists and secular youth spearheaded the protest movement , it became remarkably diverse and inclusive almost overnight .
Pious Muslims – particularly those who believe that Turkey ’ s urban development has created too much rent-seeking and too many easy fortunes – joined the demonstrations as well , as did some far-left groups .
Some of the protests became violent .
Overall , however , the movement has remained peaceful and even joyous .
Moreover , important figures in or close to the ruling Justice and Development Party expressed their willingness to hold a dialogue with the protesters .
President Abdullah Gül , in particular , played a calming , statesmanlike role .
A striking feature of the protests has been the distance that the demonstrators have put between themselves and existing political parties , including the Republican People ’ s Party ( CHP ) , the largest force in the center-left secular opposition .
In this sense , the Taksim “ sit-in ” resembles protests elsewhere , particularly in the advanced democracies , from the “ Occupy Wall Street ” movement to the protests in Spain and Italy .
To be sure , there are country-specific features to such protests – including , in Turkey ’ s case , the reaction against lifestyle paternalism .
But social democrats must understand why the protests developed quite independently of existing , organized , center-left politics .
Without such realism , the center left in Europe and the emerging world cannot regain political momentum .
Modern production systems , in which information technology plays an increasingly crucial role , are totally different from the large factory floors that characterized the birth of trade unionism and social democracy .
The way much of GDP is now produced has made it significantly harder for the left to organize in traditional ways .
That has weakened center-left parties .
Yet information technology and global social media have empowered people to overcome social fragmentation along occupational , residential , and national lines .
On some recent days , posts about Taksim Square have reportedly occupied a huge part of the entire world ’ s “ Tweet space . ”
In this corner of cyberspace , there is , of course , everything under the sun , including calls for the worst sort of sectarianism .
Nonetheless , what dominates is a desire for individual freedom , an acceptance of diversity , great concern for the environment , and a refusal to be “ organized ” from above .
Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu , the CHP ’ s reformist leader , quickly recognized these dynamics : “ The demonstrators don ’ t want us on the front lines , ” he said , “ and we have much to learn from these events . ”
And yet , while civil society can be a trigger , sooner or later democratic politics has to drive the process of change .
Whether in New York , Paris , Madrid , Rome , Istanbul , or New Delhi , a feeling of unease and a desire for change has emerged in societies that are becoming increasingly unequal , and in which politics and business mix in non-transparent ways .
Rising youth unemployment and cuts in pensions and social expenditures come at a time when many large multinational corporations legally avoid taxes by shifting their profits to favorable jurisdictions .
In the eurozone , stock prices are soaring , while joblessness is at a record-high 12.2 % .
The democratic opposition can address the flaws of the existing order only if it recognizes the need for very different forms of mobilization from those of the past .
It must recognize a strong popular desire for individual autonomy , more leadership positions for women and the young , and greater support for individual enterprise ( along with reforms of social insurance that make it cost-effective and truly inclusive ) .
Finally , the environment , climate change , and global solidarity will be defining themes of the twenty-first century .
Acting on their own , nation-states can successfully address neither tax avoidance nor carbon emissions .
The renewed patriotism seen in many places & # 160 ; – a response to the unfairness and dislocation that globalization can generate – must be reconciled with human solidarity , respect for diversity , and the ability to work across national borders .
The success of Germany ’ s Green Party reflects the focus that it has placed on many of these issues .
The events that started in Taksim Square are specific to Turkey , but they mirror aspirations that are universal .
The same can be said for the challenge facing the democratic left .
