Whose Corporate Social Responsibility ?
NEW YORK – Increasingly , corporations are under pressure , often from activist non-governmental organizations , to take on specific “ corporate social responsibility ” ( CSR ) obligations .
But the fact that CSR is being demanded , and occasionally conceded , does not ensure clarity about either its rationale or the ways in which it should be undertaken .
CSR can be divided into two categories : what corporations should do ( say , contribute to a women ’ s rights NGO or build a village school ) and what they should not do ( say , dump mercury into rivers or bury hazardous materials in landfills ) .
The latter is wholly conventional and subject to regulation ( and recently to questions about how corporations should behave when there are no host-country regulations ) .
But are CSR obligations really good practice ?
Milton Friedman and other critics often asked if it was the business of businesses to practice corporate altruism .
Prior to the rise of the corporation , there were mainly family firms , such as the Rothschilds .
When they made money , it accrued principally to the family itself .
Altruism , where it existed , also was undertaken by the family , which decided how and on what to spend its money .
Whether the firm or its shareholders and other stakeholders spent the money was beside the point .
With the rise of the business corporation , large family firms have generally disappeared .
But that does not mean that a corporation is the right entity to engage in altruism – though its various stakeholders obviously can spend any portion of the income they earn from the corporation and other sources in altruistic ways .
Instead of CSR , we should have PSR ( personal social responsibility ) .
One can also argue for PSR on the grounds that asking for CSR becomes a way of “ passing the buck ” – evading personal responsibility for doing good .
This is the flip side of blaming corporations for everything from obesity to scalding from spilled coffee – both the subject of lawsuits in recent years .
There is also an added advantage in replacing CSR with PSR : there is virtue in diversity of approaches to altruism .
Chairman Mao wanted a hundred flowers to bloom , but only so that he could cut them all off at their roots .
But PSR is more like President George H.W. Bush ’ s metaphor of a “ thousand points of light . ”
Moreover , it is hard to see how a corporation ’ s stakeholders can always arrive democratically at a common position on how the corporation should engage in social responsibility on their behalf .
Each will consider his or her CSR view the best .
But there are strong arguments in favor of CSR as well .
First , the political reality is that society treats corporations as if they were persons , which is often also a legal reality for many purposes .
Society increasingly demands that these “ corporate citizens ” be altruistic , just as people are .
Given this reality , corporations want to give simply because it is expected of them .
Such CSR builds the firm ’ s image as a “ good ” corporation , just as giving by Bill Gates and Warren Buffet builds their image as “ good ” billionaires .
Second , many corporations view CSR as an effective defensive strategy against powerful activist NGOs ( such as Greenpeace ) that have taken to using online agitation , boycotts , and other means to “ blackmail ” targeted corporations into acceding to the activists ’ demands .
The more CSR a company can point to , the less such efforts will succeed – or even be mounted .
Consider the contrasting experiences of Coke and Pepsi .
Coke has been targeted by NGOs for alleged lapses in labor and environmental standards .
By contrast , Pepsi , which once teamed up with AT & amp ; T and the CIA to oust President Salvador Allende in Chile , smells like a rose nowadays , because it has distributed CSR largesse to several causes that influential NGOs embrace .
That is a lesson that Wal-Mart has since learned .
In 2005 , the Service Employees ’ International Union ( SEIU ) created Wal-Mart Watch , with an annual budget of $ 5 million .
The purpose was to make Wal-Mart a “ better employer , neighbor , and corporate citizen , ” and Wal-Mart eventually capitulated on some of the SEIU ’ s specific demands as well .
Finally , CSR can be simply a matter of advertising .
In this case , the choice of CSR spending is focused directly on generating added revenue , much like advertising , and is aimed at sales much the way advertising is .
A benign example is Adidas ’ s sponsorship of tennis tournaments .
A malign example is Philip Morris ’ s donation of money to museums , symphony orchestras , and opera houses , cynically aimed at buying off artists who might otherwise work to ban cigarettes .
All these rationales for CSR suggest that it should be left to each corporation to determine , just as PSR leaves altruism to each individual ’ s conscience and sense of what needs supporting .
The attempt by some NGOs and activists to impose a straitjacket on CSR , reflecting their priorities , is misguided and must be rejected .
Instead , the model should be former United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan ’ s initiative , the Global Compact . What Annan has done is to embrace ten wide-ranging guiding principles while leaving signatory corporations free to choose that which they wish to support actively .
