The Politics of Self-Destruction in Peru
Peru 's President Alejandro Toledo has invented a new extreme sport , a soccer game in which he is the sole player .
Instead of kicking the ball to win , he aims so that his opponent scores .
This explains why , with more than half of his term left , the man who led a popular movement to unseat former President Alberto Fujimori holds a mere 7 % popularity rating today - the lowest ranking of any Peruvian leader since 1980 , when democracy was re-established .
Toledo assumed the presidency planning to dismantle the corruption that marked Fujimori 's administrations and end the reign of his crooked chief of intelligence , Vladimiro Montesinos .
Toledo claimed that he would send all dishonest officials to prison - words that captured the imagination of Peruvians , who yearned to see criminal politicians brought to justice .
All this resolve was shattered by revelations about Toledo 's personal advisor , César Almeyda , whom he appointed to head the new National Intelligence Board .
Almeyda secretly met with Army General Oscar Villanueva , the presumed " cashier " of Montesinos 's mafia .
Villanueva was a fugitive from justice and Almeyda knew that he should turn him over to the police .
Instead , he sought information from Villanueva , supposedly to use against the government 's enemies .
Toledo later claimed that he was wrong to trust Almeyda , but few believed that the president had not known what Almeyda , a trusted confidante , had done .
Toledo had every reason to seek Villanueva 's help : as everyone knows , despite being locked up at the Callao Naval Base , Vladimiro Montesinos continues to exercise influence and can find ways to bring down Toledo 's government .
Following the news of Almeyda 's clandestine meetings , yet another fugitive , Daniel Borobio , made damaging revelations .
Borobio , who organized the presidential advertising campaigns for both Fujimori and Toledo , declared from exile in Chile that two of Toledo 's brothers had secretly hired him to help " slow down the president 's fall from popularity , improve his public image , and raise his ratings . "
Recent public opinion surveys indicate why Toledo needs such assistance : many Peruvians believe that his government is as corrupt as Fujimori 's .
Meanwhile , Toledo 's self-destruction has given Fujimori more reason to fantasize , from the safety of his exile in Tokyo , about a political resurrection .
Never mind that Congress has prohibited him from ever returning to Peru ­ - where he faces serious charges of corruption - or that he can count on only 15 % of the electorate to support him .
Despite this , he brims with imagined presidential plans , such as ridding the country of terrorist groups like Shining Path and re-establishing Peru 's economic standing .
On his web page and through his radio program , Fujimori assures listeners that Toledo 's anti-corruption program is a fantasy and that Toledo 's association with Montesinos will bring about more looting of the treasury .
This is doubtless an attempt to deflect attention from Fujimori 's own crimes perpetuated from 1990 to 2000 , before he fled to Japan .
But Toledo 's own behavior gives such arguments a ring of truth .
Indeed , Toledo has made things worse through deception .
His first offense was raising the presidential salary to $ 18,000 ( Fujimori 's was a symbolic $ 1,500 ) .
Then he revealed that his wife was doing business with one of Montesinos 's banker friends and that his family members had obtained highly paid government posts .
But the scandal that has destroyed his credibility is his refusal for thirteen years to recognize his daughter , Zaraí , a child born of an extramarital affair .
Throughout his campaign , Toledo insisted that he would do so , but he admitted his paternity only two years later , after the girl 's mother turned to the Supreme Court for help .
Toledo 's advisors had urged honesty , assuring him that he would rise in public esteem by coming clean .
But he stubbornly refused , and his belated admission came too late to gain public favor .
The media , silent during Fujimori 's reign , contribute to the feverish political climate .
Even Peru 's most important newspaper , El Comercio , recently suggested that Toledo resign , leaving his first minister and cabinet to run the government .
More troubling is the fact that anyone with legal problems due to ties to either Fujimori or Toledo can find a newspaper , television , or radio outlet from which to make accusations .
The media tend to take accusers at their word , without regard for their credibility or the facts .
One newspaper , for instance , published a letter accusing Toledo of using drugs .
The letter 's author , Carlos Pichiling ¸ was the head of a paramilitary group that was associated with Montesinos and that killed at least 30 civilians .
In a final effort to reduce the impact of all these scandals , Toledo published an open letter , declaring that none of his brothers were authorized to represent him .
Stepping in to back the embattled president , the Organization of American States recently issued a call that Toledo be allowed to finish his term .
But opinion polls continue to show a huge drop in Toledo 's popularity , and no one believes that he will make it to the end of his term in 2006 .
