Wall street 1929 all over again
CAMBRIDGE : Any writer of financial fiction would have an easy time setting the stage-ballooning valuations of stocks founded on exaggerated beliefs about the impact of new technologies on productivity , and gross over-confidence in the American model , are placed side-by-side with an all-pervasive global financial fragility , evidenced in the Asian crises , a moribund Japan , and chaotic Russia .
All of this makes for a lethal brew .
But this may be more than fiction .
No one should be surprised if the real final chapter in the globalization story of the 1990s is a crash on Wall Street , well timed to the 70th anniversary of the drama of 1929 .
From a " Black Tuesday " revisited , it will be but a short step to world depression .
Why ?
Europe has no policy responses open to it to respond to such a calamity because its fiscal situation is already weak and the new European Central bank is tangled in ineffectiveness and a dated obsession with fighting inflation .
Japan will be incapable of responding because its government can 't even keep its own economy above water .
And in America , where confidence is now excessive and exuberant , who would be surprised if the economy just plain collapses following a stock market implosion .
Here is an outline of the next depression , poised to happen .
But do not believe it , people will say ; the ingredients are exaggerated , the disaster is not about to come .
Stocks on the New York exchange are overpriced .
By any traditional definition , there is a bubble .
The value of stocks is almost twice GDP , far more than ever in history and at least a quarter higher than at the peak of Japan 's bubble a decade ago .
By the Federal Reserve 's measure , stocks are overpriced by 40 % .
Now the Fed must be concerned about slowing American growth .
Three years of 4 % growth in an economy at full employment is asking for inflationary trouble .
On the supply side , whatever the truth of higher productivity growth and higher trend output growth , the story is not that good .
But on the demand side , gains in the stock market of the past 2 years keep pushing up spending and hence growth .
The Fed is expected to start raising rates next week and more in the coming months .
In the past , no US expansion has died in bed of old age , they have all been murdered by the Fed .
With some luck , this time will be different - the inflation problem is not yet acute and hence early and gradual restraint may produce slowdown rather than a recession .
And slowdown is what we need on the inflation front .
There is no excuse for the Fed to incite outright recession .
But this scenario may be too benign .
What if the stock market is not scared off by the prospect of higher interest rates ?
Then the going will be much rougher ; first interest rates will rise a lot and then , on top , the stock market will tumble .
High rates and a deep fall of stocks - 20 or 30 % - will surely put the US economy close to zero growth or worse .
In itself that is not terrible , but where is the assurance that it will not get worse .
With financial vulnerability everywhere , how can we be confident that the US , and the whole world , will not end up like Japan - one day on top of the world , the next day in the gutter .
There are good reasons to be confident that the coming US trouble spot will be more limited .
First , unlike when the Japanese bubble bust , the balance sheets of US banks are good and real estate is not overpriced .
That limits the fall-out from higher interest rates and stock price declines .
If things go wrong , there are remedies : a big budget surplus is an invitation to big tax cuts , which in America do work , and fast .
If things get too rough , the Fed will cut rates back .
So the going could be rough , as it always is when economies overheat .
But more likely this time is different people will say- famous last words to remember if the prognosis is wrong .
What lies ahead in the US is not just a spectacle that the rest of the world can watch with some schadenfreude .
The rest of the world will find it hard to decouple from US events .
Slowdown in America limits the chances for an upturn everywhere and trims the hopes for extra growth from Asia to Europe .
In Latin America , and in emerging markets more generally , there will be lots of pressure .
Episodes of financial tightening at the center and falling stock markets scare emerging market investors .
Who wants to be invested in Ecuador or Poland when the NY stock market crashes ?
We had a taste of all this a few weeks back when the Fed first signaled its concern with growth and inflation prospects .
There is also , of course , the question of the dollar .
If a US stock market is widely interpreted as the end of a wonderful US expansion , the dollar will sell off .
That is not much of a problem for the US , but it definitely is in Europe where the strong dollar has worked as an employment program .
It is the same in Asia where the Yen is already overly strong for a half-dead economy .
The financial crises of the past 3 years may merely have been preludes .
