Russia and China : The Movie
NEW YORK – The times we live in are often most clearly reflected in the mirror of art .
Much has been written about post-communism in Russia and China .
But two recent films , Jia Zhangke ’ s A Touch of Sin , made in China in 2013 , and Andrey Zvyagintsev ’ s Leviathan , made in Russia in 2014 , reveal the social and political landscapes of these countries more precisely than anything I have seen in print .
Jia ’ s movie is episodic ; four loosely linked stories about lone acts of extreme violence , mostly culled from contemporary newspaper stories .
Leviathan is about a decent man whose life is ruined by the mayor of his town in collusion with the Russian Orthodox Church and a corrupt judiciary .
Both films are visually stunning , despite their stories ’ bleakness .
The dark skies over the northern Russian coast in Leviathan look ravishing , and Jia even manages to make the concrete and glass jungle of Shenzhen , the monster city between Guangzhou and Hong Kong , look gorgeous .
The other thing both films share is a fascination with mythical stories , the Book of Job in Leviathan , and martial-arts fiction in A Touch of Sin .
Real estate plays a major part in both movies .
In the first episode of A Touch of Sin , the local boss has become a private-plane-owning billionaire by stripping and selling all of his region ’ s collective assets .
Everything in this new China – where the Chinese Communist Party ( CCP ) still rules , but the ideas of Karl Marx are as dead as they are in Russia – is for sale , even the trappings of its Maoist past .
In one scene , we see prostitutes in a nightclub titillating overseas Chinese businessmen by parading up and down in sexy People ’ s Liberation Army uniforms .
The story of Leviathan focuses on the house built by a simple mechanic named Nikolay .
He is robbed of his property by the corrupt mayor , who is paid by the Orthodox Church for the right to build a new church on Nikolay ’ s land .
Nikolay is disposed of by having him framed for his wife ’ s murder and tried by a crooked court .
The importance of real estate in both films is no coincidence .
Property , construction , and land are the common currencies of power in mafia societies – in China and Russia no less than in Sicily .
One reason China has been transformed into a gigantic building site , with huge new cities emerging almost overnight , is that this drives a red-hot and highly corrupt economy , ruled by a Leninist party that has monetized political power by asset-stripping and construction .
It is irrelevant that President Vladimir Putin ’ s United Russia Party , unlike the CCP , makes no claim to any form of Marxist ideology .
The way both governments operate is quite similar : party bosses , tycoons , and corrupt bureaucrats divide the spoils , while promoting chauvinism and “ traditional values ” – whether those of the Orthodox Church or Confucianism .
Judges are bought or intimidated to ensure that bosses remain above the law .
Putin ’ s party was elected in Russia , as was President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan ’ s Justice and Development Party in Turkey , Prime Minister Viktor Orbán ’ s Fidesz in Hungary , and President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi ’ s military regime in Egypt .
The CCP was not .
But this , too , is largely irrelevant .
What these governments share is the fusion of capitalist enterprise and political authoritarianism .
This political model is now seen as a serious rival to American-style liberal democracy , and perhaps it is .
But during the Cold War , authoritarian capitalism , usually under military regimes , was anti-Communist and very much on America ’ s side .
South Korea ’ s strongman , Park Chung-hee , current President Park Geun-hye ’ s father , was in many ways a pioneer of the type of society that we now see in China and Russia .
So was Chile ’ s General Augusto Pinochet .
Because the dictatorships in America ’ s client states ended more or less when the Cold War did , and were replaced by liberal democracies , many were lulled into the comforting belief that liberal democracy and capitalism would naturally – even inevitably – come together everywhere .
Political freedom is good for business , and vice versa .
This great twentieth century myth has now been shattered .
Orbán claimed earlier this year that liberal democracy was no longer a viable model .
He cited China and Russia as more successful countries , not for ideological reasons , but because he thinks that they are more competitive in today ’ s world .
There are reasons to doubt this , of course .
The Russian economy is far too dependent on oil and other natural resources , and the legitimacy of China ’ s one-party system could collapse quickly in an economic crisis .
The way that illiberal regimes use the law for their own ends will not inspire the confidence of investors , either – at least not in the long run .
And yet , for now , the societies depicted so acidly in Leviathan and A Touch of Sin continue to look good in the eyes of many people who are disillusioned with Europe ’ s economic stagnation and America ’ s political dysfunction .
Western businessmen , artists , architects , and others who need large amounts of money for expensive projects enjoy working with authoritarian regimes that “ get things done . ”
Illiberal thinkers on the far right and left admire strongmen who stand up to America .
A Touch of Sin has been shown to great acclaim all over the world , but not in China .
Leviathan , by contrast , has been submitted as the official Russian entry for the Oscars .
Perhaps China ’ s rulers are less sure of themselves than Putin .
Or perhaps Putin is just a bit cannier .
His followers in Russia are unlikely to see , let alone be influenced by , an art film , and this sliver of Russian free expression might just persuade foreigners that there is still some liberalism left in Putin ’ s authoritarian democracy – at least until that , too , ends up as a shattered illusion .
