Xi in Russia
MOSCOW – The atmospherics surrounding Xi Jinping ’ s coming trip to Russia – his first visit to a foreign country as China ’ s new president – remind me of a slogan from my early childhood in the late 1950 ’ s : “ Russia-China , Friendship Forever . ”
The irony is that , even in that slogan ’ s heyday , Sino-Russian relations were deteriorating fast , culminating in spasms of combat along the Amur River in Siberia less than a decade later .
Is that slogan more valid now ?
After China opened up its economy and Russia emerged from the Soviet Union , bilateral relations entered a new stage .
Goodwill now prevails , but some of the old suspicions linger – and some new ones have emerged .
Xi ’ s visit is not expected to usher in any breakthroughs .
A few deals to export Russian hydrocarbons to China can be expected , but not much more .
Nonetheless , the visit will highlight several important features of the bilateral relationship .
For starters , both the Russian and Chinese governments can afford to downplay the significance of their ties with the United States .
China views Russia as its strategic rear – and perhaps a base – in its escalating rivalry with the US ( though not yet as an ally ) .
Russia ’ s leaders view Sino-American competition as a welcome addition to their country ’ s strategic weight , which , unlike China ’ s , is not being augmented by robust economic growth .
The more the US challenges the inevitable expansion of China ’ s “ security perimeter , ” the better for Russia , or so the Kremlin ’ s strategists appear to believe .
Meanwhile , the Sino-Russian relationship has achieved an unprecedented degree of warmth .
The Chinese are doing almost everything possible to placate Russian concerns .
The old border disputes have been silenced .
The volume of trade is growing rapidly .
Moreover , there has been no Chinese demographic expansion into Siberia , though many journalists and pundits have been peddling that story .
The number of Chinese residing in Russia – whether officially or clandestinely – amounts to 300,000 .
Many more Chinese lived in the Russian Empire before the 1917 revolution .
But , beneath the surface , unease in the bilateral relationship persists , partly for historical reasons .
Nationalist Chinese remember imperial Russia ’ s conquests , while many Russians have a morbid fear of the “ yellow peril , ” even though the Mongols conquered and reigned in China , while they were eventually repelled from Russia ( not to mention that the Chinese never invaded Russia ) .
The more important reasons for the unease are the negative demographic trends in Russia ’ s far-eastern Trans-Baikal region , and the fear – shared by all of China ’ s neighbors – of overweening Chinese power .
Indeed , the pundits have a point : if the current economic near-stagnation in Siberia persists , the world will witness a second , epic edition of Finlandization , this time in the east .
That might not be the worst scenario a country could face , but it is not the most pleasant prospect for Russians , given their deeply ingrained sense of their status as a great power .
This scenario is not inevitable , and it certainly will not be on the minds of Xi and Russian President Vladimir Putin when they meet in Moscow .
China is in the throes of an identity crisis as it faces an almost inevitable economic slowdown and the need to implement a new growth model .
Russia , meanwhile , is clearly suffering from an even deeper identity crisis .
It somehow survived the post-Soviet shock , and has now recovered .
Yet , for the last six years or so , Russia has been in a kind of limbo , with no strategy , no goals , and no elite consensus on a vision for the future .
For Sino-Russian relations , such fundamental uncertainties may be a blessing .
Both leaders can count on the other not to create additional problems , and even to help passively on geopolitical questions .
On Syria , for example , the two countries have shown that we are indeed living in a multipolar world .
And those new oil and gas deals will buttress both economies .
In the long term , Sino-Russian relations will depend largely on whether Russia overcomes its current stagnation and , among other steps , starts to develop the vast water and other resources of the Trans-Baikal region .
To do so , capital and technology will be needed not only from China , but also from Japan , South Korea , the US , and Southeast Asian countries .
The Trans-Baikal region could relatively easily expand ties with the resource-hungry Asian economies , to the benefit of all .
Even the labor problem is solvable , with millions of workers from former Soviet Central Asia – and perhaps from a gradually liberalizing North Korea – able to take part in the ambitious development that will be needed .
But the first step is to start to create conditions in the region that make living and working there attractive to Russians .
The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Vladivostok last year created a mere enclave of development .
A growth strategy for the whole region is yet to come .
If it does not , the current Sino-Russian entente cordiale is almost certain to sour .
Russia will start to feel vulnerable , and will be pushed toward either geopolitical brinkmanship or submission to China ’ s will .
At this point , however , relations between China and Russia appear to be far better than the mythical friendship of my childhood .
Putin and Xi will do everything to emphasize that .
