Today \ u0027s Silk Road is Paved with Oil and Empires
MOSCOW : A perverse dialectic is at work in the Transcaucasus .
The more Russia is accused of neo-imperial ambitions , the weaker Russia 's actual sway becomes . All the while , Turkish and American influence grows stronger .
It is a grave mistake to think of Russia , like the Ottoman Empire of a century ago , as a " sick man of Europe , " incapable of maintaining its strategic and commercial interests , and to regard its traditional allies in the region as available for anyone to poach . Indeed , the idea that Russia and the Transcaucasus can be disentangled is nonsense .
The cat 's cradle of connections between Russia and the Caucasus are centuries old and impossible to cut . Russia 's presence runs deeper than the troops it maintains in the area .
Russian is the region 's lingua franca ; Russian businesses ( like Gazprom ) dominate .
Oil , unsurprisingly , is at the root of divisions over the Caucasus .
Westerners seek to redraw the medieval " Silk Road " with air and land routes , railways , and multi-billion dollar pipelines but also with wishful thinking .
America believes oil can grease the wheels of democracy , insuring independence .
Turkey sees its growing influence in the region as a card to play in bargaining for EU membership .
Uncertain governments in the region think oil as a magic bullet with which to buy prosperity and social peace without hard work and risky reforms .
Georgia and its president Eduard Shevarnadze are perhaps the most guilty of this .
President Shevardnadze dreamed of a new Silk Road back in the 1980s , when still the USSR 's foreign minister .
Like most policies of the perestroika era , this was another goal pursued by the Soviet leadership in a way unconnected to economic reality .
Shevardnadze 's homeland of Georgia was then seen as incomparably wealthy .
Reality is quite different .
The Baku-Supsa oil pipeline , for example , brings Georgia less money than mineral water exports to Russia .
Yet , instead of recognizing this and addressing practical problems , Georgia 's government trumpets supposed new ( and huge ) oil finds , or the proposed Baku-Jeikhan pipeline .
Sometimes Georgian officials talk as if they are already members of OPEC !
Azerbaijan 's illusions of grandeur are easier to understand but just as debilitating .
Possessing undoubted oil resources , President Haider Aliyev 's government prefers to play games about where to construct oil pipelines rather than commit to actually building one .
One day it supports the Jeikhan pipeline ( bypassing Russia ) , the next it thinks about building one between Baku and Novorossisk in Russia .
But any of these pipelines are economically risky , so even if Azerbaijan makes up its mind about whether to build one and where , there is no guarantee that it will make money .
So , while Baku 's hotels are crammed with oil men , the bankers who must fund construction are harder to find .
Meanwhile , Aliyev 's government neglects basic economic reforms like privatization and land sales .
Of course , pipelines should be part of Transcaucasus development plans .
But oil isn 't everything .
Oil sales will not help people in the region for many years ; meanwhile , for many people in the ruined economies of the Caucasus , life is no less harsh than in war-torn Chechnya .
By inciting dreams of oil , America and Turkey may or may not be playing neo-imperial games .
But whatever their purpose , by raising fanciful hopes they thwart the possibility for real reform - something , incidentally , that the West ceaselessly demands from the Kremlin .
Too busy with its own problems , Russia has neither defended its interests in the Caucasus nor offered a vision for cooperative development .
But although Russia 's role in the region has decreased , cooperation with Russia is essential if the Transcaucasian states are to succeed .
Despite its own high rates of unemployment , hundreds of thousands of people from the Caucasus have jobs in Russian cities .
The value of money coming from Russia to the region outweighs all western aid and trade combined .
Exports to Russia are the difference between life and death for regional industrial and agricultural producers .
Russia 's government knows that chaos and decay to its south carry grave economic , social , and security risks .
The inroads made by Islamic fundamentalism in the region can be tied to the Caucasus 's stunted economies .
Breaking the old bullying habits - such as imposing visa restrictions on Georgians - won 't be easy .
But the war in Chechnya revealed how abominable the alternatives are .
The Putin government must put aside wounded pride and worries about the West and embark on sustained efforts to improve infrastructure and promote trade in the region .
Only by such a program can Russia hope to eventually play an effective - not merely obstructive - role in developing the oil wealth of the Caucasus .
