Barak the Healer
TEL AVIV : The landslide victory of the leader of the Labour Party , General Ehud Barak , in the May 17th elections in Israel means not only a new government and a new foreign policy .
It also signifies the beginning of a new era in Israeli political culture .
The three years ( 1996-9 ) of Benjamin Netanyahu 's government were characterized by the politics of confrontation and animosity in all spheres of political life .
Former Prime Minister Netanyahu focused not only on a politics of confrontation with the Palestinian leadership under Yassir Arafat , but also cultivated a politics of internal confrontation - between religious and secular Jews , between " old timers " and newcomers from the former Soviet Union , between European and Middle Eastern Jews ( Ashkenazi versus Sephardi ) .
This divide-to-rule policy was a way of life which characterized Mr. Netanyahu even before he became Prime Minister .
As leader of the nationalist Likud opposition to the governments of Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres , his tactics in opposing the Oslo agreements between the Labour led government of Israel and the PLO was to characterize both Mr. Rabin and Mr. Peres as traitors , the functional equivalents of such infamous collaborators as Petain and Quisling .
It was in this atmosphere of confrontation and hatred , nurtured by Mr. Netanyahu , that a right-wing nationalist religious Jewish student assassinated Prime Minister Rabin because he saw him as a traitor who , at Oslo , gave up parts of the historical homeland of the Jewish people to the " terrorist " Palestine Liberation Organization .
When he became Prime Minister in elections six months after the assassination of General Rabin , Mr. Netanyahu continued in this strategy of exclusion and confrontation .
The consequences have been a deep crisis in relations with the Palestinians , a cooling of relations between Israel and its great strategic partner , the United States , and an internal climate of deep divisions , ethnic tension and a vulgar coarsening of almost all political discourse .
Ehud Barak , the Labour leader , is made of different stuff .
Born on a kibbutz , he served most of his life in the Israeli army , became its Chief-of-Staff and also its most decorated soldier .
But like many Israeli military leaders - Rabin himself comes to mind - as a military man he is also a pragmatist , knowing the limits of power .
When he became the leader of the Labor party less than three years ago , he also developed a new style of politics : instead of confrontation , dialogue ; instead of exclusion , the politics of inclusion .
General Barak won the election as head of a broad coalition led by his own Labour Party , but including also the Gesher Party , representing North African working-class Jewish immigrants as well as the Meimad movement , representing Orthodox Jews .
It was this coalition , based on the politics of inclusion , which gave Barak his impressive victory : while Netanyahu won the 1996 election by a margin of 0.5 % , Barak won this time by a margin of about 10 % .
Many Russian immigrants voted for the first time for a Labour candidate .
As Prime Minister , Mr Barak will have a difficult agenda before him : going back to the Oslo agreements , which signify the historical compromise between Israel and the PLO ; negotiating a territorial agreement with the Palestinians which will have to balance between their legitimate rights and Israel 's security concerns ; not letting extremist terrorism derail a peace process which is supported by a large majority of both peoples ; finding a mutually acceptable formula for the difficult problem of Jerusalem .
Negotiations with Syria have to be restarted .
Internationally he will have to get the Israeli economy out of its current recession , a downturn that it was thrown into because of the deadlock of the peace process as well as the total mismanagement of the economy under Mr Netanyahu .
Prime Minister Barak will also have to be a healer : he will have to heal the wounds between Jews and Arabs , and between Jews and Jews .
It is not an easy task , and there are no quick fixes .
A lot of patience will be needed but now at least the political will to confront Israel 's domestic divide , and its long divide with the Palestinians , is there .
