Who Caused the Currency Wars ?
WASHINGTON , DC – The world is on the brink of a nasty confrontation over exchange rates – now spilling over to affect trade policy ( America ’ s flirtation with protectionism ) , attitudes towards capital flows ( new restrictions in Brazil , Thailand , and South Korea ) , and public support for economic globalization ( rising anti-foreigner sentiment almost everywhere ) .
Who is to blame for this situation getting so out of control , and what is likely to happen next ?
The issue is usually framed in terms of whether some countries are “ cheating ” by holding their exchange rates at an undervalued rate , thus boosting their exports and limiting imports relative to what would happen if their central banks floated the local currency freely .
The main culprit in this conventional view is China , although the International Monetary Fund is a close second .
But , considered more broadly , the seriousness of today ’ s situation is primarily due to Europe ’ s refusal to reform global economic governance , compounded by years of political mismanagement and self-deception in the United States .
China certainly bears some responsibility .
Partly by design and partly by chance , about a decade ago China found itself consistently accumulating large amounts of foreign reserves by running a trade surplus and intervening to buy up the dollars that this generated .
In most countries , such intervention would tend to push up inflation , because the central bank issues local currency in return for dollars .
But , because the Chinese financial system remains tightly controlled and the options for investors are very limited , the usual inflationary consequences have not followed .
This gives China the unprecedented – for a large trading country – ability to accumulate foreign-exchange reserves ( now approaching $ 3 trillion ) .
Its current-account surplus peaked , before the financial crisis of 2008 , at around 11 % of GDP .
And its export lobby is fighting fiercely to keep the exchange rate roughly where it is relative to the dollar .
In principle , the IMF is supposed to press countries with undervalued exchange rates to let their currencies appreciate .
The rhetoric from the Fund has been ambitious , including at the recently concluded annual meeting of its shareholders – the world ’ s central banks and finance ministries – in Washington .
But the reality is that the IMF has no power over China ( or any other country with a current-account surplus ) ; the final communiqué last weekend was arguably the lamest on record .
Unfortunately , the IMF is guilty of more than hubris .
Its handling of the Asian financial crisis in 1997-1998 severely antagonized leading middle-income emerging-market countries – and they still believe that the Fund does not have their interests at heart .
Here , the West Europeans play a major role , because they are greatly overrepresented on the IMF ’ s executive board and , despite all entreaties , simply refuse to consolidate their seats in order to give emerging markets significantly more influence .
As a result , emerging-market countries , aiming to ensure that they avoidneeding financial support from the IMF in the foreseeable future , are increasingly following China ’ s lead and trying to ensure that they , too , run current-account surpluses .
In practice , this means fervent efforts to prevent their currencies from appreciating in value .
But a great deal of responsibility for today ’ s global economic dangers rests with the US , for three reasons .
First , most emerging markets feel their currencies pressed to appreciate by growing capital inflows .
Investors in Brazil are being offered yields around 11 % , while similar credit risks in the US are paying no more than 2-3 % .
To many , this looks like a one-way bet .
Moreover , US rates are likely to stay low , because America ’ s financial system blew itself up so completely ( with help from European banks ) , and because low rates remain , for domestic reasons , part of the post-crisis policy mix .
Second , the US has run record current-account deficits over the past decade , as the political elite – Republican and Democrats alike – became increasingly comfortable with overconsumption .
These deficits facilitate the surpluses that emerging markets such as China want to run – the world ’ s current accounts add up to zero , so if one large set of countries wants to run a surplus , someone big needs to run a deficit .
Leading Bush administration officials used to talk of the US current-account deficit being a “ gift ” to the outside world .
But , honestly , the US has been overconsuming – living far beyond its means – for the past decade .
The idea that tax cuts would lead to productivity gains and would pay for themselves ( and fix the budget ) has proved entirely illusory .
Third , the net flow of capital is from emerging markets to the US – this is what it means to have current-account surpluses in emerging markets and a deficit in the US .
But the gross flow of capital is from emerging market to emerging market , through big banks now implicitly backed by the state in both the US and Europe .
From the perspective of international investors , banks that are “ too big to fail ” are the perfect places to park their reserves – as long as the sovereign in question remains solvent .
But what will these banks do with the funds ?
When a similar issued emerged in the 1970 ’ s – the so-called “ recycling of oil surpluses ” – banks in Western financial centers extended loans to Latin America , communist Poland , and communist Romania .
That was not a good idea , as it led to a massive ( for the time ) debt crisis in 1982 .
We are now heading for something similar , but on a larger scale .
The banks and other financial players have every incentive to load up on risk as we head into the cycle ; they get the upside ( Wall Street compensation this year is set to break records again ) and the downside goes to taxpayers .
The “ currency wars ” themselves are merely a skirmish .
The big problem is that the core of the world ’ s financial system has become unstable , and reckless risk-taking will once again lead to great collateral damage .
