Iran ’ s Nuclear Quandary
LOS ANGELES – When the United States and its allies resume talks over Iran ’ s nuclear program on November 7-8 , the vexing task of crafting Iran ’ s recent proposal into an enduring agreement will begin in earnest .
There are many obstacles to an agreement , but among the least examined is the legacy of nuclear-disarmament efforts involving Libya and North Korea .
Both cases raise issues that neither Iran nor the US wants to see repeated – but that both will have difficulty avoiding .
For the US , North Korea illustrates how a poor but ambitious country developed the bomb by gaming talks and gaining time .
For Iran , Muammar el-Qaddafi ’ s 2003 relinquishment of Libya ’ s weapons of mass destruction demonstrates how a regime , still considered a bête noire by the international community even after normalization of diplomatic relations , arguably forfeited its survival in 2011 by forgoing the chance to build a nuclear deterrent .
Digging further into each case illuminates the challenges faced by Iran and its international interlocutors .
What makes the North Korea precedent particularly troubling is how much Iran has mimicked the regime in Pyongyang .
This naturally prompts questions about whether Iran is using the current round of negotiations as a façade for an ongoing effort to develop nuclear weapons .
Consider parallels ten years apart .
In June 1993 , following talks with the US and a threat to withdraw from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) , North Korea allowed the International Atomic Energy Agency to conduct limited “ safeguards activities . ”
Then , in October 1994 , the US and North Korea entered into the Agreed Framework to freeze North Korea ’ s nuclear program .
Similarly , in December 2003 , after hiding construction of the Natanz uranium-enrichment facility and other plants from the IAEA , Iran agreed to sign – but not ratify – the so-called Additional Protocol , allowing broader application of IAEA safeguards .
Then , in November 2004 , in negotiations with European representatives , Iran agreed to suspend nuclear enrichment .
Neither agreement lasted long .
In March 1996 , the IAEA reported that North Korea was not complying with efforts to verify plutonium held at the Yongbyon nuclear facility .
On October 9 , 2006 , North Korea detonated its first nuclear weapon , and the United Nations Security Council adopted Resolution 1718 calling on the country to abandon its program and re-join international denuclearization talks .
Since then , North Korea has responded to incremental tightening of international sanctions with two more nuclear tests , the latest this year under the new leadership of Kim Jong-un .
Likewise , in January 2006 , following the collapse of negotiations with European emissaries , Iran broke the IAEA seals on the Natanz facility ’ s equipment and storage areas .
The following month , the IAEA reported the Islamic Republic to the Security Council for its failure to be forthright about its nuclear program .
Since then , Iran has responded to incremental tightening of international sanctions by building more centrifuges .
The question now is whether the North Korea-Iran parallel stops with Iran ’ s new president , Hassan Rouhani .
The Libyan legacy confronts Iran with its own conundrum .
Like Iran , Qaddafi ’ s Libya suffered economic and political isolation for many years during which it attempted to advance a WMD program .
By the late 1990 ’ s , however , it had had enough .
British and American negotiators secretly met with Libyan counterparts to resolve the case of the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie , Scotland , and other terrorism issues .
In the quid pro quo that followed , Qaddafi agreed to eliminate his nascent nuclear program in exchange for an end to pariah status .
This was coupled with a critical demand : no deal without America ’ s commitment to eschew regime change .
On December 19 , 2003 , Libya formally renounced all WMD efforts .
Eight years later , pinned down by a US Predator drone and French airstrikes , Qaddafi met his demise .
Without a nuclear deterrent , his regime was helpless when the US reneged on the deal – a lesson that has not been lost on North Korea .
Given this history , Iran has a strong incentive to retain at least a nuclear-breakout option ( which would mean completing all but the final steps to weaponization ) .
Of course , Iran ’ s leaders may believe that economic isolation is the greatest danger to the regime .
But what happened in Libya has made them fear that Qaddafi ’ s fate could be theirs , too , without an adequate deterrent .
Indeed , commenting on Qaddafi ’ s plight in 2011 , Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said , “ [ T ] his gentleman wrapped up all his nuclear facilities , packed them on a ship and delivered them to the West and said , ‘ Take them ! ’
Look where we are , and in what position they are now . ”
But today , two years later , Iran must look again at where it is .
As long as crippling economic sanctions remain in place , the government will be unable to have its yellowcake and eat it , too .
Allowing Iran to retain some low-grade enrichment capacity would be a plausible concession – and one that would allow the country ’ s leaders to save face – but only if linked to Iran ’ s unfettered disclosure of all nuclear activities to the IAEA and confirmed cessation of any capability that contributes to weaponization .
And , given the stakes , any international agreement with Iran must come with an assured response to cheating , including military action .
With little leverage , Iran ’ s leaders would then have two options .
They could follow North Korea by sacrificing economic prosperity for nuclear breakout , and hope that US and Israeli talk of “ all options ” being on the table to stop their efforts is a bluff ; or they could pursue economic prosperity by forgoing a nuclear-weapons capacity , and hope that a Libya-style revolt does not envelope the country and doom the regime to a fate like that of Qaddafi .
It is not an easy choice , but it is one that Iran ’ s leaders cannot postpone for much longer .
