Toward a Peaceful Pacific
MELBOURNE – The Western Pacific is currently facing a difficult problem – how to accommodate China ’ s rising aspirations in a region where the United States has held primacy since the Cold War ’ s end .
Is the US determined to maintain dominance in the Asia-Pacific region ?
Or is it willing to operate through multilateral forums that allow all involved parties to help set the rules ?
The way this issue plays out will determine whether peace continues to prevail across the Pacific .
It is difficult to see the stationing of 2,500 US Marines in Darwin , Australia – a decision announced by US President Barack Obama on his recent tour of Asia – as anything more than a symbolic gesture , a provocative reminder that the US is determined to stay in the region .
America ’ s purpose , however , remains unclear .
Across the Asia-Pacific region , China ’ s rise is viewed as a welcome development , but one that requires China to play within internationally accepted rules .
That dictum , of course , should apply to everyone .
But tensions will inevitably arise if China has no say in the creation of these rules .
It is difficult to predict how America role in the region will evolve .
China ’ s economic and military power is rising .
The US , on the other hand , continues to dominate militarily , while its economic influence is waning .
In any case , China will invariably respond harshly to US efforts to step up its military presence in the region .
Containing China is not the answer to Asia ’ s security questions .
The Korean peninsula , Taiwan , and the South China Sea ’ s islands and sea lanes are all issues of potential dispute between the US and China .
But , while these issues are important , both sides should pursue diplomatic efforts to minimize Sino-American rivalry over them – and thus avoid embarking on a new cold war .
Under current conditions , responding to China ’ s rise with military force would be unwelcome .
China is modernizing its military and intends to become a significant sea power , prompting many China observers to call for greater transparency .
But it is doubtful that the US offers China much transparency about its own military capabilities .
To put the issue in perspective , the US defense budget constitutes 43 % of all military spending worldwide , whereas China ’ s expenditure represents a little over 7 % .
No country will talk openly about its military capacity in anything but the broadest terms .
Too many observers forget that China ’ s nuclear force is a deterrent only – far too small to be a first-strike force .
And China is among the first countries prepared to make a no-first-use pledge , provided other nuclear powers reciprocate .
China has demonstrated no interest in emulating either the nineteenth-century European imperial powers , or Japan ’ s imperial efforts in the first half of the twentieth century .
Anxiety about such ambitions ignores China ’ s history .
The Chinese remember all too painfully the unequal treaties imposed by the Western powers on China and Japan in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries .
An alliance between the US , Japan , Australia , and possibly India designed to contain China would be greeted by the Chinese with that history firmly in mind .
China will most likely regard the cooperation agreement recently announced by the Japanese and Indian defense ministers as a response to US pressure .
Its leaders will again suggest that a policy of containment is being pursued , and that this Cold War strategic concept is inimical to peaceful development in the Western Pacific .
While the historical background is important , the West ’ s strategic position depends on today ’ s actions .
For example , China has helped – maybe not enough – with the problems presented by North Korea .
To reduce tensions in the region , perhaps the US should initiate long-avoided direct talks with North Korea , which could help to resolve the security issues posed by that country ’ s regime .
Furthermore , the Spratly Islands dispute should be resolved through international adjudication .
The islands , claimed by China , Taiwan , Vietnam , the Philippines , Malaysia , and Brunei , are valuable because of their oil reserves and commercial fishing industry .
It is critical that the countries claiming sovereignty over the islands abide by international law and commit to keeping the area ’ s sea-lanes open .
Diplomacy , not force of arms , is the best way to pursue these objectives .
Of course , diplomacy needs to be backed by strength , but the US has plenty without militarizing the Asia-Pacific region more than it already has .
Peaceful resolution of these conflicts requires giving China a role in the decision-making process , which implies that the US and China alike relinquish any desire for regional primacy .
During the first Taiwan Straits crisis in 1954 , China began shelling the offshore islands Quemoy and Matsu , threatening to “ liberate ” Taiwan .
As the US contemplated a possible nuclear attack on China , Australian Prime Minister Robert Menzies quietly told US President Dwight Eisenhower , “ If there is a war over Taiwan , it is your affair and not ours . ”
Menzies was right .
He understood the distinction between US objectives and Australia ’ s national interests .
The US will never place a large land army on the Asian mainland again .
Wars cannot be won from the air alone , and the US will not start a nuclear contest .
The stationing of US Marines in northern Australia thus appears pointless : these troops have no conceivable reason to be there .
In addition , they have divided Australian public opinion unnecessarily on the vital issue of the country ’ s security .
Asia today presents a completely new and unique set of circumstances .
The dilemmas arising from these circumstances demand new solutions , not obsolete Cold War-era concepts .
