What the West Owes Ukraine
WASHINGTON , DC – Ukraine may not be grabbing as many headlines now as it did a year ago , but the crisis there is far from over .
The latest ceasefire agreement , concluded in Minsk in February , has contained , but not stopped , Russian military aggression .
And , though the stabilization program that Ukraine agreed with the International Monetary Fund last month is superior to last year ’ s deal – this one includes both more financing from the IMF and a more credible economic-reform plan from the government – it will be insufficient to repair the country ’ s economy .
What Ukraine really needs is to escape the old Soviet order – and , for that , it needs the West ’ s help .
Ukraine never managed to recast its state after the Soviet Union ’ s collapse .
Instead , the old Soviet elites held onto power – and most of the country ’ s wealth – through corrupt practices that became entrenched in the country ’ s economy and political system .
Reforming both will be a major challenge – one that Ukraine ’ s leaders have lately committed themselves to meeting .
Since February of last year , when the parliament voted then-President Viktor Yanukovych out of power by more than a two-thirds majority , Ukraine has held fresh elections for both institutions .
Hundreds of top officials have been replaced by young , Western-educated professionals , and the government is now working feverishly to implement deep and comprehensive reforms , including a new law on public procurement and a package of anti-corruption legislation .
Dozens of superfluous inspection agencies have been abolished , significantly reducing the regulatory burden .
Just last month , President Petro Poroshenko sacked the governor of the Dnipropetrovsk region , the billionaire tycoon Igor Kolomoisky
More recently , the authorities have been working to reform the energy sector – a hub of corruption .
On April 1 , household gas prices were quadrupled , taking them to half the market price , with offsetting compensation provided to the poor .
And the parliament has enacted a law that harmonizes energy standards with those of the European Union , thereby delineating clearly the state ’ s role and opening the gas market to investors .
But Ukraine still has a long way to go .
The good news is that the public largely understands and supports the government ’ s reform efforts .
The bad news is that Ukraine still faces considerable destabilizing threats – beginning with a renewed Russian military offensive .
A Russian attack on , say , Mariupol , eastern Ukraine ’ s second-largest port ( accounting for roughly one-third of the country ’ s exports ) , would devastate an economy that is already tanking .
Though several factors – including Western sanctions , a lack of public support for war in Ukraine , and the Russian economy ’ s rapid decline – should discourage the Kremlin from taking such a step , they may not be enough .
After all , Russia ’ s leaders have shown themselves to be unpredictable .
Even absent further Russian aggression , Ukraine ’ s economic woes could prevent further progress on reform .
The economy contracted by 6.8 % year on year in 2014 , and output has plunged by 15 % in each of the two last quarters .
Moreover , at the end of February , with the country running low on reserves , Ukraine ’ s currency , the hryvnia , lost half its value ; as a result , annualized inflation surged to 45 % in March .
A full-scale financial meltdown was avoided only when the IMF provided an early disbursement that doubled Ukraine ’ s reserves , to $ 9.9 billion ; by the end of the month , the exchange rate more or less recovered .
Nonetheless , the international financing that Ukraine has received , though invaluable , remains insufficient to support genuine recovery and reform .
The latest bailout program foresees about $ 40 billion in funding , nearly half of which will come from the IMF , over the next four years .
That means that , this year , Ukraine will receive only $ 10 billion – not enough to enable the country to replenish its reserves and service its debts .
Indeed , given Ukraine ’ s large bond debts , many of which will mature in the next two years , there is a $ 15.3 billion funding gap in the bailout package , which the IMF and Ukraine ’ s government hope to plug with a debt restructuring .
But , even if they succeed , Ukraine would need more funding than it is getting .
It needs more strategic support as well .
European politicians ’ overwhelming opposition to supplying Ukraine with defensive arms is difficult to fathom .
Europe ’ s leaders claim that they want to avoid giving Russia reason to escalate its war on Ukraine .
But that is already happening , and Ukraine ’ s fight against Russia is , after all , a defense of core European values – and , indeed , of Europe itself .
The EU flag has draped the caskets of Ukrainians killed in that fight .
Europe ’ s leaders argue that the central focus of their policy toward Ukraine must be to support its economic recovery .
But here , too , Europe is doing too little , offering paltry credits of € 1.8 billion ( $ 1.9 billion ) this year , when € 10 billion would be more appropriate .
If the United States then met Europe halfway ( at least ) , Ukraine ’ s financial crisis could finally be contained .
On April 28 , Ukraine ’ s government will host a donor conference in Kyiv .
At a time when the country ’ s leaders and public are more committed than ever to combating corruption , building a welfare-creating economy , and becoming a normal liberal democracy , Europe should be eager to support it .
It is time for Western politicians to remember their ideals – and stand up for them .
