The Taliban Reborn
NEW DELHI – The lull in headline-grabbing terror attacks appears to be over .
But do the recent suicide attack on the Bagram air base outside of Kabul , a key United States military installation in Afghanistan , and the failed car bombing in New York City ’ s Times Square mean that the “ war on terror ” ( a phrase that the Obama administration has deliberately sought to avoid ) has reignited ?
Although America and the West may have felt as if jihadist terrorism was declining in its ferocity , in Afghanistan , Pakistan , and India , no such feeling of false security ever took hold .
Indeed , the question in this region is not whether the war on terror can be wound down , but whether Pakistan , which in many ways has become Islamic terrorism ’ s nexus , is doing all that it can to fight it .
Here is a simple formula for assessing a country ’ s approach to combating terrorism : credibility + transparency + integrity of approach = legitimacy and effectiveness .
Let us apply this formula to Pakistan .
Analyzing the failed Times Square bombing , Ambassador Zafar Hilaly , a well-respected former Pakistani diplomat , wrote “ that nowhere else today have so many armed foreign outlaws been able to use the territory of a sovereign state to wage war for so long , and with such impunity , against other countries .
[ Those ] who roam … unchallenged have become … partners … in a war against the country itself . ”
The Taliban in Pakistan , Hilaly concluded , have become an “ autonomous force beyond … control . ”
Pakistan , after joining the US , as an “ ally ” in the war on terror now appears to be paying a high price domestically for becoming a “ rented state . ”
A vast majority of Pakistan ’ s citizens deeply resent America ’ s presence and influence in their country .
This growing alienation probably played a considerable part in US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton saying that deteriorating security in nuclear-armed Pakistan “ pose ( d ) a mortal ” threat to the US .
Following the Times Square bombing attempt , Clinton issued an even harsher judgment : “ if a terror attack like the New York bombing were to be successful and found to have originated from that country , there would be very severe consequences . ”
Clinton also said that Osama bin Laden ’ s whereabouts are known to “ some ” in Pakistan .
Eric Holder , the US attorney general , was even more explicit about the Times Square episode : “ We know that they ( the Pakistan Taliban ) helped direct it .
And I suspect that we are going to come up with evidence that they helped to finance it .
They were intimately involved in this plot . ”
US President Barack Obama has termed the Pakistan Taliban a “ cancer ” in the heart of Pakistan , and its origins are not shrouded in mystery .
In December 2007 , about 13 militant groups came together to form the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan ( TTP ) , and chose Baitullah Mehsud as their leader .
Mehsud was reported killed by an airstrike from a US drone in August 2009 .
The TTP has an estimated 30,000-35,000 adherents from all of Pakistan ’ s Federally Administered Tribal Areas , the near lawless regions where the writ of Pakistan ’ s government barely reaches .
The TTP ’ s stated objectives include jihad against the Pakistani army , enforcement of sharia law across the country , and a plan to unite with the Afghan Taliban to fight the NATO forces in that country .
The failed Times Square attack demonstrates the TTP ’ s growing transnational ambitions ( but also that the group ’ s reach exceeds its grasp , at least for now ) .
Despite a supposed offensive by Pakistan ’ s government against the TTP in some of the tribal regions , a recent documentary reported that the group is now recruiting young children to carry out suicide attacks .
Indeed , there were nearly 60 suicide attacks in Pakistan in 2009 , compared to only two in 2002 .
According to Brian Fishman , a terrorism expert at the US Military Academy at West Point , the growth in suicide attacks poses a severe challenge to Pakistan , for a “ whole milieu of militant groups , and individuals have come together ideologically … to embark on mission ( s ) that Al Qaeda set ( s ) for them . ”
Bruce Riedel , the Afghanistan-Pakistan policy coordinator on Obama ’ s National Security Council , stresses that Al Qaeda 's growing cooperation with the Afghan Taliban , the Pakistani Taliban , Lashkar-e-Taiba , and other like-minded groups is the most dangerous development in the effort to reduce global terrorism .
“ The notion that you can somehow selectively resolve the Al Qaeda problem while ignoring the larger jihadist sea in which [ Al Qaeda ] swims has failed in the past and will fail in the future , ” Riedel argues .
Given this analysis , however , Obama ’ s “ Afghanistan-oriented ” policy is doomed to failure .
The US would certainly like Pakistan to eliminate the leadership of the Taliban , both Afghan and Pakistani , but will not lean too heavily on Pakistan ’ s rulers to accomplish this goal .
The price to be paid for this political squeamishness is exacted in blood .
Ambassador Hilaly has pointed to the way forward : “ To succeed today , it ( is ) essential that first and foremost the power of the armed groups within Pakistan be broken .
Without an all-out effort to do so , the terrorized population will not lend us support . ”
But the US , let alone the Pakistani government , may not have the will to act with such determination .
