Beijing Versus the Billionaire
BANGKOK – China ’ s government and Hong Kong ’ s wealthiest man , the much-admired Li Ka-shing , have been waging an acidic spat – one that increasingly looks like a bitter divorce being played out in tabloid newspapers .
Indeed , Chinese media have lately been directing a relentless stream of vitriol at Li .
His “ crime ” ?
Buying low in Europe and selling high in China – that is , acting like an investor .
The trigger for this wave of scorn was Li ’ s sell-off of some of his prime Shanghai properties , after relocating his corporate registry from Hong Kong to the Cayman Islands .
This is a completely mundane and rational business decision , aimed at minimizing tax obligations .
Indeed , some 70 % of all Hong Kong-listed companies have a Caribbean registry , and even a number of major mainland companies , including the Internet giant Alibaba , are registered in offshore tax havens .
But , in the Chinese media ’ s puerile narrative , the move exposes Li as “ ungrateful ” and “ unpatriotic . ”
He is “ abandoning ” China – which , it is claimed , enabled him to rise from extreme poverty to become one of the world ’ s wealthiest men – when the country needs him most .
This absurd account neglects the fact that Li was already one of the world ’ s wealthiest people before he ever invested in China .
Perhaps more important , it fails to recognize that Li ’ s Chinese land holdings still amount to more than 20 million square meters ( 215 million square feet ) – nearly a quarter of the size of Manhattan – and that the number of retail outlets he owns in China has increased by 70 % in two years .
But the facts are irrelevant .
This is a matter of politics .
As China attempts to tighten its grip on Hong Kong , Li is showing independence , and China ’ s new rulers – who , true to their communist roots , believe firmly in top-down control – do not like it one bit .
The ongoing squabble represents a significant shift in Li ’ s relationship with China ’ s government .
A former adviser to Deng Xiaoping and confidante of former President Jiang Zemin ( whose political influence is now waning ) , Li was among the first to invest in China after the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989 .
He long touted the motto , “ I don ’ t do anything against China ’ s interest , and I don ’ t say anything that may hurt China ’ s reputation . ”
That changed in 2012 , when Leung Chun-ying was appointed as Hong Kong ’ s chief executive .
China ’ s first choice for the position , Henry Tang , was forced to withdraw because of private indiscretions and a disgraceful bid to have his wife take the fall for a zoning violation .
Leung became China ’ s man in Hong Kong , responsible for doing the Chinese government ’ s bidding – including taking an uncompromising position against pro-democracy protests by students and intellectuals .
Indeed , even as China ’ s agenda in Hong Kong has become increasingly tough – and thus unpopular locally – Leung has proved himself to be absolutely loyal to China ’ s rulers .
Li , however , stood by Tang .
More problematic , he has occasionally dissented publicly from Leung ’ s various misguided policies .
As any student of the People ’ s Republic knows , expressions of political disagreement , however mild , can be lethal .
There is no “ agree to disagree ” in China ; once the leader has spoken , there is only “ obey . ”
In Li ’ s case , the stakes are particularly high .
Unlike most of Hong Kong ’ s tycoons , who are considered excessively focused on political expedience , Li is viewed as a person of strong conscience and thus worthy of considerable respect .
He even enjoys the affectionate nickname “ Superman . ”
But now , China ’ s rulers , through Leung , are pushing potentially disastrous policies aimed , in Chinese Communist Party parlance , at “ de-colonizing ” Hong Kong .
For example , officials recently declared that judicial independence and the separation of powers are “ colonial ” legacies that should be discarded , with China ’ s government and Hong Kong ’ s chief executive , not the local courts , calling all the shots .
In this moment of transition , dissent from someone of Li ’ s standing could have precisely the kind of destabilizing impact that China ’ s leaders fear .
So Li has to be “ de-deified . ”
China ’ s attacks have pushed Li , after almost three weeks of stony silence , to do something he had never done before : strike back .
Not only did he point out that all of the accusations about his intentions to abandon China were false ; he openly accused China of using tactics from the Cultural Revolution that left him “ trembling with fear ” and sent “ shivers down the spine . ”
Li concluded his statement with the message , delivered via three lines by two canonical Chinese poets from the ancient Tang and Song dynasties , that his home was where he felt safe .
The subtext to any literate Chinese was clear : “ China may be my ancestral country , but I am a free man , free to choose my home . ”
Li , an avid reader of world history and literature , has apparently not taken to heart the lesson that so many Chinese have learned , through great personal tragedies , since 1949 .
The core values of China ’ s government are not informed by the humane civility of Tang or Song poets , but by the twisted dialectics of Marxism-Leninism and the amoral militaristic tradition of a party that still cherishes its often brutish and violent habits of governance .
As China ’ s leaders continue to push for more control over Hong Kong , spinal shivers are likely to become an increasingly common feature of life there .
