Who Will Rescue the Rest of Us ?
SYDNEY – The rescue of the 33 Chilean miners , from what was feared would be their tomb , gave the world something to cheer about .
Hope has not , after all , become a redundant virtue in the twenty-first century .
But , looking around us today , there do not seem to be many reasons for optimism elsewhere .
The world lurches towards a currency war , or even towards trade protectionism , threatening to destroy jobs and growth .
America ’ s recovery from recession is anemic and largely jobless .
China , meanwhile , with foreign reserves worth half its total output , denies with a straight face that it is deliberately manipulating the value of the renminbi .
So its trade surplus continues to soar at the expense of other countries .
Nor does a global solution to the challenge of climate change appear any closer .
A few weeks of rain in Australia has emboldened those who think that global warming is a gigantic hoax perpetrated by the United Nations or conspiring scientists or maybe men from Mars .
The war in Afghanistan bleeds more lives and treasure into the inhospitable terrain of that sad land , with little immediate chance of whatever might constitute sufficient success to allow America and its allies to quit .
And the problems of Pakistan fester next door .
In Palestine , Israeli colonies continue to grow with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu ignoring Washington ’ s efforts to secure traction for the peace process .
Europeans continue to look inward , obsessed with their own problems of declining competitiveness and how to pay for entitlements that they have come to regard as theirs by right .
With the gap between the world ’ s rich and poor increasing , the impoverished South seeks a home or a job in the developed North .
Legal and illegal migration triggers far-right hostility in countries that customarily brag about their commitment to civil liberties .
So , as Lenin once asked , what is to be done ?
The world obviously needs political leadership of the highest quality to see us through .
We need the sort of courage that was the hallmark of Margaret Thatcher .
We need Bill Clinton ’ s extraordinary ability to spin a political narrative that enabled voters to identify their own interests with his goals .
We require Helmut Kohl ’ s understanding of the need to identify the big decisions in politics , and to get those decisions right .
We need leaders with sufficient mastery of detail , like China ’ s last premier Zhu Rongji , who can not only tell us how they will get us from A to Z , but can actually lead us from A to B.
Looking around , leaders like this seem to be an extinct species .
Or , if they exist at all , they appear to be constrained by dysfunctional political systems .
Their ability to act is limited by their political environment .
The best example is US President Barack Obama , on whom so many hopes rested – probably too many for any one leader .
Obama inherited messy and expensive wars in Afghanistan and Iraq , and an economy in meltdown .
His attempts to revive the economy have inevitably driven up the deficit .
But no recovery in the labor or housing markets has yet materialized .
Now Obama faces defeat in the mid-term elections at the hands of Republicans whose past policies created many of the problems that weigh him down today .
They want less government , lower taxes , and a smaller deficit , a combination to be achieved seemingly without pain .
This nonsense on stilts is articulated by some zany candidates who enjoy the support of the Tea Party , a reference not to the Mad Hatter in Alice in Wonderland , which would be fitting , but to the Bostonians who rebelled against colonial Britain ’ s imposition of taxes in the eighteenth century .
The rest of the world needs a strong , self-confident , and decisive America .
But America ’ s political system is about to deliver a balance of power in Washington that is likely to produce stalemate and paralysis .
In Europe , meanwhile , many of our problems are exemplified by what is happening in France , where President Nicolas Sarkozy ’ s attempt to recognize demographic and fiscal reality by raising the retirement age from 60 to 62 provoked a wave of strikes and stormy protests from workers and students .
Is there not something deeply depressing about 18-year-olds demonstrating about the retirement age ?
How on earth did they acquire such a statist and conservative mind-set ?
Perhaps , then , Asia is the answer .
Perhaps the Singapore-based strategist Kishore Mahbubani is correct to write off the West and tell us that the future lies in his own continent .
The evidence on that point is mixed .
India is a glorious democracy with an economically literate government and pockets of real economic achievement .
But the fiasco in the run-up to the Commonwealth Games showcased some of India ’ s problems , not least deep corruption and inadequate infrastructure .
If those problems were sorted out , India ’ s growth rate would outstrip China ’ s .
And what of the booming Middle Kingdom ?
In Brussels the other day , Premier Wen Jiabao scolded European leaders for pressing for the renminbi ’ s revaluation .
Did they not understand , he argued , that this would lead to factory closures and social turbulence in China ?
Elsewhere , of course , this sort of turmoil has democratic safety valves .
It is more than odd to argue that the rest of the world has to cope with a built-in advantage for China ’ s exporters because its authoritarian political system cannot cope with any change .
No wonder the impressive premier is thought to favor some political loosening .
From East to West , politics seems to be operating in a manner that is , to be diplomatic , sub-optimal .
Then again , maybe we ’ re lucky that things aren ’ t worse .
The Chilean miners survived against the odds , so perhaps the rest of us will somehow get by as well .
But who , exactly , is responsible for the rescue operation ?
