A Czech Moment
PRAGUE – As I listened to what some Europeans were saying as my country prepared to take over the presidency of the European Union , I heard dim echoes of Neville Chamberlain ’ s infamous description of Czechoslovakia as “ a faraway country of which we know little . ”
I suppose that Donald Rumsfeld ’ s misguided bid a few years ago to incite a divide between “ new and old ” Europe contributed to the re-emergence of that disdainful attitude .
The reality is that there is no such thing as “ old and new ” Europe , and there never was .
The break with communism and reunification of Europe is now almost two decades old .
We Czechs are 100 % European , and were even when the Iron Curtain cut us off from democratic Europe .
Indeed , our pro-EU sentiments may be all the stronger because our membership in the Union , like our freedom , is so comparatively new .
So no one in Europe needs to fear that the Czech Republic has some nostalgic or idiosyncratic agenda that it wants to impose on the Union .
On the contrary , events have imposed an agenda on Europe that we cannot escape and for which solidarity – true union – will be needed .
The primary , and most pressing , of the problems we face is the financial and economic crisis that is enveloping the EU .
Unfortunately , conditions across the Union will likely worsen before they begin to improve .
The type of social unrest recently witnessed in Greece may spread , because the downturn is likely to take a disproportionate toll on Europe ’ s young people , who are seeking jobs at a time when hard-pressed European businesses will be able to offer them very few .
It will fall to the Union , once again , to help transform despair into hope .
We Czechs know something about this , as the wrenching economic transition that we underwent in the 1990 ’ s taught us much about how the right policies can break the grip of hopelessness .
To contain today ’ s financial and economic crisis , Europe will also need to continue the cooperation that it has shown up to this point .
The very existence of our Union , and particularly of the euro , has already helped to prevent the competitive devaluations and beggar-thy-neighbor policies that ravaged Europe during the 1930 ’ s – the last time the continent faced so brutal an economic downturn .
But we cannot be complacent that the forces of national egoism will remain in check .
For now , EU governments ’ coordinated fiscal stimulus has deprived populists of their usual charge that the EU is indifferent to the fate of individuals .
Even more policy coordination will be needed both to confront the crisis and to re-establish EU norms once the storm clouds begin to dissipate .
Although it is right that the Stability and Growth Pact has become more flexible in these extraordinary times , its rules did secure a successful first decade for the euro .
These rules must eventually be restored intact if Europe is to return to the path of sustainable growth , and a consensus will need to be forged now to make that happen .
The second key challenge that we will face during our European presidency is that of Russia .
A new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement ( PCA ) between the EU and the Russian Federation must be negotiated .
Those negotiations should have begun seriously last year , but the war in Georgia intervened to put them on hold .
Now those talks have resumed , but the background to the negotiations has changed dramatically .
Russia ’ s economy is now in far worse shape than that of EU members .
The collapse of world oil and gas prices has wounded Russia ’ s budget , and lack of investment in the country ’ s energy sector over the years is now causing the declining production that economists have long predicted .
Until now , Russia has cared less about a new PCA than the EU , because two-thirds of Russia ’ s exports to the Union comprise natural resources , which bring in cash even without the strong rules that a PCA provides .
Given the stark changes in economic conditions , however , it is now in Russia ’ s national interest to reassure international markets that it is a reliable place to do business , for which a new PCA would serve as an ideal signal .
Moreover , without a new PCA , individual European countries may feel it necessary to seek even more bilateral agreements with Russia .
Indeed , many EU members have been in a race with each other to see who will be Russia ’ s closest friend in the Union .
But the bilateral deals that have emerged from this race sometimes come at the expense of other Union members , and may unbalance relations within the Union as a whole . Only a rules-based EU framework can provide a firm foundation for both bilateral and Union-wide relations with Russia .
Europe ’ s main strength in foreign policy is not its commitment to a rules-based multilateralism , important as that undoubtedly is , but its unity .
When the Georgia crisis erupted , Europe united around a single position on Russia ’ s withdrawal .
It is the Czech Republic ’ s task , and that of the Swedish EU presidency that will follow our own , to maintain this unity as the PCA negotiations move forward .
During the 1990 ’ s , the US and Europe erred in treating Russia with benign neglect . It would be a mistake for Russia to respond in kind today by seeking to prolong the PCA negotiations in the hope that a possibly more amenable EU president may one day offer softer terms .
We , like all EU presidencies , will be representing the wider Union interests when we negotiate .
