The Trouble with Poland
“ We are only demanding one thing , that we get back what was taken from us … .If Poland had not had to live through the years 1939-1945 , it would be a country of 66 million . ”
Thus spoke Polish Prime Minister Jaroslaw Kaczynski on the eve of the last European Union summit , when he sought to gain greater voting weight for his country within the EU by invoking the memory of Hitler ’ s war against Poland .
Kaczynski ’ s words , however , stand in contradiction with what happened in Paris this July 14th .
For on Bastille Day , a small Polish contingent marched down the Champs de Elysée alongside the forces of 26 other EU national contingents , including the Germans , in a display of European unity .
This contrast perfectly summarizes today ’ s confused Poland – a country that boasts one of the highest levels of popular acceptance of the EU among all member countries , yet is the place where defense of the “ national ” interests is practiced most fiercely .
Poland today is no longer “ God ’ s Playground , ” to use Norman Davies ’ s famous phrase .
Instead , it seems more like a child ’ s playground : a strange mixture of inferiority and superiority complexes .
The problem is that Poland ’ s unjustified lack of confidence is leading to an extremely unpleasant form of intolerance toward others .
To understand what went wrong with Poland , a comparison with Spain might be useful .
In the nineteenth century , Europe ’ s southern and eastern extremities were united by common decay .
Poland had disappeared as an independent nation , the victim of its powerful neighbors ’ greed ;
Spain was a country that no longer mattered .
This dual decline was a subject frequently discussed by historians across the continent .
They generally emphasized the failure of both countries to adjust their political systems to the requirements of the times .
Today , Spain and Poland both appear to be experiencing a renaissance , thanks to the framework of European unity .
Their economies are booming .
Democracy has been restored after half-century of dictatorial disruption .
Yet the buoyant self-confidence of today ’ s Spain is completely absent from Poland .
Is this because Poland ’ s sufferings were even more terrible than Spain ’ s ?
Is it because it is more difficult to emerge from a totalitarian regime than from an authoritarian one ?
Is it because Spain has had 20 more years to be vaccinated by the EU against the temptations of nationalism ?
All these explanations probably contain an element of truth .
And perhaps there is another factor : there is more pride and less self-doubt in Spanish culture than in the Polish one .
What seems clear is that Poland today can choose among two paths .
It can continue to play a “ nuisance value ” role in the Union .
But in that case , it must at least play well .
Poland ’ s government cannot simultaneously pretend to resist Russia ’ s energy pressures and yet reject Germany ’ s offers of help .
When all things are considered , Germany is a more reliable ally and partner than Ukraine , which some in Warsaw see as a potential counterweight to Russia .
The realities of the present must not be obscured by the burdens of the past .
Entering the EU means integrating into a country ’ s politics a logic dominated by the concept of reconciliation .
In this sense , Germany , having stifled the evils of aggressive nationalism , remains the most “ European ” country in Europe .
To deny this , to threaten to undo Polish-German reconciliation , is to harm Poland ’ s fundamental national interests .
By antagonizing Germany , indeed all of the EU , Poland is merely encouraging a revisionist Russia .
If Poland ’ s current leaders want to re-play nineteenth-century balance-of-power games , they should understand where the real weight of power in Europe lies .
The other path Poland can take is that of Spain .
Javier Solana , the EU ’ s high representative for foreign policy , symbolizes the role that Spaniards are playing in building Europe ’ s international identity .
Spain ’ s influence is , to a large extent , a result of its national self-confidence .
Demographically and strategically , Poland is by far the most important of the EU ’ s new members .
Former French President Jacques Chirac , with his seeming contempt for these new members , is gone .
Nobody is out to insult the Polish people gratuitously .
Only the Poles can harm Poland ’ s reputation and influence , and one must say that they have excelled at it of late .
In the course of the last five years , while teaching at the College of Europe in Natolin , near Warsaw , I have witnessed at first hand Poland ’ s remarkable progress .
Sadly , there is a “ disconnect ” between Poland ’ s economic progress and the discourse and behavior of its politicians .
Warsaw exudes positive energy .
The famous Polish plumber is a guarantee of high-quality work across Europe .
Everywhere from London to Rome to Paris , Polish artisans are contributing decisively to the beautification of Europe , using the skills they used in the past to build cities like Krakow and St. Petersburg .
The problem is in the eyes of the beholder .
If Poland were less unjustifiably afraid of its future , it would be less obsessed with a past that will not pass away .
One hopes that this is just a temporary phase , and that comprehension of Poland ’ s real achievements will prevail over the hyper-sensitivity of its current leaders .
For the “ real Poland ” that emerged after 1989 is much more promising than their political incarnation of it .
