The Summit of Muted Intentions
MEXICO CITY – The Summit of the Americas , which takes place roughly every three years , could be viewed as the sort of Latin American boondoggle that convenes heads of state for a few days , either south or north of the Rio Grande , to make endless speeches that lead nowhere .
But every now and then , the Summit – an American initiative launched by US President Bill Clinton in 1994 – actually helps to place key issues on the hemispheric table .
One such issue was the so-called Free-Trade Area of the Americas , which was proposed by former US President George H.W. Bush in 1990 , and then collapsed at the Mar del Plata summit in Argentina in 2005 .
Incensed by the presence of Bush père ’ s son , President George W. Bush , Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez rallied thousands of anti-American demonstrators to protest against the agreement .
The Summit of the Americas thus serves as a bellwether of United States-Latin American relations , even if it fails to accomplish much of significance .
This year ’ s summit , which will take place in Cartagena , Colombia , in mid-April , has already generated controversy .
Two traditional hot-button issues will dominate the discussions : Cuba and drugs .
Cuba has never been invited to the Summit of the Americas , because the meeting was designed to include only members of the Organization of American States ( OAS ) and democratically elected presidents ( although Peru ’ s then-president , Alberto Fujimori , attended in 1998 , despite having suspended the country ’ s constitution in an “ auto-coup ” in 1992 ) .
In February , Ecuador ’ s president , Rafael Correa , declared that if Cuban President Raúl Castro were not invited to the Summit , the ALBA countries ( Cuba , Venezuela , Ecuador , Nicaragua , Bolivia , and some of the Caribbean islands ) would not attend .
This was clearly intended to provoke the US , Canada , and a handful of other countries opposed to his presence .
Several Latin American leaders and commentators recommended that US President Barack Obama attend , despite Castro ’ s presence , in order to confront him about Cuba ’ s dearth of democracy .
Obama did not take the bait : an accidental photo opportunity or public debate with Raúl Castro in the middle of an election campaign is not how a US president wins a second term .
Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos tried to defuse the issue by first ascertaining whether the Cubans actually wanted to be invited .
Having sent his foreign minister to Havana to ask , he received a surprising response : Cuba did wish to attend , despite having rejected in 2009 an invitation to return to the OAS .
It was clear to Santos that , if Castro attended , the Cartagena summit would take place without Obama , Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper , and perhaps a few other heads of state .
If , on the other hand , Castro did not attend , some of the ALBA members , including two neighbors with which Colombia hopes to improve relations – Ecuador and Venezuela – might not show up , either .
In the end , Santos , like his summit-hosting predecessors , had no choice but to inform the Cubans personally that they were not welcome , as “ there was no consensus regarding their participation . ”
Despite talk of growing Latin American independence and Castro ’ s recent reforms , most countries , when forced to choose between Cuba and the US , choose the latter .
Indeed , even Cuba ’ s supposed allies in the region refrained from urging Santos to invite Castro .
So Castro will not attend , Obama will , and the ALBA leaders will probably be divided .
The participants will try to ensure that Cuba is invited to the next summit in 2015 , but it is difficult to predict what will happen .
Cuba remains Latin America ’ s black sheep for now .
Because Obama will be present , other leaders may seize the opportunity to share with him their views on what is increasingly called the “ failed war on drugs , ” the anti-drug program originally launched by US President Richard Nixon in 1971 .
Recently inaugurated Guatemalan President Otto Pérez Molina , together with Santos and other heads of state , question today ’ s punitive , prohibitionist approach , owing to its enormous costs and meager results , and propose a different strategy : legalization .
Obama sent Vice President Joe Biden to Mexico and Central America a few weeks ago to forestall this trend , and he may have partly succeeded .
Nevertheless , whereas only a smattering of political leaders and intellectuals advocated legalization in the past , nowadays officials are coming “ out of the closet ” on drugs in droves .
Those who used to say that they favored a debate on the issue now support legalization ; those who opposed it now accept the need for debate ; and those who continue to oppose legalization do so on moral , rather than rational , grounds .
But Obama has other priorities .
His foreign-policy challenges , with the exception of Iran ’ s nuclear-enrichment program and Israel ’ s reaction to it , come second to the US economy ’ s health , and its impact on his re-election .
Latin America – even Mexico – is not on his radar screen at the moment .
Nonetheless , Obama will go to Cartagena , as he should .
The US has learned by now that it is in the country ’ s best interests to pay close attention to its southern neighbors .
