The Road to Justice in Iraq
As questions continue to mount concerning the true rationale behind the Iraq war , we should avoid only looking backwards .
Examining the US-led coalition 's prewar actions may well expose official deception and manipulation in making the case for military intervention .
But the nagging questions about the campaign 's legitimacy lie less in the past , and more in the ongoing absence of virtually any semblance of the rule of law in Iraq .
Today , the domestic security vacuum in Iraq is so profound that it calls into question whether the war is really over .
Guerrilla attacks on coalition soldiers show that no neat line separates " before " and " after . "
So does the disturbing continuity between the absence of legality prior to the occupation and now , under the formal authority of the occupying powers .
After all , it is the rule of law--and only the rule of law--that distinguishes free societies from dictatorships .
Coalition military officials recognize the obvious : without proof of Saddam Hussein 's demise , resistance by his hardcore supporters would inevitably continue .
But what about the need for a wider reckoning with the former regime ?
Is justice for the victims and perpetrators of Saddam 's crimes any less important for separating Iraq 's past from the present and the future ?
So far , security and law enforcement have been utterly inadequate to deal with past abuses .
Given decades of repressive rule , and tens of thousands of disappeared Iraqis , there are already endemic problems of verification .
But from the outset of the intervention , coalition officials have displayed patent disregard for mass graves and massacre sites .
Chaotic excavation and exhumation--often by family members desperate to learn the fate of loved ones--and unprofessional treatment of the evidence aggravates the challenges of uncovering the truth .
Unfortunately , the coalition 's neglect of forensic issues reflects its wider failure to devise any strategy to address issues concerning the rule of law and justice , or any central body with the authority to begin building the necessary institutions .
While US Chief Administrator Paul Bremer recently vested authority in a number of judges , their powers are extremely limited , and apply only to present violations , not the sustained abuses of human rights that defined Saddam 's regime .
With weapons of mass destruction nowhere to be found , the justice of this intervention remains an open question--one that now turns on the coalition 's efforts to establish the rudiments of legality in Iraq .
These efforts will succeed only if they include a modicum of transitional justice .
As the occupation force in Iraq , the coalition has undertaken international obligations , under the fourth Geneva convention , to uphold security and the rule of law .
This means that the coalition cannot do whatever it wishes with Saddam 's henchmen and war criminals .
It cannot simply ship them to Guantanamo Bay or Diego Garcia .
But the coalition 's choices are extremely limited .
Appointing an Iraqi tribunal capable of generating some form of legal accountability for Saddam and his henchmen--an idea that is gaining ground among Bremer 's staff , at least for Saddam Hussein if he is captured alive--is unrealistic .
No one is fully legitimate : neither those who thoroughly compromised themselves serving the Ba 'athist judiciary , nor exile returnees .
Similarly , the coalition would inevitably face the charge of " victor 's justice " were it to administer and staff its own courts .
Only the UN can meet the demand for transitional justice .
This requires the immediate establishment of a judicial body , whose legitimacy would be based on the same multilateral process that was sought prior to the war .
In this case , Chapter 7 of the UN charter gives the Security Council authority to set up criminal tribunals , as it did previously to adjudicate massacres in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda .
Unlike the UN tribunal for former Yugoslavia , which was established
But even such limited action is better than doing nothing .
We know from the many cases of regime change in recent decades that the problem of transitional justice will not merely go away if ignored .
Indeed , inaction in Iraq will not only postpone the inevitable reckoning with the past ; it may
One of the main purposes of pursuing transitional justice is to reestablish legitimacy and the rule of law in the present .
If the necessary institutions remain unavailable , then at the least an investigative commission should be created to establish an evidentiary record while this is still possible .
Such a commission would afford a measure of preservative justice , enabling a more comprehensive verdict once the institutional capacity for achieving this is built .
There is still a chance to create a " before " and " after " in Iraq , and hence to redeem the legitimacy of the US-led intervention and ongoing occupation .
But the path lies before us , not behind us , in a sustained commitment to security , the rule of law , and transitional justice .
