Tzipi Livni ’ s Israel
HAIFA – Famously irreverent , Israelis tend to call their leaders by their first name or childhood nickname .
But don ’ t be fooled : Tzipi ( Tzipora ) Livni is nobody ’ s close friend .
Her dry style , personal remoteness , and forced smiles make her an atypical Israeli .
Perhaps the country needs exactly this just now : an atypical Israeli at the steering wheel .
Newly elected as leader of the Kadima party , Livni only barely defeated her rival , Shaul Mofaz .
Her predecessor , Ehud Olmert , inundated by corruption charges and set to resign , is hardly her best asset .
But , beyond narrow party confines , opinion polls were exceptionally kind : a vast cross-section of the Israeli public wants Livni to lead .
It has been a while since any national figure won such high esteem .
If she manages to rebuild Olmert ’ s coalition and become Israel ’ s next prime minister , Livni ’ s initial credit at home and abroad will be outstanding .
The reason is that Livni is the quintessential envoy of “ Middle Israel . ”
She comes from the heartland of a successful and moderate civil society flanked by extremism and rage .
Despite her brief spell in Mossad , Israel ’ s spy service , Livni is deeply civilian when set against Israel ’ s militarized landscape .
Given reasonable security conditions , she may be able to navigate Israel from war to peace .
She represents the civic values that have been common to many “ middle Israelis ” ever since Theodore Herzl first put them in writing : the Jewish state must be modern and democratic to the core .
It should respectfully leave the rabbis and the army officers in their confined quarters .
It belongs in the world of nations , and seriously strives for peace with its Arab neighbors and equality for all its citizens .
The vast center of the Israeli political spectrum nowadays is essentially Herzlian .
Uninterested in nationalist daydreams or religious mystique , we simply want to live safely , and , if at all possible , next door to a stable and peaceful Palestine .
But , for now , Middle Israel is conducting its creative and affluent life alongside an assortment of Muslim and Jewish fanatics , many of whom are sponsored by the moderate middle ’ s tax money .
Livni herself , like other ex-Likudniks – including her mentor , Ariel Sharon – cool-headedly read the map .
She gave up the dream of Greater Israel in favor of a two-state solution .
If she becomes prime minister , her term may prove to be a window of opportunity , perhaps a last chance , to enact this least-of-evils settlement for the region ’ s future .
Moreover , Livni is as clean as politicians come .
Her legal background and previous experience as minister of justice accentuate her self-declared mission : stabilizing Israeli government and cleaning up all traces of corruption , including those associated with Olmert and Sharon .
Israel ’ s excellent judiciary can rely on her full support .
Livni is also an unpretentious person , not quite as ascetic as Menachem Begin and David Ben Gurion , but far humbler than Israel ’ s last four prime ministers , all men of sturdy egos and large expense accounts .
Livni is a selective and unsentimental peacemaker .
As minister for foreign affairs , she appeared to distrust Syria ’ s peace signals but kept an open link of negotiation with Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas .
She is not “ nice , ” her rhetoric tends to be flat and uninspiring , and her English is not great .
Nor , for that matter , is her Hebrew .
But linguistic skills , like gender , are refreshingly irrelevant at this moment .
Far removed from left-wing apologetics , Livni is a self-righteous believer in Israel ’ s basic right to exist .
Yet she is ready to do business with pragmatic Palestinians and offer them full sovereignty in exchange for full peace .
She will not allow the repatriation of Palestinians to Israel proper ( the controversially named “ right of return ” ) , but territory is not holy to her .
And she is offering Jews and Arabs some hope , an open horizon , and low-key rationality .
Here is an Israel that you may not recognize , especially if the electronic media is your window on the world .
In Israel ’ s lively market of ideological debates , the fact that Livni is a woman is almost beside the point .
After all , Israel is not the United States , and gender can never work as anyone ’ s sole adjective .
Nevertheless , if Livni becomes Israel ’ s prime minister in a few weeks , then Israel will become the world ’ s first country where all three branches of governments are led by women .
She would join the head of the legislature , Knesset Speaker Dalia Itzik , and the head of the judiciary , Supreme Court President Dorit Beinish – not bad for a warring nation with generals-turned-politicians and a macho public image .
Middle Israel has produced the Livni mindset , but there are many other forces at work .
Livni may fail in several ways .
If she does not put a coalition together , Israel will go to the ballot box and a religious-right coalition would be likely to emerge .
Even if she persists , she may break her teeth on the same bones of contention that kept her predecessors from achieving security and peace .
But , given Livni ’ s record , she richly deserves the chance to try .
