The Two-Faced Economy
ROME : Italy 's economy has two faces .
On one side , sectors of the economy demonstrate extraordinary productivity , and have won big shares of international markets .
For example , the mechanical industries in the Veneto and in Emilia led by Carararo , and Ducati , as well as the optical industry in the Northeast with Luxottica in the lead .
These are firms known across the globe , and which are often the objects of acquisitive interest from foreign competitors or great international investors , such as Piaggio and Stefanel .
On the other hand , Italy 's economy as a whole is stagnant : in the last ten years Italy has been growing more slowly than the median in Europe , which is already seeing much lower growth rates than the United States .
In the last eight years per capita GDP has increased , on average , by 3.2 % per year in America , 2 % in Europe , and only 1.2 % in Italy .
How are these two economic facts to be reconciled and what does this divided economy tell us about Europe , east and west , as well as other economies where the percentage of people in work may be stagnant or falling ?
The answer is at the same time simple and rich in consequences for economic policy .
GDP per capita ( that is , GDP divided by the total population ) depends on two factors : the productivity of those who work ( that is , GDP divided by the number of people employed ) , and the number of people who work as a proportion of the population .
In order for an increase in the productivity of those who work to result in a growth of GDP per capita it is necessary that productivity growth not be not nullified by a simultaneous reduction in the number , and thus the proportion , of those who work .
Such a reduction happens not only when unemployment goes up , but also when the number of those who do not participate in the labor force grows : students , retired people , the unemployed who are discouraged and stop looking for work and so abandon the labor force .
In Italy , the country 's stagnant GDP masks two phenomena which cancel each other out .
Productivity grows due to the expansion of the most dynamic and efficient firms , but the percentage of those who work is decreasing all the time .
The result is that the productive sectors of the economy do not succeed in " pulling " with them the ever greater mass of people who do not work .
Data on labor force participation is almost incredible .
The ratio of the labor force ( that is those who are employed and those unemployed who are actively looking for work ) to the number of people of working age is equal to 75 % in USA , 76 % in Great Britain , around 68 % in France and Germany , and 58 % in Italy .
This is the lowest number in all of the European Union .
Among OECD countries , the only one with a percentage of participation in the economy lower than that of Italy is Turkey , where 53 % of the population makes up the labor force .
Considering that the Italian 58 % includes the unemployed , only about half of Italians of working age are now working or even looking for work .
This percentage is lower today than in 1970 , while in the United States the equivalent number has increased from 65 % to 78 % .
True , a small part of the near half of the population who officially do not work are employed in the underground economy , but this is small consolation ; certainly it is not in those sectors that the future of the Italian economy is to be found .
What accounts for this propensity of people not to look for work , and why does what is happening in Italy matter to other countries ?
First of all , an extremely generous system of retirement benefits makes the " no work " option attractive , though not quite obligatory .
Indeed , abandoning work at an ever younger age relative to the longer life expectancy of Italians is something particularly worrying .
In the second place , low labor force participation is a response to the heightened fiscal pressure that results from the burden of having to pay for all the retirement pensions of today 's fifty-year-olds .
The pressure affects those who do work and , because of the heavier tax burden , makes work less attractive for them , especially for the second members of a family .
When a man works and marginal tax rates are very high , the wife very often prefers to stay at home .
Finally , the propensity not to look for work results from a university system that accepts anyone and which does not offer any disincentive to those who seek to indefinitely prolong their so-called " studies . "
This state of affairs is reproduced inside individual families : young people of 30 survive thanks to the work of the head of the family , who supports everyone .
Reform of the pension system is often attacked as a zero-sum game , in which whatever one person loses another gains .
Put in these terms , the problem is always solved by giving more to those who have the most political power .
Professor Nicola Rossi , economic advisor to Prime Minister Massimo D 'Alema , in the title of his recent book , expresses the wish that we give " Less to the Fathers and More to the Sons . "
But if unions are powerful or seniors are in the majority ( in Italy the two coincide , because seniors are the majority in all labor unions ) , the exact opposite happens .
Italy 's recent budget , which neither confronted the pensions issue nor the issue of fiscal reform , demonstrates this fully .
Here is the grand delusion of the budget and the Finance Ministry in Italy .
Neither seems capable , and in fact neither has tried to understand , that we are not dealing with a zero some gain .
Those countries who also provide disincentives to work should keep Italy 's sluggishness in mind and learn the lessons Italy 's government has ignored .
