A Year of Anniversaries and Uncertainties
ALBERTA – As China enters the “ Year of the Ox , ” there is much to reflect on from the past 12 months and even more to speculate about regarding the coming year .
2008 began with devastating snowstorms that paralyzed most of central and southern China ’ s transport system , interrupting lives and causing severe material damage .
Then came the riots in Tibet , which caught the government off guard , followed by embarrassing protests over China ’ s Olympic torch relay in several Western and Asian countries .
Then , as Chinese were wondering why 2008 , a year of supposed good fortune marked by the lucky number eight , had started with so much misfortune , a deadly earthquake struck Sichuan province , killing 80,000 people and leaving millions homeless .
Emerging more united from this tragedy , the country welcomed the world to the long-anticipated Olympics , which were remarkably successful , but were soon superseded by the tainted-dairy-product scandal in which many babies became ill , and some died .
In contrast to last year , when the rush home for the lunar New Year celebration was hampered by freak storms , this year millions of migrant workers have already returned to their rural homes .
Many will be staying there , because the global economic downturn has hit China hard , costing them their jobs .
Littered with a host of extremely sensitive anniversaries , 2009 could prove even more dramatic and unpredictable than 2008 .
Fast approaching is not only the March anniversary of last year ’ s disturbances in Tibet , but also the 50th anniversary of the Tibetan unrest in 1959 that led to the exile of the Dalai Lama and his supporters .
Since the riots last spring , China ’ s government has taken many pro-active measures , even adopting a “ Serf Liberation Day , ” to defend its record in Tibet of the past 50 years , while continuing to talk with the Dalai Lama ’ s representatives .
But it has also implemented heavy-handed police and military controls .
Then comes the 20th anniversary of the June 4 crackdown on the Tiananmen Square student demonstrations .
Calls to re-evaluate the official response began when President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao came to power seven years ago .
But recently the pressure has intensified , especially with the publication of “ Charter 08 , ” a manifesto signed by hundreds of Chinese intellectuals , journalists , lawyers , and ordinary citizens , condemning the government ’ s human rights record and demanding more democratic reform , press freedom , governmental transparency , and societal openness .
Although neither Hu nor Wen were directly involved in the crackdown , they nonetheless must tread carefully .
Doing everything possible to avoid a repeat of the 1989 scenario may well be the Communist Party leadership ’ s top priority in 2009 .
And , given the economic slowdown , widening income disparity , rising unemployment , and growing popular discontent over corruption , China ’ s leaders will have their hands full .
Of course , the inspiration for almost every political reform movement in China is the May 4th Movement of 1919 , when Chinese students protested against a weak and corrupt government and called for China to strengthen itself by adopting two key Western ideals : democracy and science .
As the 90th anniversary approaches , China has made great strides in science , but still has a long way to go in terms of democracy .
This year also marks the 50th anniversary of the Great Leap Forward , when 20-40 million Chinese died of starvation , as well as the tenth anniversary of the government ’ s ban on Falun gong , an organization of self-claimed religious and meditation practitioners that has challenged the Communist Party ’ s legitimacy .
Though largely discredited inside the country , this militant movement still has a following around the world , and further protests may come at any time and in unpredictable forms .
While some of the plethora of anniversaries that China ’ s leaders must confront are potentially very destabilizing , several have , and will , work in their favor .
For example , the 30th anniversary of China ’ s reform movement and the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and the United States has been a much-celebrated event this January .
More importantly , October will mark the 60th anniversary of the founding of the Peoples ’ Republic of China , an occasion that the Party will commemorate in grand style .
After all , the Middle Kingdom has re-emerged as the world ’ s third-largest economy ( having recently replaced Germany ) , sent astronauts into space , dispatched advanced naval destroyers to the Horn of Africa , and become the largest holder of US foreign debt .
China will want to flex its muscles and proclaim to the world that the Party has delivered the goods to its people , while making the country strong and prosperous .
As the worst recession since the1930 ’ s continues , both the American and Chinese economies are bound to suffer further setbacks .
There is no guarantee that protectionist and xenophobic sentiment in America will not hit China-US relations , or that the economic downturn will not fuel new unrest in China .
The world should not misjudge the effect of such troubles on China .
Nor should it forget China ’ s fierce display of nationalism in response to Western protests of the Olympic touch relay , the extraordinary patriotism that swept the country in response to the Sichuan earthquake , and the national pride evinced by the Olympic Games .
But , in 2009 , it would not hurt if China ’ s leadership also took note of the need to continue assuring the world of its commitment to a “ peaceful rise , ” and to do so by boldly addressing some of the unresolved issues that this year ’ s anniversaries will highlight .
