Block Thinking
“ Multiculturalism ” has become a suspect term almost everywhere in the world nowadays , and particularly in Europe .
People say things like : “ I used to be for openness and toleration of difference , but now I see where it ’ s leading . ”
But where is it leading ?
Almost every reason for toleration ’ s apparent fall into disrepute concerns Islam .
Even simple requests , like that of schoolgirls to wear headscarves in class , are suddenly freighted with immense political significance and treated as issues that must be resolved at the highest level of government .
People – and their elected leaders as well -- often have the feeling that such seemingly innocent proposals are in fact part of an ominous “ hidden agenda . ”
That agenda is “ Islam , ” which many imagine to include all the terrible things that we can read about in the press every day : the stoning of adulterous women under Sharia law in northern Nigeria , the amputation of thieves ’ hands in Saudi Arabia , honor killings of women who refuse arranged marriages in Pakistan ( or even northern English cities like Bradford and Manchester ) , the willingness to justify suicide bombings .
If you reply that the girls who want to wear headscarves to school aren ’ t living in Nigeria or Saudi Arabia , and almost certainly don ’ t share the extreme Wahhabi views found in those countries , you will be met with a look of almost indulgent pity , a look of the type reserved for the terminally naïve .
Or you will be told stories about how Saudi trained imams are twisting the girls ’ arms , turning them into unwilling stalking-horses for “ Islam . ”
Indeed , it is virtually impossible nowadays to talk about headscarves as an issue in its own right .
All the sociological evidence about the girls ’ motives , which are in fact very varied , is swept aside as irrelevant .
All that matters is the threat posed by Islam .
This is a classic example of what I call “ block thinking , ” which seems to have made huge strides in Europe in recent years .
John Bowen ’ s recent book Why the French Don ’ t Like Headscarves documents this shift .
Block thinking fuses a varied reality into one indissoluble unity , and in two ways .
First , different manifestations of Islamic piety or culture are seen as alternative ways of expressing the same core meaning .
Second , all Muslims are then seen as endorsing these core meanings .
The possibility that a girl wearing a headscarf might in fact be rebelling against her parents and their kind of Islam , and that others might be deeply pious while being utterly revolted by gender discrimination or violence , is lost from view .
Block thinking is an age-old phenomenon , and we all do it to some degree .
But , while in another age we might have been indulgent about its consequences , today it has explosive potential , because people who think in this manner are prime recruits for seeing the world in terms of Samuel Huntington ’ s theory of the “ clash of civilizations . ”
What ’ s worse , the way such people then act tends to edge us closer to Huntington ’ s nightmare scenario .
By treating all the varied segments of Islam as nothing more than parts of a unified threat to the West , they make it harder for Muslims to stand out and criticize their own block thinkers – people like Osama bin Laden , who are building their own unified enemy , composed of “ Christians and Jews . ”
Block thinkers on each side give aid and comfort to block thinkers on the other side , and with each exchange they pull us closer toward an abyss .
So how can we stop this madness ?
Block thought persists in part because its critics on each side are unknown to those on the other side .
Indeed , how many times does a critic of European block thought meet this kind of response : “ But where are the Muslims who are criticizing extremist Islam ? ”
Of course , one isn ’ t likely to meet them in the drawing rooms of Paris journalists or the wider European professional political class .
But explaining that to block thinkers will never have the impact of a real connection to the multi-faceted discourse that is actually taking place on the other side .
The real question , then , is this : Where are the crossover figures who can provide that urgently needed connection ?
