Block Benefits , Not Immigrants
As EU enlargement approaches , people across Western Europe fear a flood of job-seeking immigrants from the postcommunist accession countries .
Indeed , if all eight of the top East European candidates ( excluding Bulgaria and Romania ) join by the target date of 2004 , the EU population 's will soar by about 75 million people .
When Spain and Portugal joined the EU two decades ago , emigration to existing member states was lessened by the fact that many immigrants had arrived from these countries during Europe 's go-go 1960s .
But migration from Eastern Europe in those years was blocked by the Iron Curtain .
Now the income gap between eastern applicants and the EU is three times as large as the disparity with the Iberian peninsula was .
Munich 's Ifo Institute expects about 2.5--3.3 million migrants to Western Europe during the 15 years following EU enlargement .
These are big numbers , but there is little or no reason for fear-not if today 's EU members prepare .
Unlike immigration from non-European countries , East European immigrants share a similar cultural background and will assimilate easily .
In principle , with flexible labor markets , migration creates welfare gains for all countries .
Emigration countries gain because their nationals can earn an income in Western Europe that , for all but the most marginal migrant , is more than sufficient to compensate for the loss of domestic value added and the subjective and objective costs of migration .
Immigration countries gain because all but marginal migrants produce more value added than they get back in wages .
While blue-collar workers incur income losses , their losses will be overcompensated by the gains of landowners , capital owners , entrepreneurs and white collar workers .
Sadly , today 's EU labor markets are too inflexible to achieve this result .
If immigration countries suffer from chronic unemployment because wages are overly generous and rigid , as seems the case in most West European countries , migrants who find work will simply displace nationals from their jobs .
Here migration will result in a welfare loss .
Migrants gain .
So , too , family members staying home who receive money transfers .
But migrants produce no additional value added for the countries into which they immigrate , but incur migration costs and their contribution to domestic value added is missing .
The EU wants to solve this problem by limiting migration for a transition period of up to seven years .
This is a second-best solution .
The best solution is to make Western labor markets flexible by opening the system of collective wage bargaining , dismantling labor market regulation , and reforming the welfare state .
If workfare replaces welfare , wages will become more flexible enabling EU labor markets to absorb immigrants more efficiently .
But even with these measures , social benefits may artificially increase the incentive to migrate .
If immigrants gain welfare benefits in addition to wages , more will be lured into coming than necessary , and marginal migrants would create welfare losses for the EU equal to the benefits .
Given that immigrants usually enter countries that redistribute resources from above-average to below-average incomes , such benefits are likely even if immigrants work and pay taxes and social security contributions .
Excluding taxes and contributions paid and transfers and public goods received , the Ifo Institute reckons that the average immigrant to Germany receives a net 2,300 euros annually .
One way to curtail this problem is to delay full integration of immigrants into the welfare system of a host country for a few years-a reform advocated by the Scientific Advisory Committee to Germany 's Federal Finance Ministry .
Immigrants could come and work , pay taxes and social contributions , and gain free access to the public goods of the host country .
They could also receive the full contribution-financed social transfers that the welfare state provides .
But they would not be granted tax-financed social benefits .
Temporary exceptions could include supplemental social assistance , housing benefits or the " export " of family benefits to children living in the home country .
The exceptions would have to be tailored by each country so that the net cost of all transfers of public resources to and from immigrants is zero .
Politicians and lawyers may dislike this solution , because it undermines the EU 's principle of social inclusion for employment and resembles arrangements that currently apply to EU citizens who live in other member countries without working there .
Instead , bureaucrats and politicians prefer a quota system , whereby bureaucrats , not the market , select who immigrates .
Such a system may formally fit better with the idea of social inclusion , but violates the basic right of free migration granted in the Treaty of Rome .
Only people that bureaucrats deign to select are fully included , while others who want to come but are not allowed to do so face discrimination .
A policy of partial , delayed integration is preferable to quotas , not only in view of the Treaty of Rome but also on economic grounds .
It allows for fine-tuning and self-selection of migration flows , yielding far better results than even the most well-meaning bureaucrats could ever achieve .
Moreover , it would reduce the fiscal burden on taxpayers in immigration countries , thereby preventing a competitive dismantling of West European welfare states driven by the aim of warding off expensive immigration .
Partially delayed integration rather than transition periods or quotas is a market-oriented solution that can maintain Europe 's welfare states and enable it to grow and develop to its true potential .
