The International Misrule of Law
NEW DELHI – On the face of it , China ’ s recent declaration of an air defense identification zone ( ADIZ ) extending to territories that it does not control has nothing in common with America ’ s arrest and strip-search of a New York-based Indian diplomat for allegedly underpaying a housekeeper she had brought with her from India .
In fact , these episodes epitomize both powers ’ unilateralist approach to international law .
A just , rules-based global order has long been touted by powerful states as essential for international peace and security .
Yet there is a long history of major powers flouting international law while using it against other states .
The League of Nations failed because it could not punish or deter such behavior .
Today , the United States and China serve as prime examples of a unilateralist approach to international relations , even as they aver support for strengthening global rules and institutions .
Consider the US , which has refused to join key international treaties – for example , the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea ( UNCLOS ) , the 1997 UN Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses ( which has not yet entered into force ) , and the 1998 International Criminal Court Statute . Indeed , unilateralism remains the leitmotif of US foreign policy , and this is also reflected in its international interventions , whether cyber warfare and surveillance , drone attacks , or efforts to bring about regime change .
Meanwhile , China ’ s growing geopolitical heft has led to muscle-flexing and territorial claims in Asia that disregard international norms .
China rejects some of the same treaties that the US has declined to join , including the International Criminal Court Statute and the Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses ( the first law to establish rules on the shared resources of transnational rivers , lakes , and aquifers ) .
Indeed , despite their geopolitical dissonance , the world ’ s most-powerful democracy and its most powerful autocracy have much in common when it comes to how they approach international law .
For example , the precedent that the US set in a 1984 International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) case filed by Nicaragua still resonates in China , underscoring that might remains right in international relations .
The ICJ held that America violated international law both by supporting the contras in their insurrection against the Nicaraguan government and by mining Nicaragua ’ s harbors .
But the US prevented Nicaragua from obtaining any compensation by vetoing UN Security Council resolutions that called for enforcement of the ICJ ’ s judgment .
China still hews to Mao Zedong ’ s belief that “ power grows out of the barrel of a gun . ”
Indeed , while China ratified UNCLOS , it then reinterpreted the provisions to justify cartographic aggression in the South and East China Seas .
Worse still , China has refused to accept the UNCLOS dispute-settlement mechanism , thereby remaining unfettered in altering facts on the ground .
The Philippines has filed a complaint against China with the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea .
China , however , has simply refused to participate in the proceedings , as if it were above international law .
Whatever the tribunal ’ s decision , China will simply shrug it off .
Only the Security Council can enforce an international tribunal ’ s judgment on a noncompliant state .
But China wields a veto there and will block enforcement of an adverse ruling , just as the US did in the Nicaragua case .
China ’ s new ADIZ , while aimed at solidifying its claims to territories held by Japan and South Korea , is similarly provocative , because it extends to areas that China does not control , setting a dangerous precedent in international relations .
Japan has asked its airlines to ignore China ’ s demand for advance notification of flights , even if they are merely transiting the new zone and not heading toward Chinese territorial airspace .
By contrast , the US has advised American carriers to obey China ’ s prior-notification demand .
There is a reason for this : Although the prior-notification rule in American policy applies only to aircraft headed for US national airspace , in practice the US demands advance notification of all flights through its ADIZ , regardless of their intended destination .
If other countries emulated the example set by China and the US by establishing unilateral claims to international airspace , a dangerous situation would result .
Binding international rules are thus imperative in order to ensure the safety of fast-growing commercial air traffic .
But who is supposed to take the lead when China and the US have pursued a unilateralist approach on this issue ?
Now consider the case of the Indian diplomat , Devyani Khobragade , whose treatment India ’ s national security adviser called “ despicable and barbaric . ”
True , as a consulate-based diplomat , Khobragade enjoyed only limited diplomatic immunity under the 1963 Vienna Convention on Consular Relations . But this convention guarantees freedom from detention until trial and conviction , except for “ grave offenses . ”
Can a wage dispute qualify as a “ grave offense ” warranting arrest and humiliation ?
Would the US tolerate similar treatment of one of its consular officers ?
The harsh truth is that the US interprets the Vienna Convention restrictively at home but liberally overseas , in order to shield even the military and intelligence contractors that it sends abroad .
A classic case involved the CIA contractor Raymond Davis , who fatally shot two men in 2011 in Lahore , Pakistan .
Claiming that Davis was a bona fide diplomat with its Lahore consulate , and thus enjoyed immunity from prosecution , the US accused Pakistan of “ illegally detaining ” him , with President Barack Obama defending him as “ our diplomat in Pakistan . ”
Despite a widely held belief that the current international system is based on rules , the fact is that major powers are rule makers and rule imposers , not rule takers .
They have a propensity to violate or manipulate international law when it is in their interest to do so .
If universal conformity to a rules-based international order still seems like a distant prospect , an important reason is that countries that should be leading the charge still so often behave like rogue states .
