Japan ’ s Obama Problem
TOKYO – When Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe visited Tokyo ’ s controversial Yasukuni Shrine last month , Chinese leaders predictably condemned his decision to honor those behind “ the war of aggression against China . ”
But Abe was also sending a message to Japan ’ s main ally and defender , the United States .
Faced with US President Barack Obama ’ s reluctance to challenge China ’ s muscle-flexing and territorial ambitions in Asia – reflected in Japan ’ s recent split with the US over China ’ s new Air Defense Identification Zone ( ADIZ ) – an increasingly desperate Abe was compelled to let both countries know that restraint cannot be one-sided .
For China and South Korea , the Yasukuni Shrine ’ s inclusion of 14 Class A war criminals who were executed after World War II has made it a potent symbol of Japan ’ s prewar militarism , and Abe had long refrained from visiting it – including during his previous stint as prime minister .
He may well have maintained that stance had China not established the ADIZ , which set an ominous new precedent by usurping international airspace over the East China Sea , including areas that China does not control .
( Abe does not appear to have considered the possibility that his pilgrimage to Yasukuni might end up helping China by deepening South Korea ’ s antagonism toward Japan . )
The Obama administration had been pressing Abe not to aggravate regional tensions by visiting Yasukuni – an entreaty reiterated by Vice President Joe Biden during a recent stopover in Tokyo on his way to Beijing .
In fact , Biden ’ s tour deepened Japan ’ s security concerns , because it highlighted America ’ s focus on balancing its relationships in East Asia , even if that means tolerating an expansionist China as the strategic equivalent of an allied Japan .
Instead of postponing Biden ’ s trip to Beijing to demonstrate disapproval of China ’ s new ADIZ , the US advised its commercial airlines to respect it , whereas Japan asked its carriers to ignore China ’ s demand that they file their flight plans through the zone in advance .
By calling for Japanese restraint , the US stoked Japan ’ s anxiety , without winning any concessions from China .
Now , the widening rift between the US and Japan has become starkly apparent .
Abe feels let down by Obama ’ s decision not to take a firm stand on the ADIZ – the latest in a series of aggressive moves by China to upend the status quo in the East China Sea .
For its part , the US government openly – and uncharacteristically – criticized Abe ’ s Yasukuni visit , with its embassy in Japan releasing a statement saying that the US was “ disappointed that Japan ’ s leadership has taken an action that will exacerbate tensions with Japan ’ s neighbors . ”
Such recriminations do not mean that the US-Japan alliance – the bedrock of America ’ s forward military deployment in Asia – is in immediate jeopardy .
Japan remains a model ally that hosts a large US troop presence , even paying for the upkeep of American forces on its soil .
Indeed , Abe ’ s visit to Yasukuni came only a day after he completed a long-elusive , US-backed bilateral deal to relocate America ’ s airbase in Okinawa to a less populous area of the island .
And he supports Japan ’ s entry into the US-led Trans-Pacific Partnership , an emerging regional trading bloc that will exclude China .
Nonetheless , a psychological schism between the Abe and Obama administrations has gradually developed .
While the US frets about Abe ’ s nationalistic stance vis-à-vis China and South Korea , Japanese officials have stopped trying to conceal their uneasiness over Obama ’ s effort to strike a balance between its alliance commitments and its desire for Sino-American ties .
Biden spent more than twice as much time in discussions with Chinese President Xi Jinping as he did with Abe .
The paradox is that while anxiety over China ’ s growing assertiveness has returned the US to the center of Asian geopolitics and enabled it to strengthen its security arrangements in the region , this has not led to action aimed at quelling China ’ s expansionary policies .
As a result , Japan is becoming skeptical about America ’ s willingness to support it militarily in the event of a Chinese attack on the Japanese-controlled Senkaku Islands ( called the Diaoyu Islands in China ) .
The Obama administration ’ s contradictory rhetoric – affirming that the US-Japan security treaty covers the Senkakus , while refusing to take a position on the islands ’ sovereignty – has not helped .
A wake-up call for Japan was Obama ’ s inaction in 2012 , when China captured the Scarborough Shoal , part of the Philippines ’ exclusive economic zone .
In an effort to end a tense standoff , the US brokered a deal in which both countries agreed to withdraw their maritime vessels from the area .
But , after the Philippines withdrew , China occupied the shoal – and , despite a mutual-defense treaty between the US and the Philippines , the US did little in response .
This emboldened China effectively to seize a second Philippine-claimed shoal , part of the disputed Spratly Islands .
Factors like geographical distance and economic interdependence have made the US wary of entanglement in Asia ’ s territorial feuds .
And , unlike Asian countries , America would not really suffer from a Chinese “ Monroe Doctrine ” declaring that China would not accept any outside intervention in Asia .
But America ’ s neutrality on sovereignty disputes threatens to undermine its bilateral security alliances ( which , by preventing countries like Japan from turning toward militarism , actually serve Chinese interests ) .
The Obama administration ’ s Asian balancing act obfuscates the broader test of power that China ’ s recent actions represent .
What is at stake are not merely islands in the East and South China Seas , but a rules-based regional order , freedom of navigation of the seas and skies , access to maritime resources , and balanced power dynamics in Asia .
By fueling Japanese insecurity , US policy risks bringing about the very outcome – a return to militarism – that it aims to prevent .
