Britain ’ s New Internationalism
TOLEDO , SPAIN - With President George W. Bush ’ s grand strategy for the Middle East in ruins , his administration has , however hesitantly , begun to put greater emphasis on resolving conflicts by peaceful means .
The settlement reached with North Korea , whereby it will dismantle its nuclear program , and the Annapolis conference for an Israeli-Palestinian peace – with the participation of Syria , a pivotal member of the region ’ s “ axis of evil ” – are two key examples of this trend .
The United States ’ staunchest ally since 2001 , Great Britain , has already gone down this path , divorcing itself from its servile alliance with a Bush administration that focused on war and confrontation .
Though only a miniature version of America ’ s imperial predicament , Britain ’ s current policy , as its new prime minister , Gordon Brown , is defining it , may anticipate the direction taken by the next American president .
Tony Blair ’ s endorsement of Bush ’ s Middle East designs showed that an imbalance of power in an alliance always causes the weaker partner to become subservient .
Britain joined America ’ s Iraq adventure with the same inflated perceptions of its military capacity and diplomatic clout that trapped Bush .
But Britain ’ s military contribution to the war effort was not indispensable , so Bush did not have to heed Blair ’ s advice .
As a result , Britain could not serve as a bridge between a doubtful Europe and a belligerent US , as Blair believed , and Britain ’ s capacity to be a force for good on the world stage was severely damaged .
Like America , Britain has learned the hard way the limits of what sheer military power can achieve , and also the devastating implications of its misuse for its reputation in the Muslim world and beyond .
The scope and virulence of anti-British sentiment in the Muslim world are now second only to that facing the US .
Restoring Britain ’ s reputation in the region will take years of hard work .
Blair ’ s legacy has thrown Brown into a confusing oscillation between Britain ’ s transatlantic tradition and its European connections .
No longer an independent global power , yet unhappy with the London-Washington axis that Blair forged , Brown ’ s government continues to waffle in its commitment to a united Europe .
Indeed , Brown , for whom America remains “ Britain ’ s most important bilateral relationship , ” recently blocked his foreign secretary , David Miliband , from delivering a speech that he considered excessively pro-Europe .
But such uncertainty , common in times of transition , should not overshadow what the end of the Blair-Bush era in Britain holds in store .
Unilateralism and pre-emptive wars are to be replaced by what Brown defines as “ an agenda for a hard-headed internationalism , ” based on cooperation with multilateral agencies and alliances – the United Nations , NATO , the European Union , and the British Commonwealth .
The new policy seems to shift emphasis to “ soft power ” strategy aimed at projecting Britain as a global economic and cultural hub .
The City of London , the British Council , Oxfam , and the BBC are now expected to restore the prominence of Britain ’ s enduring values .
Conspicuously , it is no longer the British , but France ’ s government under President Nicolas Sarkozy , that is carrying the torch of a possible attack on Iran ’ s nuclear installations .
But , for Brown ’ s policy to succeed , it must promote social change and political reform in the Arab world .
That means abandoning Blair ’ s strategy of confronting the “ arc of extremism ” with putative “ moderates ” who , besides offering lucrative markets for arms sales , are in fact autocrats whose conduct has helped fuel the growth of radical Islam .
The “ extremists ” versus “ moderates ” language has served only to revive colonial memories in the region and divide it even more deeply .
Post-Blair Britain is becoming a country for which wars that lack international legitimacy can only presage defeat and moral decay .
Of course , international legitimacy can be a vacuous concept when not backed by the capacity to use effective force .
Now incapable of intimidating anyone , Britain has opted for developing its potential to inspire .
Unfortunately , inspiration , too , requires the threat of effective military power to be an effective force for change .
Notwithstanding its many setbacks in recent years , the US remains the only power capable of leading a global strategy that consists in balancing soft and hard power .
May the next American president pursue this course .
