Bringing the World Health Organization Back to Health
CAMBRIDGE : Many life and death issues facing developing countries can only be addressed by international joint action .
No lone African country , for example , can overcome the crushing burden of malaria , a disease that claims perhaps 1million lives per year , and which causes around 800 million episodes of illness per year .
Current scientific knowledge is simply inadequate to face the challenge .
The world , instead , relies on the World Health Organization ( WHO ) to address challenges such as this .
In recent years , however , the United States and other governments have squeezed the budget of the WHO to a point where it can not effectively carry out its global mission .
It is desperately important that the world 's governments now recommit to raise the budget of the WHO , as one of the most important steps available in the cause of global development and justice .
Start with two points .
First , many of the crucial barriers to economic development are scientific rather than purely economic .
All of the IMF-World Bank missions in the world are not going to overcome the problems of malaria , or drug-resistant tuberculosis , or even low agricultural productivity in the arid regions of Africa .
These problems simply require new scientific and technical approaches .
Second , the needed science will not emerge from the poorly financed laboratories and universities of developing countries .
It now takes around $ 300 - $ 500 million to develop a new vaccine , for example , a malaria vaccine .
Only the major pharmaceutical companies , working in conjunction with basic and applied research centers around the world , can mobilize the necessary funding .
The developing world , alas , contributes only a tiny fraction of worldwide scientific advance , and the major drug companies generally lack the market incentives to invest in diseases afflicting the poor people of the developing world .
Here enters the critical role of the World Health Organization .
As the only international body charged with looking after global health , including the health of the world 's poorest people , the WHO is uniquely placed to create a framework in which the needed research and development can take place .
The WHO identifies the areas of highest priority , and then mobilizes the international community to appropriate actions .
It did this most famously in the case of smallpox , where the WHO led the successful campaign on global eradication of that long-dread disease .
It 's now time that the WHO lead a similar effort on malaria , tuberculosis , AIDs , and other afflictions of the developing and developed world .
Fortunately , under the dynamic management of the new Director General of the WHO , former Norwegian Prime Minister Gru Brundtland , the WHO is gearing up to meet these new global challenges .
But it currently lacks the resources to match the WHO 's will-power , the urgency of the problems , and the operational capabilities of the organization .
In a blindly mechanical way , the U.S. had taken the view that all major UN agencies should keep their budgets unchanged in nominal ( current-dollar ) terms , leading to a drop in real spending because of inflation .
This tight budget is supposed to force shake-ups in UN management .
On the contrary , it is starving the ability of key units such as the WHO to carry out their job , and to attract and keep the expertise that they need .
Such a simple-minded budget policy as an across-the-board freeze in nominal budgets should be ended immediately .
Of course , in the end , success in malaria control , or AIDs control , will require a partnership between the WHO , the private pharmaceutical companies , academic research establishments , and the world 's governments .
For example , the WHO and the rich-country governments could promise to purchase an effective malaria vaccine in order to distribute it ( below cost ) in Africa , thereby guaranteeing the drug companies that they will have a market for a new vaccine if these companies spend the time and money to develop one .
Such creative approaches could spur a tremendous amount of research and development on behalf of the world 's poor , and do much more good than yet another IMF-World Bank mission .
The WHO can lead such valuable efforts , and has already proposed to lead dynamically and creatively if given the chance .
For the sake of the world , let 's give the new WHO team the chance to make good on this commitment .
