Brazil ’ s Financial Train Wreck
CAMBRIDGE : The IMF ’ s record remains perfect -- five big rescues since mid-1997 , five big failures .
Brazil was the latest to go off the rails .
Last week its currency collapsed and stock market plummeted .
This wreck is likely to damage not only Brazil but much of Latin America .
All this was avoidable . The three engineers guiding Brazilian policy - its government , the IMF , and U.S. officials - were negligent .
Until the IMF in particular is called to task for its failures everyone risks waking up to financial shocks that undermine living standards in developing countries and threaten global stability .
Bluntly , the IMF has been too solicitous of Wall Street .
If you are , say , a U.S. bank with Brazilian investments , you want Brazil to maintain its exchange rate until you get repaid ( after that , who cares ! ) .
So , you pressure the IMF and the U.S. Treasury to urge Brazil , or Russia , or any other hapless IMF-loan recipient to defend its currency .
This gives you time to whisk your money out unscathed before any change in currency values .
Fortunately , those disastrous policies are being abandoned - too late and at too high a cost .
Indeed , Brazil ’ s stock market soared on news that the country ’ s currency - the Real - was allowed to float and the nightmare of a monetary straitjacket lifted .
Brazil ’ s currency , however , had been over-valued for years , whacking Brazil ’ s exporters and contributing to low economic growth .
Why ?
In 1994 , Brazil suffered hyperinflation , with prices rising 2000 % per year .
The then finance minister ( now President ) Fernando Henrique Cardoso , imposed a new currency with a stable value to the U.S. dollar , roughly 1 Real per 1 dollar .
Inflation dropped , but it took some time for it to cease altogether .
Brazil began to recover , but the relative costs of productions were still going up for some time .
By late 1995 , inflation was gone , but exporters were squeezed .
Local costs doubled while the prices received for exports remained unchanged , since each $ 1 of exports translated into approximately 1 Real of local earnings .
Financial markets understood the impact of this and expected a devaluation .
For Brazil to defend its currency , it was necessary to maintain punishingly high interest rates at home in order to encourage investors , foreign and domestic , to risk keeping their money in Brazil .
For foreign creditors , such crushing rates didn ’ t matter ( or so they thought ) .
If a defense of the currency succeeds for six months , that ’ s all the time international banks with 90-day loans on their books need to make their get-away .
Brazil ’ s government , the IMF , and the U.S. didn ’ t need to go this route .
They were urged to allow the Real to weaken slightly and gradually , according to market forces , in order to restore export profitability .
By 1996 , Cardoso was President , but he had fallen in love with the stable – though unrealistic - exchange rate .
When Asia ’ s crisis hit in 1997 , the IMF and the U.S. short-sightedly believed that exchange rate stability would help the world , and Brazil .
They encouraged President Cardoso to defend the overvalued Real through stringent policies .
Defend he did .
Interest rates were jacked up to 50 % a year to encourage skittish investors to hold Brazilian assets .
Investors aren ’ t blind .
They knew the currency was overvalued .
But at a 50 % annual return , they gambled , and even expected ( rightly ) that the IMF would give Brazil big bucks to back up its currency if necessary .
During 1998 , Brazil ’ s economy began a tragic , predictable descent into recession .
High interest rates sent the budget deficit soaring , because Brazil ’ s government held large short-term debts , and the financing costs on them were sky-high . The deficit ballooned from 4 % of national income in 1997 to 7 % in 1998 .
Brazilian investors and U.S. banks began to take money out , forcing the Central Bank to sell scarce dollars in order to keep the hallowed stability of the currency .
Throughout 1998 it would have been preferable to lower interest rates and let the Real move to a realistic level .
When Russia defaulted in August 1998 , and investors began to bolt emerging markets , the U.S. and IMF decided to loan Brazil the proverbial rope to hang itself .
To the cheers of the financial establishment , the IMF told Brazil last December , " Don ’ t worry about your falling foreign exchange reserves , we ’ ll give you another $ 41billion of short-term loans to defend your currency . "
This was insidious .
IMF loans are effectively used to repay foreign investors , either through a fairly direct mechanism ( say , Korea in December 1997 ) , or indirectly when the Central Bank sells dollars in the foreign exchange market as part of its currency defense .
Brazilian taxpayers will now be hit hard , and social and other spending cut , to service the IMF ’ s $ 41billion in loans .
Now , Brazil has abandoned its currency defense , but only after sending the economy toward depression and building up huge debts following a year of astronomical interest rates .
By floating the currency Brazil got some breathing room to cut interest rates and head off depression .
Nonetheless , many investors may run in panic from Brazil and the rest of Latin America .
There ’ s nothing like a high-profile failure of a Washington-backed policy to stoke a general retreat from the region , leading to cascading bank failures , economic contraction , and widespread hardship .
The IMF-U.S. strategy of telling countries to defend their exchange rates through high interest rates backed by IMF bailout loans should end and the IMF ’ s Managing Director , M. Michel Camdessus , shown the door .
Brazil has seen the light - the hard way .
Other developing countries should adopt flexible exchange rates and moderate interest rates , and avoid IMF rescue loans like a poisoned chalice .
Throughout Latin America , it will be necessary for major international banks and national governments to negotiate a responsible path forward , one in which governments behave sensibly and realistically , while large banks recognize their collective interest in avoiding panicked withdrawals .
If bankers panic and yank their loans , they will bring enormous damage to themselves as well as to Latin American economies .
