Bubble Spotting
NEW HAVEN – People frequently ask me , as someone who has written on market speculation , where the next big speculative bubble is likely to be .
Will it be in housing again ?
Will it be in the stock market ?
I don ’ t know , though I have some hunches .
It is impossible for anyone to predict bubbles accurately .
In my view , bubbles are social epidemics , fostered by a sort of interpersonal contagion .
A bubble forms when the contagion rate goes up for ideas that support a bubble .
But contagion rates depend on patterns of thinking , which are difficult to judge .
Big speculative bubbles are rare events .
( Little bubbles , in the price of , say , individual stocks , happen all the time , and don ’ t qualify as an answer to the question . )
And , because big bubbles last for many years , predicting them means predicting many years in the future , which is a bit like predicting who will be running the government two elections from now .
But some places appear a little more likely than others to give rise to bubbles .
The stock market is the first logical place to look , as it is a highly leveraged investment – and has a history of bubbles .
There have been three colossal stock-market bubbles in the last century : the 1920 ’ s , the 1960 ’ s , and the 1990 ’ s .
In contrast , there has been only one such bubble in the United States ’ housing market in the last hundred years , that of the 2000 ’ s .
We have had a huge rebound from the bottom of the world ’ s stock markets in 2009 .
The S & amp ; P 500 is up 87 % in real terms since March 9 of that year .
But , while the history of stock-market prediction is littered with too much failure to try to decide whether the bounceback will continue much longer , it doesn ’ t look like a bubble , but more like the end of a depression scare .
The rise in equity prices has not come with a contagious “ new era ” story , but rather a “ sigh of relief ” story .
Likewise , home prices have been booming over the past year or two in several places , notably China , Brazil , and Canada , and prices could still be driven up in many other places .
But another housing bubble is not imminent in countries where one just burst .
Conservative government policies will probably reduce subsidies to housing , and the current mood in these markets does not seem conducive to a bubble .
A continuation of today ’ s commodity-price boom seems more likely , for it has more of a “ new era ” story attached to it .
Increasing worries about global warming , and its effects on food prices , or about the cold and snowy winter in the northern hemisphere and its effects on heating fuel prices , are contagious stories .
They are even connected to the day ’ s top story , the revolutions in the Middle East , which , according to some accounts , were triggered by popular discontent over high food prices – and which could themselves trigger further increases in oil prices .
But my favorite dark-horse bubble candidate for the next decade or so is farmland – and not just because there have been stories in recent months of booming farmland prices in the US and the United Kingdom .
Of course , farmland is much less important than other speculative assets .
For example , U.S. farmland had a total value of $ 1.9 trillion in 2010 , compared with $ 16.5 trillion for the US stock market and $ 16.6 trillion for the US housing market .
And large-scale farmland bubbles are quite rare : there was only one in the US in the entire twentieth century , during the great population scare of the 1970 ’ s .
But , farmland , at least in certain places , seems to have the most contagious “ new era ” story right now .
It was recently booming , up 74 % in real terms in the US in the decade ending with its price peak , in 2008 .
And the highly contagious global-warming story paints a scenario of food shortages and shifts in land values in different parts of the world , which might boost investor interest further .
Moreover , people nowadays easily imagine that the housing and farmland markets always move together , because prices in both boomed in recent memory , in the early 2000 ’ s .
But , from 1911 to 2010 in the US , the correlation between annual real growth of prices for homes and farmland was only 5 % , and the latest data on farm prices have not shown anything like the decline in home prices .
By 2010 , real farm prices in the US had fallen only 5 % from their 2008 peak , compared to the 37 % decline in real home prices since their peak in 2006 .
The housing-price boom of the 2000 ’ s was little more than a construction-supply bottleneck , an inability to satisfy investment demand fast enough , and was ( or in some places will be ) eliminated with massive increases in supply .
By contrast , there has been no increase in the supply of farmland , and the stories that would support a contagion of enthusiasm for it are in place , just as they were in the 1970 ’ s in the US , when a similar food-price scare generated the century ’ s only farmland bubble .
Still , we must always bear in mind the difficulty of forecasting bubbles .
And , for daring investors , it is not enough to find a bubble to pile into .
They must also try to determine when to cash out and put their money elsewhere .
