The Eclipse of British Reason
BERLIN – When placed under too much strain , chains tend to break at the weakest link .
Figuratively speaking , the same applies to the European Union .
So the entire world quite naturally assumed that any process of EU disintegration would start primarily in the crisis-ridden European south ( Greece , first and foremost ) .
But , as British Prime Minister David Cameron has now demonstrated , the European chain is most likely to break not at its weakest link , but at its most irrational .
The United Kingdom – the homeland of pragmatism and realism , a country of unflappable principles and unmatched adaptability that stoically gave up its empire after successfully defending Europe ’ s freedom against Nazi Germany – has now lost its way .
More precisely , it has been led astray by the Conservative Party ’ s ideological fantasy that certain EU powers can and should be returned to British sovereignty .
The UK ’ s national interests have not changed , and no fundamental shifts within the EU have worked against those interests .
What has changed is Britain ’ s domestic politics : a prime minister too weak to control his roughly 100 anti-European backbenchers ( call them the “ High Tea Party ” ) in the House of Commons , and a Conservative establishment wary of the UK Independence Party ’ s rise , which could cost the Tories enough votes on the right to give Labour an electoral advantage .
Cameron claims that he does not want the UK to leave the EU .
But his strategy – “ renegotiation ” of EU membership , followed by a British referendum on the new agreement – is the product of two illusions : first , that he can ensure a positive outcome , and , second , that the EU is able and willing to give him the concessions that he wants .
In fact , there is good reason to believe that such a course would take on a dynamic of its own , possibly leading to an unintended British exit from the EU .
That would be a severe setback for the EU ; for the British , blundering through history , it would be a veritable disaster .
While Britain surely would survive outside the EU , the quality of its existence is another matter .
By exiting the EU , the UK would severely damage its economic interests , losing both the single market and London ’ s role as a financial center .
An exit would also harm Britain ’ s geopolitical interests , both in Europe ( where , ironically , it favors EU enlargement ) and , worldwide , in its global standing and special relationship with the United States ( which has made clear its preference for a European UK ) .
Unfortunately , Cameron ’ s track record in European politics does not inspire confidence in his ability to manage a different outcome .
When , in 2009 , he ordered the Conservative MEPs to withdraw from the European People ’ s Party , the Europe-wide grouping of center-right political forces , he merely deprived the Tories – now consigned to sit with the sectarians and obscurantists – of any influence in the European Parliament .
By weakening the UK ’ s position within the EU , he ended up strengthening the Euro-skeptics within his party .
But , while Cameron should know from grim experience what is looming , it seems that he has abandoned rational considerations .
Indeed , the belief that the EU would renegotiate Britain ’ s membership terms – which assumes , further , that Germany would not object – borders on magical thinking .
Such a precedent would be applicable to the other member states , which would mean the end of the EU .
With all due respect to the UK , dismantling the EU as the price of its continued membership is an absurd idea .
Cameron should recognize that his strategy cannot be allowed ( even if he fears that a few cosmetic corrections to the treaty won ’ t help him at home ) .
In the meantime , the Tories risk losing their way on a crucial issue – reform of the relationship between the eurozone and non-euro EU members – if they try to use it as leverage to renegotiate the various European treaties .
Britain knows that the euro ’ s survival requires much closer political integration , and also that London ’ s role as a financial center – as important for the UK as the nuclear industry is for France and the auto industry is for Germany – would be greatly damaged if the euro should fail .
Although no one should expect the British to join the euro any time soon , political leadership within the EU requires the acumen to take account of the central interests of one ’ s own country and those of the other member states without indulging in threats .
This , however , requires an adequate understanding of those interests and a willingness to cooperate on the basis of mutual trust , which should be a given within the European family .
Speeches , particularly when delivered by leaders of great nations , can be useful , irrelevant , or dangerous .
Cameron ’ s long-planned speech on Europe was postponed time and again .
Perhaps he should have taken that as a sign that he should rethink his position .
He still can , before it is too late .
The best starting point would be a re-reading of Winston Churchill ’ s famous speech in Zurich in 1946 .
“ We must build a kind of United States of Europe , ” urged Britain ’ s greatest twentieth-century statesman .
That remains our task – and Britain ’ s – to this day .
