China ’ s Borderline Belligerence
NEW DELHI – In recent years , the People ’ s Liberation Army has been taking advantage of its rising political clout to provoke localized skirmishes and standoffs with India by breaching the two countries ’ long and disputed Himalayan frontier .
The PLA ’ s recent intensification of such border violations holds important implications for President Xi Jinping ’ s upcoming visit to India – and for the future of the bilateral relationship .
In fact , such provocations have often preceded visits to India by Chinese leaders .
Indeed , it was just before President Hu Jintao ’ s 2006 visit that China resurrected its claim to India ’ s large northeastern state of Arunachal Pradesh .
Likewise , prior to Premier Wen Jiabao ’ s trip to India in 2010 , China began issuing visas on loose sheets of paper stapled into the passports of Kashmir residents applying to enter China – an indirect challenge to India ’ s sovereignty .
Moreover , China abruptly shortened the length of its border with India by rescinding its recognition of the 1,597-kilometer ( 992-mile ) line separating Indian Kashmir from Chinese-held Kashmir .
And Premier Li Keqiang ’ s visit last May followed a deep PLA incursion into India ’ s Ladakh region , seemingly intended to convey China ’ s anger over India ’ s belated efforts to fortify its border defenses .
Now , China is at it again , including near the convergence point of China , India , and Pakistan – the same place last year ’ s PLA encroachment triggered a three-week military standoff .
This pattern suggests that the central objective of Chinese leaders ’ visits to India is not to advance cooperation on a shared agenda , but to reinforce China ’ s own interests , beginning with its territorial claims .
Even China ’ s highly lucrative and fast-growing trade with India has not curbed its rising territorial assertiveness .
By contrast , Indian prime ministers since Jawaharlal Nehru have traveled to China to express goodwill and deliver strategic gifts .
Unsurprisingly , India has often ended up losing out in bilateral deals .
Particularly egregious was Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee ’ s 2003 surrender of India ’ s Tibet card .
Vajpayee went so far as to use , for the first time , the legal term “ recognize ” to accept what China calls the Tibet Autonomous Region ( TAR ) as “ part of the territory of the People ’ s Republic of China . ”
That opened the way for China to claim Arunachal Pradesh ( three times the size of Taiwan ) as “ South Tibet ” and reinforced China ’ s view of territorial issues : Whatever area it occupies is Chinese territory , and whatever territorial claims it makes must be settled on the basis of “ mutual accommodation and understanding . ”
Vajpayee ’ s blunder compounded Nehru ’ s 1954 mistake in implicitly accepting , in the Panchsheel Treaty , China ’ s annexation of Tibet , without securing ( or even seeking ) recognition of the then-existing Indo-Tibetan border .
In fact , under the treaty , India forfeited all of the extraterritorial rights and privileges in Tibet that it had inherited from imperial Britain .
As agreed in the pact , India withdrew its “ military escorts ” from Tibet , and conceded to the Chinese government , at a “ reasonable ” price , the postal , telegraph , and public telephone services operated by the Indian government in the “ Tibet region of China . ”
For its part , China repeatedly violated the eight-year pact , ultimately mounting the trans-Himalayan invasion of 1962 .
In short , China used the Panchsheel Treaty to outwit and humiliate India .
Yet , just this summer , Prime Minister Narendra Modi ’ s new government sent Vice President Hamid Ansari to Beijing to participate in the treaty ’ s 60th anniversary celebrations .
Ansari was accompanied by Commerce Minister Nirmala Sitharaman , who , during her stay , signed an agreement allowing China – without any quid pro quo – to establish industrial parks in India .
This will exacerbate existing imbalances in the bilateral trade relationship – China currently exports to India three times more than it imports from the country , with most of these imports being raw materials – thereby exposing India to increased strategic pressure and serving China ’ s interest in preventing India ’ s rise as a peer competitor .
The fact that the spotlight is now on China ’ s Tibet-linked claim to Arunachal Pradesh , rather than on Tibet ’ s status , underscores China ’ s dominance in setting the bilateral agenda .
Given India ’ s dependence on cross-border water flows from Tibet , it could end up paying a heavy price .
Embarrassed by China ’ s relentless border violations – according to Indian Minister of State for Home Affairs Kiren Rijiju , there were 334 in the first 216 days of this year – India has recently drawn a specious distinction between “ transgressions ” and “ intrusions ” that enables it to list all of the breaches simply as transgressions .
But word play will get India nowhere .
A reminder of that came at July ’ s BRICS summit of Brazil , Russia , India , China , and South Africa , when , yet again , China emerged ahead of India .
The BRICS ’ New Development Bank , it was announced , will be headquartered in Shanghai , not New Delhi ; India ’ s consolation prize was that an Indian will serve as the Bank ’ s first president .
Under pressure from an unyielding and revanchist China , India urgently needs to craft a prudent and carefully calibrated counter-strategy .
For starters , India could rescind its recognition of Chinese sovereignty over Tibet , while applying economic pressure through trade , as China has done to Japan and the Philippines when they have challenged its territorial claims .
By hinging China ’ s market access on progress in resolving political , territorial , and water disputes , India can prevent China from fortifying its leverage .
Moreover , India must be willing to respond to Chinese incursions by sending troops into strategic Chinese-held territory .
This would raise the stakes for Chinese border violations , thereby boosting deterrence .
Finally , India must consider carefully the pretense of partnership with China that it is forming through trade and BRICS agreements – at least until a more balanced bilateral relationship emerges .
After all , neither booming trade nor membership in the BRICS club offers protection from bullying .
