Brazil Coldest Election
Paulo Rabello de Castro , a University of Chicago trained economist and one of Brazil ’ s wittiest thinkers , has called the country ’ s October presidential elections a choice between “ more of the same ” and “ the same without more . ”
This is light years away from the strong emotions presidential elections usually incite in developing countries .
Rabello de Castro ’ s irony is apt , for it is difficult to say which candidate represents “ more of the same ” : President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva , who is running for re-election and is the favorite according to the polls , or former Governor of São Paulo , Geraldo Alckmin , of the PSDB ( Brazilian Social Democracy Party , which governed Brazil for eight years before Lula , with Fernando Henrique Cardoso as President ) .
Indeed , the distinction is so difficult that in a recent interview , Cardoso himself said that Lula ’ s Workers ’ Party ( PT ) project is the PSDB ’ s project .
He added : “ Perhaps there is not another one .
History does not always produce a new project ”
Cardoso is right .
Except for barely practical political rhetoric from leaders like Hugo Chávez in Venezuela and Evo Morales in Bolivia , there is nothing new on offer in the world ’ s electoral marketplace that differs very much from what is usually called neo-liberalism or the Washington Consensus .
In other words , there is no longer a battle between different projects in any modern country , no left-right confrontation ( with their nuances ) that might raise voters ’ emotions .
Here , Brazil is no different than the United Kingdom , Spain or Uruguay .
Indeed , Brazil ’ s upcoming election this year is like a soccer match between big teams , where supporters of one candidate and the other are solely distinguished by the colors of their shirts , since the strongest teams accept the rules of the game and even tactics are similar .
According to the socialist sociologist Francisco de Oliveira , the coldness of the electoral landscape is closely related to one reality : the “ irrelevance ” of politics due to its “ financiarisation . ”
In other words , the boundaries of government action have narrowed tremendously in the face of strong financial markets , with their power to destabilize any government act deemed inconvenient .
Quite simply , there is no other way of playing the game than by the rules of the financial markets .
Is this lack of emotion about politics , this absence of confrontation between different projects , good or bad ?
For some analysts , it is good , because it reveals a nation ’ s political maturity .
In the case of Brazil , it means that the people are no longer willing to accept or vote for the heterodox political and economic adventures that characterized the 1980 ’ s and early 1990 ’ s .
The problem is that this assumed maturity , whether real or not , is happening while the basic problems of the country remain unsolved .
Indeed , for at least 25 years Brazil has not been able to achieve rapid economic growth .
This is the sine qua non for beginning to face and correct intense and deeply rooted problems , such as redressing the country ’ s poverty , obscene distribution of income , the vast educational shortages , a precarious health system , a devastated infrastructure caused by long years of insufficient investment , and the rest of a long list of other miseries typical of underdevelopment .
Rabello de Castro argues that “ the country lacks an institutional model or a productive order that comes to terms with fast growth . ”
Concerning the process of de Oliveira “ financiarisation ” of politics , there is an interesting fact to take into account : country risk reached its lowest level , since the creation of the index in 1994 , on Wednesday August 9th , precisely in the sequence of what Brazilian media called “ the third wave of attacks ” by a criminal group , the PCC ( First Command of the Capital ) , which burned buses , destroyed banking agencies , placed bombs in public buildings ( even the headquarters of the Sao Paulo ’ s Public Ministry of State and the police agency in charge of repressing organized crime ) .
This means that the financial world measures risk according to its own interests .
If a country is not slow in paying back its debts and applies those policies considered “ healthy ” by the markets , bingo , country risk is low .
For the general population , particularly the middle class and / or low-resource people , the risks posed by going out into the street on that same day may be extremely high , but this does not affect financial estimations .
So why , under these circumstances , is President Lula close to re-election ?
Simply put : he works on both sides of the counter .
Between January 2003 ( when his administration began ) and June 2006 ( latest available data ) , Lula ’ s administration assigned 530 billion reales ( almost $ 242.7 billion ) to repay the holders of government bonds , whereas he devoted 30 billion reales ( $ 13.8 billion ) to a program called “ Bolsa-Familia ” that distributes money directly to poor families .
This does not seem to be the best way to bring about a true redistribution of income , but has been enough to achieve two objectives : it keeps domestic and foreign investors satisfied .
( In the electoral campaign of 2002 , both domestic and external investors who bet heavily against the Brazilian currency during the electoral campaign in 2002 , for fear of Lula , a candidate who seemed to be radical . )
This strategy also wins the votes of the poorest segments of society , who make up the majority of Brazil ’ s electorate and receive very little , but see the subsidies as “ better than nothing . ”
And the poor make up the majority of Brazil ’ s electorate .
Everything indicates that this will be enough for Lula to win re-election .
But can this political game be replayed indefinitely ?
We will start getting an answer from January 2007 when the new ( or , most probably ) the old president takes office .
