Britain Votes and Reality Waits
LONDON – I don ’ t mean to sound as though I am bragging , but the last time the Conservative Party won an election in Britain was 1992 , when John Major was Prime Minister .
The chairman of the party at the time , running the winning campaign , was me .
We won the election , but I lost my own race for a parliamentary seat and was sent off to Hong Kong as the colony ’ s last British governor .
So I wasn ’ t around when the Conservative Party , losing the will to govern , tore itself apart in the mid-1990 ’ s over Britain ’ s role in Europe .
As Winston Churchill said , the problem with committing political suicide is that you live to regret it .
Despite piloting the economy through a post-recession recovery , Major lost to Tony Blair in 1997 , ending 18 years of Conservative government and bringing a 13-year Labour run , which will probably end when Britain votes for a new government on May 6 .
Blair took over a strong economic legacy , and , to be scrupulously fair , he didn ’ t wreck it .
He and his finance minister , Gordon Brown , stuck to their predecessors ’ public-spending plans , for example .
In Labour ’ s first nine years of governing , public expenditure as a proportion of GDP was lower than in the comparable Conservative period .
Then we fell into the usual British trap .
Brown , who became prime minister in 2007 , let spending and borrowing rip , so that when the global crash hit Britain was already suffering from a structural fiscal deficit and a credit bubble .
The country was worse prepared for disaster than most others .
As a result , whoever wins the election will have an awful job cutting the country ’ s budget deficit – 12 % of GDP – and setting the economy back on the road to sustainable recovery .
The Conservatives should triumph under a young leader , David Cameron , who has hauled them back onto the middle ground of politics where elections are usually won .
Labour , under Brown , is unpopular , with the economy in deep trouble and a general sense that the party has run out of ideas . The Liberal Democrats under Nick Clegg have surged remarkably , and may even push ahead of Labour in the popular vote . But the structure of the British election is such that a victory for them is almost a statistical impossibility .
Indeed , the opinion polls remain tight .
Much will depend on the outcome of TV debates between the leaders , which are being held for the first time in a British election campaign , and which have thus far contributed mightily to the Liberal Democrat surge .
Each leader has been carefully groomed to avoid the sort of gaffes that could cost his party the election , and thus far , not one has shot himself in the foot .
If Clegg ’ s job is almost impossible , Cameron ’ s job is also much harder than it should be because the British electoral system is tilted heavily against the Conservatives .
The more Labour-oriented parts of the United Kingdom – Wales , Scotland , and urban England – are over-represented .
Electorates in constituencies where Labour is usually dominant are smaller , and district boundaries take insufficient account of population shifts .
Thus , more votes are needed to elect a Conservative than a Labour MP .
In the last election , Labour got 3 % more of the popular vote than the Conservatives , but gained 150 more seats .
The situation is a bit fairer today , but Cameron still has a steep hill to climb if he is to win .
I think he will do so – not least because the most potent electoral argument today is “ time for change . ”
Voters tend to get rid of governments once the incumbents have lost their most precious attribute : the benefit of the doubt .
Labour seems to be in that situation today .
But , whatever the outcome , a new government will face a daunting challenge – challenges that will be even more daunting in the case of a “ hung parliament , ” which will require either a coalition government or minority government to be formed after the vote .
It is not just that tough measures will be required to rein in public spending for years to come .
More worrying is that many voters seem to be in denial about that fact .
They are likely to find that economic reality , once all the electioneering is over , is a very cold shower indeed .
As a tribal Conservative , albeit it with pretty moderate tendencies and a deep suspicion of ideology , I naturally want Cameron to win .
He is clever , decent , and strong .
I think he will make a good prime minister .
But I don ’ t envy him the job .
It will require leadership skills of a high order to persuade voters that in order to prevent national decline we must curb our appetite for more and more public spending .
The old laws of household economics still apply . You can ’ t spend more than you earn – even in the so-called new economy of the twenty-first century .
I suspect that other countries will have to learn that lesson as well .
In Europe , it is not just Greece that is in a mess .
The public finances of Spain and Portugal are somewhat sounder , but those countries face huge problems in increasing their competitiveness within the eurozone .
In Spain , for example , wages have risen too fast , and productivity has lagged .
We should be on the lookout for political fireworks over the next few years in many European countries as people are forced to confront some uncomfortable verities .
It won ’ t only be in Britain that politics , from time to time , becomes a bit too exciting .
