Can US-Iran Relations Be Revived ?
During World War II , Allied soldiers occupied Iran , using the country as a way station to transport supplies from the Persian Gulf to the Soviet Union .
This was Iran ’ s first exposure to Americans .
“ They arrived in our country with a certain innocence , ” said the respected Iranian historian Kaveh Bayat , “ and without any colonial pretenses . ”
The Americans ’ supply train would regularly pass through my father ’ s ancestral village , Arak , then a scenic oasis of green gardens and fruit orchards .
“ Whenever we heard the train coming , ” my father once told me , “ all the young boys in the village would run as fast as we could through the apple orchard to greet the passing Americans .
They would smile and wave and throw us whatever gifts they happened to have – playing cards , chewing gum , lifesaver candies … .For us they were like heroes from another world . ”
So much has changed since then .
Iran ’ s 1979 revolution did away with the pro-American , undemocratic regime of the Shah , bringing in its place the anti-American , undemocratic regime of the clerics .
Relations between the United States and Iran have been officially non-existent since a group of radical students stormed the US embassy in Teheran – 25 years ago this week – taking sixty six Americans hostage for 444 days .
Sixty years ago , Arak was a humble village known to US troops for its grapes ; today Pentagon officials hone in on it as an industrial city that is integral to Iran ’ s worrisome nuclear program .
And yet few countries have a more paradoxical relationship than the US and Iran .
While the Iranian regime continues to be belligerently anti-American , the Iranian people are overtly pro-American .
While the governments in Teheran and Washington appear to be strategic archrivals , in the words of former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger , “ there are few nations in the world with which the United States has less reason to quarrel or more compatible interests than Iran . ”
Indeed , Iran has likely benefited more than any other country from US-led regime changes in Afghanistan and Iraq , as both the Taliban and Saddam Hussein were the country ’ s sworn enemies .
But neither side seized the opportunity to build on this common ground , and today US-Iran relations are as antagonistic as they have been in years .
For the US , Iran ’ s nuclear ambitions , opposition to Israel , and support for extremist groups have become increasingly intolerable in the context of the war on terror .
Iran ’ s long-standing opposition to relations with the US is a bit more complex .
To be sure , many of Iran ’ s ruling elites came of age politically during the anti-imperialist and anti-colonialist agitations of the 1960 ’ s and 1970 ’ s , and still cling to that worldview .
Although their revolutionary zeal may have waned over the years , they still tend to share the outlook of the late Ayatollah Khomeini , who likened the relationship between Iran and the US to that “ between a sheep and a wolf . ”
Ideological rigidity alone , however , does not explain Iran ’ s often-gratuitous anti-Americanism .
For Iran ’ s political and military elite , any increased liberalization that would likely result from an opening of ties with the US represents a threat to their interests .
From their perspective , Iran is now a closed party – their party – and the less who join in , the merrier .
With America bogged down in Iraq and oil prices hitting record highs , regime hardliners see little reason to compromise these days .
On the other hand , some influential Iranians – led by former president Hashemi Rafsanjani – recognize that relations with the US are inevitable , given Iran ’ s need to re-integrate into the international community and face its economic deficiencies .
Moreover , the Iranian people are overwhelmingly in favor of rapprochement .
As author Afshin Molavi wrote in his incisive travelogue Persian Pilgrimages , Iranian youth today are not revolutionary idealists , like those of three decades ago .
Instead , they have concrete demands , like jobs and political and social freedom .
They are desperate to enter the global community and rid themselves of a damaged international reputation .
Today ’ s Iranian intellectuals have undergone a similar maturation process , dismissing the “ utopianist ” and “ nativist ” political ideals of their predecessors .
Referring to Jalal Al-e Ahmad ’ s 1962 book Gharbzadegi ( “ West-toxication ” ) , which became one of the manifestos of the 1979 revolution , one secular intellectual in Teheran remarked to me that , “ Nobody reads Al-e Ahmad anymore .
On the contrary , we long for interaction with the West .
If it can bring us more economic opportunities , as well as social and political freedoms , let us be ‘ West-toxified . ’ ”
Still , despite popular demand in Iran , and common strategic interests , it could be years before America and Iran sit down and make amends .
After 25 years of living without each other , reconciliation will not come immediately .
When it does , there is good reason to believe that Iranians will greet their long lost friends with the same friendliness and exuberance that they did sixty years ago in Arak .
