Can Regional Integration Save Africa ?
During the last quarter-century , global economic growth has soared , but Africa continued to lose ground .
Indeed , the continent ’ s share of world exports fell from 4.6 % in 1980 to 1.8 % in 2000 , and its share of world imports declined from 3.6 % to 1.6 % over the same period .
Africa ’ s share of global flows of foreign direct investment ( FDI ) also fell , from 1.8 % in 1986-90 to 0.8 % in 1999-2000 .
Can regional economic groupings , such as the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa ( COMESA ) and the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) , help increase trade and bolster growth ?
Overall trade flows in southern Africa fell from $ 131.1 billion in 2002 to $ 112.3 billion in 2003 , with South Africa – one of only three countries in the region that recorded current-account surpluses – accounting for 65 % of the total .
Whereas South Africa ’ s foreign trade almost doubled between 1994 and 2002 , exports from , say , Malawi to Tanzania or from Mozambique to Zambia remained negligible , despite their geographic proximity .
The low level of intraregional trade , despite the SADC and COMESA , reflects several factors , including a range of non-tariff barriers – mainly communication and transport problems , customs procedures and charges , and a lack of market information .
Moreover , in the past , southern African countries put their faith in protectionism and import substitution policies .
Relying on “ infant economy ” arguments , major exports were restricted and legal obstacles were erected against foreign participation in the development of natural resources , as well as financial and other services , further impeding regional integration .
Nowadays southern African countries are committed to reinforcing their regional integration through economic harmonization .
A regional plan approved in August 2003 in Dar-Es-Salaam , Tanzania ’ s capital , by the SADC focuses on promoting trade , economic liberalization , and development as a means of facilitating the establishment of an SADC Common Market .
This requires completing the formation of a free-trade area , with 85 % of SADC trade to be liberalized in 2008 , and 100 % in 2012 .
A common market – including harmonized policies for free movement of factors of production – will enhance competitiveness , industrial development , and productivity .
However , protocols and political treaties are not sufficient to boost integration .
The major barrier is the region ’ s great diversity in economic and institutional development .
The SADC ’ s regional plan establishes a timeframe for policy implementation over the next fifteen years that takes these constraints into account , focusing on macroeconomic policies , debt problems , and establishing a stable and secure investment climate .
Macroeconomic policy harmonization is needed to ensure that changes in one SADC member country do not adversely affect economic activity elsewhere .
The new initiative calls for all member states to harmonize their economic , fiscal , and monetary policies completely , beginning with currency convertibility and followed by exchange-rate unification and , finally , a common currency .
Several currencies have attained some measure of regional convertibility , which should encourage monetary harmonization and promote intraregional trade , as countries ’ trade flows shift from partners that require payment in foreign currency .
A form of monetary harmonization in southern Africa already exists between South Africa and Lesotho , Namibia , and Swaziland , whose currencies are traded at par with the South African Rand .
The Reserve Bank of South Africa implements monetary policy after consultation with the other countries ’ central banks .
Despite tight monetary policy and foreign exchange regulations , the scheme has boosted trade and investment while reducing intraregional indebtedness .
But debt remains a grave challenge for southern Africa as a whole .
The region ’ s total aggregate external debt stood at $ 75.6 billion in 2003 , up from $ 56.6 billion in 2000 , with Angola , Mozambique , and South Africa accounting for 75.9 % of the total .
Angola , Malawi , Mozambique , and Zambia owe an average of 150 % of their GDP , and servicing the debt swallows billions of dollars annually .
Moreover , SADC has faced a sharp decline in FDI inflows , which fell from $ 9.8 billion in 2001 to $ 3 billion in 2003 .
This is attributable mainly to Angola , Botswana , and Namibia , owing to cyclical investment behavior in the petroleum and extraction industry , and to South Africa , where privatization and acquisitions activity have slowed .
Indeed , South Africa and Angola alone accounted for 73 % of the region ’ s inward FDI in 2003 .
For southern Africa – indeed , for the continent as a whole – global competitiveness requires diversification to higher value-added and manufactured exports .
In order to attract the FDI needed to achieve this , southern African countries have enacted laws aimed at encouraging greater private sector participation , with special emphasis on foreign investment .
But , despite these efforts , FDI inflows in the region ( excluding South Africa ) remain too low to have a significant economic impact .
This reflects the real and perceived risks associated with investment in the region .
Southern Africa ’ s leading economies must therefore make every effort to promote regional integration .
Removing all trade barriers , as called for by SADC ’ s plan , would enable them to take full advantage of the region ’ s abundant natural resources and point the way toward deeper global integration for all of Africa .
