Our Cosmic Context
NEW YORK – We have always lived on a changing planet , but many of today ’ s variations in climatic and ecological states are taking place exceptionally fast , and are directly attributable to our behavior .
Slowing the rate of alteration is the only rational course of action , given the potential outcomes .
But we also need to examine our responses closely , or risk repeating our shortsighted behavior .
Unexpectedly , the search for life elsewhere in the universe may provide a critical new perspective .
Our technologically advanced civilization – replete with remarkable tools and notable headaches – owes everything to a tapestry of cosmic and planetary history .
Consider , for example , oil , gas , and coal .
These substances comprise a complex package of carbon chemistry , produced by biology and geophysics operating within a deep rhythm of variation and evolution originating far from our own epoch .
The minerals and rare-earth elements that we exploit to build ingenious devices – extending our bodies and minds – are also a part of this rhythm , and are accessible only because of a great chain of circumstances , from planetary origins to plate tectonics and asteroid impacts .
Our trajectory as a species is hardwired to this four-billion-year-old bio-geo-chemical system that has profoundly worked and reworked the planetary environment , all the way from bacteria to city planners , atmospheric oxygen to paper mills .
In addition to our own genes , each of us carries the genes of tens of trillions of microbial passengers .
These tiny organisms harbor codes for metabolic processes that have been preserved across eons – the same processes responsible for shaping the world .
It is a plausible blueprint for successful life anywhere , even if the biochemical details differ .
Our daily business usually ignores this existential backdrop .
The struggle to mold our future , to stave off the humanitarian disasters of war , disease , and starvation leaves little room to be philosophical about our place on this crumb of cosmic dust .
But many scientists , including me , have a sense that the universe might be about to reach in and give us a metaphorical slap in the face .
For the last few decades , the modern scientific endeavor known as astrobiology has been seeking to determine whether or not all of this – life , death , and evolution – has happened elsewhere in the cosmos .
Humans have long asked this question , but the evidence – the raw data – was lacking .
Now , astronomers have discovered a remarkable abundance of planets orbiting other stars .
The numbers tell us that 15-20 percent of Sun-like stars harbor worlds similar in size to the Earth , orbiting stellar parents at distances implying that their surfaces might be temperate .
We have not found the nearest such world yet , but statistically it should be within about 15 light years of us – a stone ’ s throw in cosmic terms .
There is an excellent chance that we will find it and its brethren within a decade , and search for signs of an alien biosphere in these worlds ’ atmospheric compositions or climates .
In the Solar System , NASA ’ s Curiosity rover has discovered what may be organic carbon in the fossil mud of an ancient Martian lakebed .
Europa , Jupiter ’ s icy moon , has been spotted spewing water into space from a hidden ocean that could hold twice the volume of all of Earth ’ s oceans .
Serendipity is providing us with access to an abyssal realm that could conceivably harbor life .
We just have to go smell the salty spray .
Even finding nothing in such places is important , because these new data have predictive power , narrowing the field of planets , or moons , that might harbor life .
Nature has the critical experimental data that we need to finally place Earth in context , within a zoo of worlds emerging from ice ages , worlds descending into greenhouse hells , young worlds , old worlds , barren worlds , and possibly worlds teeming with life .
And that means that we will have new data to steer decisions about planetary stewardship .
In other words , the cosmic sprawl can help us disentangle the complex terrestrial systems and histories of which we are a part .
This is not a frivolous exercise .
On the contrary , it could be the key to overcoming our scientific ignorance .
We might guess the general consequences of global warming in the next couple of decades , but the details remain hard to predict , as does the distant future .
Biological networks change , chemical balances change , species go extinct , ecosystems unravel , and new ones emerge .
Cosmic context would go a long way in sorting this out .
For many people , the idea of spending time and resources on such otherworldly pursuits is difficult to swallow .
But if we are to sustain our species into the distant future , we need to make big decisions correctly .
It is time to take the long view seriously , because we have tried the short view , and it has not worked .
