Burying Augusto Pinochet
At long last , the age of General Augusto Pinochet in Chile is over .
Thirty-six years after the left took power for the first time with Salvador Allende ’ s peaceful revolution – one supported by votes rather than armed struggle – Chileans have opted again for real change by i naugurating a socialist and a woman as their president .
“ My commitment will be to travel with you on yet another stretch of this great promenade of freedom we have been opening , ” Michelle Bachelet said after being elected in January .
Her comment was an explicit reference to Allende ’ s last speech from the besieged La Moneda palace on September 11 , 1973 , when he declared that some day , much sooner than later , “ we will reopen the great promenades down which free men pass . ”
The street euphoria that greeted Bachelet ’ s victory felt very much like the emotions that gripped Santiago back in 1970 , when Allende was elected .
Even the stage from which Bachelet spoke was located at almost the same place from which Allende delivered his historic victory speech 36 years ago .
But the balcony of the Students ’ Federation of Universidad de Chile no longer exists , having been replaced by the tall buildings and modern subway stations that have marked the intervening years of Chile ’ s history .
Indeed , although Michelle Bachelet , like Allende , is a socialist and a physician , today ’ s Chile is not the country of 1970 .
This is not only because Pinochet ’ s 17 years in power , from 1973 to 1990 , dramatically shattered the country ’ s democracy , with thousands of people executed , missing , or tortured – among them Bachelet ’ s own father , an air force general who died under torture because he opposed the coup .
The changes go much deeper , which explains how a country with a huge Roman Catholic majority has chosen to be led by a woman who is a socialist , an agnostic , and an unmarried mother .
With Allende ’ s victory , Chile ’ s stock exchange and markets were gripped by financial panic .
But this time , the markets were calm , mostly because economists believe that Chile ’ s GDP will continue growing in 2006 at a brisk 6.3 % annual rate .
This change in market sentiment is one of the great achievements of President Ricardo Lagos , Bachelet ’ s predecessor , who was also a socialist .
So it is small surprise that he left office with more than 75 % popular support .
Bachelet ’ s margin of victory was far larger than the scant 31,000 votes that brought Lagos to power in January 2000 .
Back then , many predicted that Lagos wouldn ’ t last the thousand or so days that Allende ruled before Pinochet launched his coup .
Today , however , nobody is predicting chaos for Bachelet .
Lagos brought Chile free-trade agreements with the United States , the European Union , and China , an unemployment rate of less than 8 % , and a growth rate over 6 % .
Investment this year could reach a record-high 30 % of GDP , and changes in education , health , and justice have transformed society .
Most importantly , Lagos leaves office having erased from the constitution the dictator ’ s signature .
The new constitution eliminated the so-called “ authoritarian enclaves ” by subordinating the armed forces to civilian rule and removing their designated senators from Parliament .
As for Pinochet himself , ever since July 2004 , when the US Senate revealed his vast secret bank accounts , the once-powerful dictator has become a pariah .
At age 90 , he is being prosecuted for his crimes and corruption .
Thus , the general who yearned to see his picture in Chilean history books next to that of our liberator , Bernardo O ’ Higgins , must now resign himself to dying abandoned even by those who , until only two years ago , revered and honored him .
That is hardly surprising .
After all , one of the reasons Chile ’ s right hasn ’ t won an election since 1990 , when democracy was restored , has been its silence regarding Pinochet ’ s crimes and financial misdeeds .
But , in yet another sign of Chile ’ s transformation , the right-wing candidate that Bachelet defeated , Sebastián Piñera , is a liberal entrepreneur who has never hidden his rejection of Pinochet and his dictatorship .
Piñera ’ s great challenge will be to use his 46.6 % of the vote in January to strengthen his leadership and his effort to build a new right-wing coalition with unimpeachable democratic credentials , thereby enabling it one day to defeat the ruling “ Concertación ” coalition that Bachelet leads .
Such a reformed right ’ s opposition to Bachelet will probably focus on her efforts to modify the country ’ s neo-liberal model as she tackles the country ’ s persistent knots of poverty and inequality .
If Bachelet , who has already served as Minister of Health and Minister of Defense , is to succeed as president , she must transform this other Chile , where 18 % of the population is poor , and 5 % indigent .
These are the Chileans for whom a lack of hope might make social unrest seem to be the only alternative . From now on , the danger of a military comeback will no longer be present to act as a deterrent .
In any case , on March 11 , when Michelle Bachelet crosses the presidential sash over her chest , a new Chile will set itself in motion . The first truly post-Pinochet-era government will have begun .
