Bush ’ s Flawed Middle East Peace Plan
That a summit in Damascus of the Middle East ’ s “ axis of evil ” – Iran , Hezbollah , Syria , and Hamas – was convened immediately following President George W. Bush ’ s call for a conference of “ moderates ” to promote an Israeli-Palestinian peace demonstrates once again how intertwined the region ’ s problems are .
The Damascus meeting reflects Iran ’ s view of Israeli-Arab peace as a major strategic threat , because it would condemn it to isolation in a hostile Arab environment free of its conflict with Israel .
The Iranians also sought the meeting to forge an alliance against a possible US attack on their country ’ s nuclear installations .
America has always known that the Middle East ’ s problems are interconnected , but for years it got its priorities wrong , because it failed to see that if there was an Archimedean point to the Middle East problem , it was to be found in the Palestinian issue , not the “ War on Terror , ” Iraq , or the need for Arab democracy .
It took Bush six years of wrongheaded policies to finally admit that “ Iraq is not the only pivotal matter in the Middle East . ”
Bush ’ s initiative is a last-ditch effort to salvage America ’ s position in a region where it is on the defensive on all fronts .
It is especially ironic that , in stark contrast to his own rhetoric , Bush ’ s call for a Middle East peace conference is a call to wage war against the party , Hamas , that won a democratic election , and to make peace with the loser , Fatah .
Nevertheless , Bush ’ s initiative is not devoid of virtue .
He has finally acknowledged the failure of the “ road map , ” and hence the need to skip interim stages and move directly to a final settlement between Israelis and Palestinians .
Moreover , both he and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice were unusually blunt in warning Israel that its future does not lie in “ continued occupation of the West Bank . ”
Bush also came as close as he could to endorsing former President Bill Clinton ’ s peace plan by affirming that “ the borders of the past , the realities of the present , and agreed changes ” will define his two-state solution .
But Bush ’ s strategy suffers from serious inconsistencies .
The conference ground rules exclude radical forces – Syria and Hamas – thus encouraging them to persist in their role as spoilers .
It is a fantasy to believe that peace can be concluded without the radicals ’ participation .
As long as Hamas and Syria are left out of the United States-led peace process , they are condemned to Iran ’ s orbit .
The Saudis certainly have an interest in supporting this last ditch American attempt for an Israeli-Palestinian peace , especially now that , for the first time ever , Israel has refrained from opposing an arms deal between the US and Saudi Arabia .
The common fear of Iran is a major consideration here .
However , Saudi Arabia ’ s willingness to participate in the conference might come with a price too high for Israel to pay : an endorsement of the Saudi peace initiative .
This is the reason Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice was cautious in her reaction to the Saudis ’ ambiguous acceptance of their invitation to attend the conference .
Bush was right to call on friendly Arab states to contribute to an Israeli-Palestinian peace .
But how much leverage can he apply when they are so badly needed for his “ War on Terror ” and for containing Iran ?
Though certainly a welcome new idea , Bush ’ s call for Egypt and Jordan to replace Israel as the gateway for Palestinian exports is most likely to be resisted .
For these “ moderate ” American allies , peace is about Israeli concessions , not about pulling Israel ’ s chestnuts out of the fire , certainly as long as it refuses to endorse the Arab peace plan .
The current American initiative sounds reasonable , but it is essentially unrealistic .
Tony Blair , the new envoy of the Quartet ( the US , the European Union , the United Nations , and Russia ) , has called for a “ conference with substance . ”
But Israel will be required to engage in peace talks only if the Palestinians crack down on terrorism – that is , risk another Fatah-Hamas civil war – and eliminate corruption .
Such a sequence – and a conference whose harmless aim is “ to review progress toward building Palestinian institutions , look for ways to support further reforms , and support the effort going on between the parties ” – fits perfectly with the Israeli view .
But Palestinian militias have shown time and again that they will not give up the armed struggle before they see a Palestinian state along the lines of the 1967 borders , with Arab Jerusalem as its capital .
This is the fundamental pitfall of a strategy based on driving a wedge between Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas ’ s “ moderates ” and Hamas ’ s “ extremists . ”
If Abbas is to prevail , it will not be through “ gestures ” or a process focusing on “ institution building , ” however important these may be .
Nothing less than a full-fledged peace agreement that meets the fundamental aspirations of Palestinian nationalism is likely to give him the popular legitimacy needed to confront the radicals .
