Can One International Financial Architecture Fit All ?
CAMBRIDGE : Leaders from the G8 countries left Cologne without agreeing on institutional reform for the world 's financial system .
Before they begin to tinker they should ponder the following scenario .
Financial market deregulation in an un-named country sets off a credit boom and an explosion in equity and real estate prices .
Private sector debt , increasingly short-term , shoots up from 85 % of GDP to 135 % within five years .
As the currency appreciates in real terms , exports falter and the current account deficit widens , and the government balks at devaluation .
Soon , devaluation in a nearby country reveals how vulnerable the economy is to the loss of international confidence .
Suddenly , foreign creditors curtail short-term credit lines .
The central bank tries to hold the exchange rate , but eventually is forced to let the currency float .
The result is a currency collapse and a wave of bankruptcies .
The economy confronts its most severe economic crisis in many decades .
Is the country Mexico in 1994-1995 ?
Thailand or South Korea in 1997-1998 ?
Actually , no .
The country in question is Sweden in 1992-1993 .
Similarities between Sweden then and major developing economies recently are reminders that in a world of capital mobility financial crises can overwhelm all kinds of countries , regardless of their structural features .
Crony capitalism , corruption , weak rule of law , lack of transparency , inadequate financial regulation and prudential supervision , poor corporate governance , non-enforcement of bankruptcy procedures , an insufficiently open capital account , overly-ambitious industrial policies -- these were the features of Asian countries that supposedly precipitated the Asian financial crisis .
Yet they are hardly Swedish characteristics , or for that matter are they dominant in Finland and Norway ( two countries that experienced severe financial turbulence in 1992-1993 ) .
Nonetheless , the view that such structural elements played a key role in the crisis has come to enjoy widespread support in official circles .
The result is a remarkable development : the international community has now taken on the task of redesigning developing economies in East Asia and elsewhere .
To cite one example : the memorandum of economic policies submitted by the Korean government to the IMF ( March 10th , 1999 ) contains one-and-a-half pages on macroeconomic policy , and twelve densely-packed pages on privatization , financial sector restructuring , prudential regulation and supervision , corporate restructuring , trade and capital account liberalization , and transparency , monitoring and data reporting .
An irony here is that conditionality on developing countries is being ratcheted up at precisely the moment when our comprehension of how the world economy works and what small countries need to do to prosper within it has been revealed to be sorely lacking .
As Alan Greenspan candidly acknowledged recently , " I have learned more about how this new international financial system works in the last twelve months than in the previous 20 years . "
There are serious dangers in throwing at developing countries a Washington-consensus view of economic policy , even if this consensus is now refurbished with new international codes and standards and with " second-generation reforms . "
First , the new set of external disciplines come hand-in-hand with a particular , neo-liberal model of economic development that remains untested , and will foreclose development strategies that worked in the past , and others that could work in the future .
The narrowing of national autonomy in the formulation of development strategy is a cost for which developing countries are unlikely to receive an adequate reward .
Second , it is doubtful that the new policy agenda will make the international financial system much safer .
As long as capital flows remain large relative to the liquid assets held by national governments and are easily reversible , the international economy will be hostage to spectacular boom and bust cycles .
Indeed , by focusing attention on internal structural reforms in the developing world , the risk is that the current approach will lead to complacency on short-term capital flows , increasing rather then reducing systemic risks .
Finally , the difficulties of implementing many of the institutional reforms under discussion are severely underestimated .
Today 's developed countries did not acquire their institutions overnight .
It would be nice if third-world countries could somehow acquire first-world institutions , but the safe bet has to be that this will happen only when they are no longer third-world countries .
The fact that fashions in economic policy change should make us more humble in prescribing structural programs for developing countries - especially on those ( in , say , East Asia ) that have developed by rejecting conventional wisdom and espousing heterodox policies .
The reality is that our prescriptions often go beyond what can be supported by careful theoretical reasoning or empirical demonstration .
Ignorance calls for humility .
Back to Sweden in 1992 .
How did the Swedes deal with their financial crisis ?
To begin with , they enacted a general guarantee for the entire banking system to stem panic ( providing blanket protection to all but the shareholders ) .
This was followed by a recapitalization of the banking sector .
They also pursued an expansionary monetary policy and let interest rates slide .
The budget deficit was allowed to increase .
Real GDP began to recover in 1994 after three years of decline .
Imagine now that Sweden had been an ordinary developing country and that the IMF had been called in .
What would the Fund have recommended ?
Presumably bank closures , higher interest rates , and fiscal tightening to restore market confidence .
No doubt many structural reforms as well .
It wouldn 't have escaped the Fund 's attention that the Swedish public sector plays a significant role in the economic life of the country : taxes are high , public employment is large , and government spending is close to half of GDP .
What better candidate for structural reform than a dismantling of the Swedish welfare state ?
Would the IMF have made its assistance conditional on significant reforms in labor markets and in the social insurance system ?
Probably yes .
Would Sweden have been better off today as a result ?
Not likely .
Would it have been a good idea for the IMF to extend its conditionality in this manner ?
Almost certainly not .
