Can the G-8 Survive St. Petersburg ?
Russia ’ s gradual inclusion in the G-8 was supposed to nurture the growth of democracy , foster creation of a free-market economy , and encourage constructive behavior in international relations .
Instead , Russia ’ s leaders have become more interested in consolidating state power at home and abroad than in promoting democracy , protecting human rights , and cooperating with the West .
The collapse of the USSR , President Vladimir Putin has proclaimed , was the greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the twentieth century .
Obviously , the USSR is not about to be resurrected .
But Putin has moved to reassert state control over strategic sectors of the economy , including oil and gas , communications , pipelines , electricity and banking , as well as limiting political rights , harassing independent groups , and strengthening control over the media .
Moreover , Russia is coming to the fore , firmly and confidently , to regain its Great Power status .
Putin continues to pursue a brutal military campaign in Chechnya while intervening politically in Soviet successor states like Ukraine , Georgia , Moldova , and Belarus and rejecting Western tactics aimed at curbing Iran ’ s and North Korea ’ s nuclear ambitions .
Putin ’ s position is reinforced by strong public support , as well as by the dramatically weakened position of major Western leaders .
George W. Bush and Tony Blair have lost the popularity they enjoyed before the Iraq war , and Blair , together with French President Jacques Chirac , will soon leave the political scene .
Angela Merkel in Germany and Romano Prodi in Italy are ruling with weak coalition governments .
In these circumstances , given Russia ’ s continuing failure to meet the G-8 ’ s political and economic standards , the upcoming summit in St. Petersburg could produce a backlash , eroding the legitimacy , credibility , and relevance of the world ’ s most developed countries .
Indeed , Russia and the world may well see in the summit the G-8 ’ s silent approval of Putin ’ s domestic and foreign policies .
Clearly , there are many who would endorse former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev ’ s recent call on Western countries to stop pressuring Putin over human rights .
According to Gorbachev , Western pressure merely strengthens Putin , “ because in essence his position is very close to the aspirations of the people . ”
Bush has echoed that sentiment , telling CNN ahead of his trip to the summit that admonishing the Russian president in public on matters such as democracy and human rights would be counterproductive .
“ No leader likes to be scolded publicly , ” he said .
But can the West afford to remain aloof ?
Russia started off its year as G-8 president with a crisis over gas supplies to Ukraine , and even threatened Europe with rerouting its gas exports to Asia .
Putin has placed energy security at the top of the summit ’ s agenda , but that does not mask Russia ’ s ambition to dominate European markets by controlling the pipelines that carry its oil and gas , the refineries that process it , and the retail outlets that sell it .
The dilemma facing the West is that it needs Russia ’ s backing not only on policy toward Iran and North Korea , but also in Afghanistan , Iraq , and the Middle East as a whole .
Unfortunately , Bush ’ s strategy of democracy promotion has mainly contributed to unease around the world and alienation from Western goals .
Especially in view of the Iraq experience , Putin has won substantial public sympathy by arguing that opposition to Western democracy promotion is resistance not to democracy itself , but to Western intervention against Russian “ sovereign democracy . ”
Clearly , an ostracized Russia is a dangerous Russia .
But to hold a G-8 meeting in St. Petersburg in an atmosphere of “ business as usual ” may be even more dangerous .
Bush and European leaders issued a statement after their recent meeting in Austria saying that Russia must honor “ democratic freedoms , respect for human rights , civil society and transparency , and a responsible approach to energy security . ”
But words alone are not enough .
Nor should it be the end of the story .
The G-8 ’ s seven democratic countries should use the St. Petersburg summit as an opportunity to reaffirm their will to develop close and friendly relations with Russia .
But if their inclusion of Russia is to serve a useful purpose , they must also reaffirm the values that unite them .
