China ’ s Evolving Economic System
It is generally agreed that China ’ s impressive economic achievements during the last three decades are largely the result of the radical reform of its economic system .
While private ownership of firms hardly existed when these reforms started , private firms today account for about 60 % of total production .
Ownership , however , is only one dimension of an economic system .
China ’ s economic system has changed just as drastically in other ways as well .
Decision-making regarding consumption and production has largely been decentralized to individual households and firms , respectively ; economic incentives , markets , competition , and internationalization have to a considerable extent replaced command , administrative processes , monopoly , and autarky .
Generally speaking , China ’ s reform period has been a stark contemporary illustration of the historical lesson that unleashing individual initiative tends to boost economic development .
How , then , should today ’ s Chinese economy be characterized ?
Some observers describe China ’ s current economic system as “ state capitalism ” ; others ( including China ’ s rulers ) call it “ market socialism . ”
Both labels mislead .
One reason is the domination of private firms on the production side . Another is the fact that “ socialism ” usually does not rely upon strong economic incentives and competition , which are the dominant economic factors in today ’ s China .
In fact , China is a type of mixed economy , with a number of specific features , some of which favor GDP growth , while others have not dragged down the economy to any considerable extent so far .
But this situation is likely to change .
So further reforms will be decisive in determining the Chinese economy ’ s future performance .
Although internationalization of the economy has served China well , it is unlikely that the current 35 % share of GDP claimed by exports and the heavy reliance on foreign technology are sustainable in the long run .
Tension between widespread private ownership of firms and pervasive public ownership of assets is another specific feature of China ’ s economic system that looks similarly creaky .
For example , by disfavoring lending to private firms , state-owned banks distort the allocation of resources .
Chinese agriculture provides another example of tension between private entrepreneurship and public-sector ownership of assets .
In particular , public ownership of land harms the investment incentives for family farms and reduces their chance of consolidating land holdings in order to exploit economies of scale .
Reducing this tension over ownership of firms and assets is imperative , because the entry and expansion of small private companies will be increasingly important when China ’ s domestic markets and domestic innovation need to play a greater role .
Thus , for China to gain maximum advantage from private entrepreneurship , it is important to continue shifting the share of financial assets and land holdings out of the public sector .
This would also help address the endemic corruption that is also a specific feature of the Chinese economic system .
Corruption is difficult to reduce drastically so long as politicians and bureaucrats have much “ to sell ” to firms and individuals – including rationed loans from public-sector banks and regulatory permits of various types .
In rural areas , corruption emanates from frequent expropriation of land-lease contracts held by farmers working on collectively owned land , which local officials then turn over to non-agriculture land developers .
In both cases , reducing corruption will require not only government pep talks against bad ethics , but also institutional reforms , including further deregulation , stronger property rights , and more privately owned assets .
Free media would also help .
No doubt , some types of corruption , including “ asset stripping ” in connection with the privatization of public-sector firms , has speeded up the emergence of a class of private capitalists and entrepreneurs .
But if corruption becomes a permanent element of China ’ s economic system , it is likely to both reduce the efficiency of the allocation of resources and damage the legitimacy of private entrepreneurship .
China also needs to shift from its highly “ extensive ” ( resource consuming ) growth strategy to a more “ intensive ” development path .
Although high growth requires large-scale capital formation , the relation between investment in real capital assets and human capital in China seems to be out of proportion .
This is reflected in the current investment ratio for real capital assets of 43 % of GDP , compared to 4.3 % investment in human capital in the form of education .
China ’ s growth would be more efficient if these proportions changed in favor of education , including vocational training , which is very poorly developed .
Moreover , eliminating today ’ s vast wastage of natural resources , which underpins exceptionally high levels of pollution , will require a reformed regulatory framework , including higher user prices for energy , raw materials , and environmental resources .
By shifting to a less resource-dependent development strategy , more resources would be available for improvements in the country ’ s much neglected social arrangements , particularly among rural citizens and “ urban outsiders ” ( individuals in informal urban sectors ) .
This includes addressing China ’ s patchy arrangements for income security , as well as its unevenly distributed provision of social services , such as health and education , in particular , in rural areas .
The case for combining further government withdrawal from the production system with more engagement in the social field is compelling .
China ’ s leaders seem to be promising this by voicing their concern for domestic entrepreneurship , social arrangements , rural development and environmental protection .
Only time can tell to what extent , and how fast , such promises will be fulfilled .
