China ’ s Dangerous Nobodies
Ever since their reinvention by Pierre de Coubertin , the Olympic Games have always been politicized .
The first took place in 1896 in Athens in order to embarrass the Turks still occupying Northern Greece .
The Berlin Games in 1936 celebrated the triumph of Nazi ideology .
The Seoul Games in 1988 opened the door to South Korea ’ s democratization .
This summer ’ s Olympics in Beijing will be no less political , but will it resemble Berlin or Seoul ?
Will it mark the apotheosis of an authoritarian regime or the beginning of its demise ?
Many optimistic observers of China , often mollified by their close relations with the Communist regime , bet on a soft transition from despotism toward an open society , but recent events don ’ t support such a benign interpretation .
Since the beginning of this year , repression of human rights activists , lawyers , and bloggers has been harsher than ever .
The exact number of democratic dissidents who have been incarcerated , or worse , is unknown .
There is no way to account for ignored victims , or why some are condemned to death and shot .
We don ’ t know how many are sent without trial to “ re-education centers . ”
In the absence of reliable statistics , let us focus on two iconic figures of China ’ s pro-democracy movement : Hu Jia and Chen Guancheng .
Last December 27 , 20 armed police officers used extreme physical violence to arrest Hu Jia in front of his wife and their two-month-old baby , acting as if he could offer real resistance .
But Hu Jia is a diminutive young man of 34 who suffers from a severe liver ailment .
Moreover , he is a committed believer in non-violence , an admirer of the Dalai Lama , a disciple of the Mahatma Gandhi , and a sincere Buddhist .
Why is the mighty Chinese Communist Party deploying all of its powers to kidnap – no word better describes what happened – such a tiny enemy ?
The Party accuses him of “ subversion , ” but he broke no laws , does not head a counter-revolutionary army , and was not on the verge of toppling the Party .
Hu Jia ’ s political actions are much more modest than that .
In 2000 , he abandoned his studies at Beijing University when he learned that thousands of Henan peasants were dying from AIDS after having sold their blood to local traffickers .
Since the beginning of this epidemic , his main activity has been the distribution of medicine and moral comfort in the doomed villages of Henan .
Hu Jia ’ s charitable work is not facilitated by the local authorities , who bear some responsibility in this epidemic ; moreover , with NGOs being forbidden in China , Hu Jia can act only by himself .
Indeed , if he were to build any kind of organization to support his charity , he would be violating the law .
But the eye-opening tragedy of the Henan victims caused Hu Jia to understand that it arose from the absence of human rights in China .
So he started a Web site that acts as a chat room for Chinese scholars sharing his concern .
This Web site , now closed by the government , has also reported on the fate of Chen Guangcheng .
Chen , a blind peasant and self-taught lawyer , had protested in 2005 against the kidnapping of some 3000 women in his hometown of Linyi .
The women were sterilized or forced into having abortions in order to stabilize the population increase in the region .
As this extreme violence violates Chinese law , Chen petitioned the central government – the only legally recognized form of protest in China .
When carrying his petition to Beijing , escorted by a tiny group of lawyers , Chen was accused of disrupting traffic on the city ’ s clogged roads and condemned to four years in jail .
Why do such moderate actions , rooted in the Chinese moral tradition , provoke such dramatic repression ?
Hu and Chen clearly respect the law .
They don ’ t call for revolution .
True enough , they talk to foreign journalists who report their actions ; however , such contact is not illegal .
But the Party is haunted by the Soviet precedent .
No Chinese Sakharov or Solzhenitsyn will be allowed to tarnish the “ success ” of the Party .
The incarceration of Hu Jia and Chen Guangcheng is a clear signal that no democratization process will start in China outside of the Party ’ s control .
When the Chinese leaders mention democracy in official declarations , they mean “ organized ” democracy , from the top down .
Any attempt at democratization by civil society will thus be crushed in its infancy .
China is clearly not on the path toward a Western-style democracy , and economic growth will not be a prelude to a free society so long as the Party can prevent it .
The regime ’ s true ambition is to invent an alternative to Western democracy : an enlightened despotism under the tutelage of a meritocratic Communist Party .
The Olympic Games are being designed to promote this alternative model .
How legitimate is this model ? The Party ’ s 60 million members , nearly all males and city dwellers , would probably approve , as might the 200 million Chinese who share the profits of rapid economic growth .
But what do one billion people living in utter poverty ( 300 million on less than one dollar a day ) and deprived of any rights think of this enlightened despotism ?
No one knows , because they cannot express their wishes .
Perhaps Hu Jia and Chen Guancheng represent this silent billion more than the Party does .
That would explain why the Party has crushed them – and why any decent participant in this summer ’ s Olympics should demand their immediate release .
