China ’ s Internet Dictatorship
Eleven years after its initial connection to the World Wide Web ( WWW ) , China ’ s access to the Internet is still guarded by firewalls , embedded in its proxy servers , which have proven to be more practical and impenetrable than the Berlin Wall .
Moreover , an increase in the demand for broadband connection has triggered the launch of an $ 800 million “ Jin Dun ( Golden Shield ) Project , ” an automatic digital system of public policing that will help prolong Communist rule by denying China ’ s people the right to information .
The principle underlying the Golden Shield is that “ as virtue rises one foot , vice rises ten . ”
Aided by systems developed by western intelligence agencies , China has forged a virtual sword that threatens to block the path to democracy .
Internet “ gateways ” mainly supervise and filter political information in China .
Their technical functions include blocking overseas Web sites , filtering content and key words on Web pages , monitoring email and Internet cafes , hijacking PC ’ s , sending out viruses , and inter-connecting with the monitoring systems of the Public Security Bureaus .
Rather than heralding a new era of freedom , the Internet is enabling Chinese authorities to perfect totalitarian control in a way that puts the rulers in George Orwell ’ s 1984 to shame .
Since April 15 of this year , the Golden Shield ’ s advanced science and technology has been monitoring every thought and action of those Chinese people who use the Internet .
But what Orwell failed to predict is that China ’ s government has accomplished this with the help of Western democracies .
Today , China is the only country in the world that has enshrined in law the concept of a “ Web political criminal . ”
Publishing articles on the Internet can amount to “ committing an offense , ” and “ radical views ” may result in imprisonment .
The real criminals , the officers of the companies – Nortel , Cisco , and Sun Microsystems – that built this sinister system of mind control , will never get closer to a prison than China ’ s five-star hotels .
Since the first Chinese Web criminal , Lin Haiyin , was imprisoned for instigating subversive actions in 2000 to the recent arrest of writer Shi Tao , more than 100 independent intellectuals have been imprisoned for expressing their views .
Internet monitoring is also behind the constant rise in the number of Falun Gong practitioners executed by the state – a total of 1,692 as of April 18 .
Internet communication in modern China is filled with baits and traps : user-friendly Web page designs , easy-to-click icons and symbolized facial expressions , beautiful female stars in online ads and constantly updated international news induce users to participate and express their own ideas .
But once someone ’ s fingertips touch the keyboard , the “ Kitchen Table Democracy ” of the Web no longer exists – he or she may find themselves stepping into a trap , because the Internet Police monitor every word that is typed .
In a country where freedom of expression has been off limits for half a century , the Internet had at first proven to be a godsend : people poured their enthusiasm into it by building Web sites and personal homepages .
Now these people find themselves exposed to the Public Security Bureaus .
For example , the Democracy and Freedom Web site has been either temporarily shut down or blocked 43 times in three years .
Its robust reports on the death of Zhao Ziyang , the reform-minded leader of the 1980 ’ s who was imprisoned for objecting to the Tiananmen Square crackdown of June 1989 , ultimately forced it to succumb to the power of the “ Golden Shield . ”
Today , the average online lifespan of proxy servers in China is a mere 30 minutes , and 17,000 Internet cafes have been shut down .
The online filtering technology is capable of blocking or intercepting the emails of the 80 million or so “ Net citizens ” in China .
Because Internet chat rooms and personal emails have become essential to many Chinese , the upgrading of Internet supervision is also gaining momentum .
As a result , thinkers today are far more likely to get caught expressing “ unsanctioned ” ideas than they ever were in the 1980 ’ s and early 1990 ’ s , when underground publications served as the main channel of free expression .
Indeed , although the Internet ’ s coverage in China has been expanding steadily , the Communist Party ’ s ability to censor it has grown even faster , thanks to Western technology .
The Party has been dreaming of this kind of oversight ever since its revolutionary days .
Dictatorship is not only safe in China , but , at least for now , it is on the offensive .
But not forever .
Although “ the Golden Shield Project ” is the Communist Party ’ s largest single investment in the ideological field since it gained control of China in 1949 , it is also likely to be the last big bet before the Party ’ s collapse .
Like the Berlin Wall , China ’ s Internet restrictions may be technically sound , even as they defend the indefensible and sustain the unsustainable .
