China ’ s Choice in North Korea
TOKYO – If the most dangerous moment for any dictatorship is when it starts to reform , North Korea looks ready to turn that truism on its head .
Its recent shelling of South Korea suggests that the failing Kim dynasty might set East Asia alight rather than undertake any serious reform .
If peace really is the key component of China ’ s rise , the Chinese must now rein in their mercurial client .
Trying to understand the “ Hermit Kingdom ” can be like staring into a black hole .
Some view the bombardment of South Korea ’ s Yeonpyeong Island as a bid to divert North Koreans ’ attention from their country ’ s collapsing economy , or perhaps from the approaching death of their “ Dear Leader , ” Kim Jong-il , or to create a synthetic reputation as a military leader for Kim ’ s son and intended heir , the 27-year-old ( or so ) “ Young General , ” Kim Jong-un .
Others view the attack as simply another in a long line of provocations , and thus not to be taken all that seriously .
Hwang Jang-yop , North Korea ’ s former chief ideologist and its most senior defector to the South , describes North Korea as a mixture of “ socialism , modern feudalism , and militarism . ”
It has proven to be a lethal combination .
Roughly 1.5 million of North Korea ’ s 23 million people are estimated to have starved to death over the past decade .
Hunger remains widespread , if not as dire as two years ago .
The standard daily ration is 150-300 grams ( 5-10 ounces ) of corn or rice ( equivalent to roughly four slices of dry bread ) , depending on the location .
Food often remains unavailable in rural areas .
Atop North Korea ’ s starvation economy sits a personality cult that dwarfs those of Stalin or Mao .
Ubiquitous images of Kim Jong-il and his father , Kim Il-sung , are the official symbols of a secular theocracy based on juche ( pronounced choocheh ) , the Kims ’ contribution to the world ’ s patrimony of totalitarian ideologies .
As with the Church or the divine right of kings , the system cannot be challenged without undermining the infallibility of its perfect leaders .
The third and seemingly scariest component of Hwang ’ s formula , militarism , may in fact prove to be the system ’ s Achilles heel .
Maintaining the world ’ s fifth-largest army in a perpetual state of combat readiness is crushingly expensive for one of its poorest countries , with the military budget claiming an estimated one-third of GDP .
The armed forces operate a parallel economy , with its own mines , farms , and factories , though many soldiers and junior officers still go hungry .
The permanent war footing is just one manifestation of North Korea ’ s obsession with rugged self-sufficiency .
Juche is autarky raised to the level of philosophy .
The North Koreans consider any reliance on the outside world as a source of weakness , even though their economy would collapse without Chinese handouts .
Because North Korea does not repay loans , it cannot borrow money ; because it reneges on deals , it drives away potential partners ; and , because it aims for autarky , it cannot specialize or exploit its comparative advantages .
As a result , its annual exports – which include film and television animation , reconditioned cars , and , inevitably , an illicit trade in arms – are worth less than $ 1 billion .
Not surprisingly , defectors nowadays describe an environment of social breakdown , petty crime , and a Darwinian struggle for survival .
There is despondency and latent unrest .
Corruption is rife .
So what is Kim up to with this latest attack on South Korea ?
Kim ’ s main target was surely the six-party talks between his regime and the United States , United Nations , China , Russia , South Korea , and Japan .
Previously , North Korea was offered economic and other inducements to give up its nuclear weapons .
Like Iran , however , Kim wants to have his cake and eat it : eventual acceptance as a nuclear power and all the economic enticements from the US , Europe , Russia , and China to de-nuclearize .
That might seem crazy , especially given the likelihood of another round of economically crippling sanctions following the bombardment .
But Kim ’ s calculus is different from that of most rulers .
He has always shown scant regard for his people ’ s plight , and he still expects to get two-thirds or more of the oil and food he needs from China .
In the face of the North ’ s provocations , South Korean President Lee Myung-bak has demonstrated more of the statesmanship he showed in the recent G-20 summit in Seoul , when he successfully crafted a new focus on development for the group .
President Lee ’ s allies have rallied , rightly , to his cause , but even we recognize that his restraint cannot be unending .
Much , then , depends on the Chinese , whose self-defeating regional diplomacy has managed to push a listless and defense-shy Japanese government into closer cooperation with the US on security matters , and has inspired South Korea to seek out strategic partnerships with other Asian powers , including India .
One hopes that North Korea ’ s recent behavior – the sinking of the South Korean warship Cheonan in March , and now the shelling of Yeonpyeong island ( which followed a supposedly “ accidental ” shooting incident in the DMZ in October ) – will focus minds in Beijing .
But China , which fears a collapse of the North Korean regime above all , does not want to antagonize Kim .
And China is keen to draw South Korea closer in the game of regional rivalries .
The result could be a new round of efforts by China to manipulate regional suspicion – or worse .
Alternatively , China could shoulder some real responsibility for security in East Asia and close ranks against Kim and his reckless brinksmanship .
That should start with support for a clear condemnation of North Korea by the UN Security Council .
That global effort will almost certainly not succeed without a credible Chinese threat to sever Kim ’ s economic umbilical cord .
