Latin America ’ s Tale of Two Crises
MEXICO CITY – If one were an irredeemable optimist , upcoming events in Venezuela and Colombia could be viewed as a harbinger of good things to come .
In Venezuela , the October 7 presidential election may put an end to Hugo Chávez ’ s 14 years in power , along with his systematic destruction of the economy , media clampdowns , and endless meddling in other countries ’ affairs .
In Colombia , peace talks scheduled for October 8 in Norway between President Juan Manuel Santos ’ s government and the FARC guerrillas may bring an end to 40 years of war and bloodshed .
Unfortunately , neither of these outcomes is likely .
In both cases , what seems desirable appears highly improbable .
Chávez has participated directly in four Venezuelan elections : in 1998 , when he was elected for the first time ; in 2004 , when the opposition forced a recall vote ; in 2006 , when he was re-elected ; and now , as he recovers from cancer and the country is in the midst of a huge public-safety crisis that has made Caracas one of the most dangerous cities in the world .
Chávez won the first three , and , for several reasons , seems poised to win again .
For starters , Chávez is a formidable campaigner , and he has at his disposal every available lever of state power , from the Electoral Council to PDVSA , the national oil company .
As skillful as Henrique Capriles Radonski , the opposition candidate , may be , the playing field is so uneven that he appears to stand little chance .
One example : Venezuela ’ s overall population has grown 14 % over the past 13 years , but electoral rolls have jumped 53 % ; the new voters can be ghosts , Colombians , or several generations of chavista supporters already registered to vote , even before they are born .
Most polls give Chávez a significant advantage ( of up to 15 percentage points ) , but nonetheless offer a glimmer of hope to the opposition .
Many of the more impartial polling firms , such as Luis Christiansen ’ s Consultores 21 , Varianzas , and Keller , all show a surprisingly large proportion of undecided voters – those who do not answer or do not know for whom they will vote .
In highly polarized and politicized Venezuela , it is unlikely that upward of 20 % of voters have yet to decide what they will do .
Consequently , some analysts suspect a “ hidden opposition vote , ” such as occurred in Nicaragua in 1990 , when Violeta Chamorrro won the presidency , or in Mexico in 2000 , when Vicente Fox emerged victorious .
According to this logic , the “ undecided ” are actually leaning toward Capriles , and if their number is larger than Chávez ’ s margin in the polls , the caudillo will lose .
That is not impossible , but it is unlikely , especially if Chávez can count on several percentage points of tampered votes before and after the polling booths close .
Despite the president ’ s illness , the enormous problems facing Venezuela , and fatigue after 13 years of chavismo , it is still Chávez ’ s election to lose .
The status quo will also likely persist in Colombia .
No one knows exactly when Santos decided to seek new negotiations with Latin America ’ s oldest – and one of its most vicious – guerrilla groups ; nor do any but his closest aides know how many meetings have already taken place , where and when , or what happened .
But much evidence suggests that most of the process began some time ago , and was meant to be kept secret until broad agreement had been reached on most of the outstanding issues .
Santos probably wanted to have the talks viewed as a relatively unconditional surrender and disarmament by the “ narco-guerrillas . ”
He would have wanted to avoid the grandstanding and propaganda generally associated with public negotiations .
So the talks may have been revealed not because they had advanced sufficiently , but because someone wanted to sabotage them .
Who could that be ?
The predictable suspect is former Colombian president Álvaro Uribe .
Although Santos was both Uribe ’ s defense minister and preferred successor , relations between the two have soured .
The bottom line is that Uribe thought Santos would do his bidding as president , and Santos is convinced that his ( high but declining ) popularity is of his own making , not borrowed from Uribe .
These strains express themselves on policy issues .
Uribe criticizes Santos – through up to 40 tweets per day to his more than one million followers – for repudiating his “ democratic security ” stance , for the growth of the “ Bacrim ” ( petty-crime gangs ) , for appeasing Colombia ’ s two hostile neighbors , Venezuela and Ecuador , and for prosecuting some of his aides on corruption charges .
Santos says nothing , but replies in kind : making peace with Chávez and Ecuadorean President Rafael Correa , prosecuting human rights violations under Uribe , and arresting several of his allegedly corrupt officials .
And now , seemingly out of the blue , he has defied and even offended Uribe by undertaking negotiations with the despised FARC , after having delivered such devastating military blows to them that perhaps , this time around , the peace process will prosper .
One can see why Uribe would threaten to leak news about the negotiations , as well as why Santos would try to preempt the leaks by going public and having them take place in the open ( the talks will begin in Oslo , but will be pursued in Havana ) .
The problem is that , although there are good examples of publicized – if not public – peace talks that have succeeded , there are more instances of failure or indefinite stalemate , owing to the pressure of working under the glare of the international spotlight .
As a fervent supporter of Santos ’ s human-rights efforts , of his call for a major debate on drug legalization , and of his attempt to end Colombia ’ s “ Forty Years ’ War , ” I fear that Uribe has fatally wounded the peace process , and will prolong the country ’ s bloody and fruitless status quo indefinitely .
That is a great pity .
So , in this tale of two South American neighbors , unfortunately , little will change – unless , as so often happens , the unexpected suddenly becomes inevitable , in which case all bets are off .
