Making Space for China
LONDON – When the United Kingdom announced earlier this month that it had agreed to become a founding member of the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank ( AIIB ) , most of the headlines focused not on the news itself , but on the friction the decision had caused between the UK and the United States .
The White House issued a statement urging the British government to “ use its voice to push for adoption of high standards . "
And one senior US administration official was quoted accusing the UK of “ constant accommodation of China , which is not the best way to engage a rising power . "
In fact , it is the US that is advocating the wrong approach .
In the UK , the diplomatic spat served as an occasion for the British press to air criticism from those who believe that the government should adopt a stronger stance on China .
For example , they say that the government should have spoken out more forcefully in support of last year 's pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong , and that it should not have distanced itself from the Dalai Lama ( as it seems to have done ) during Prime Minister David Cameron 's visit to China in 2013 .
The UK does need to stand up for itself , but there is no reason for it to become confrontational about internal Chinese matters – especially in the case of Hong Kong , where it lost its standing when it agreed to return the city to Chinese control in 1997 .
The US , too , would be wise to stop resisting the fact that the world is changing .
The US Congress has yet to ratify a 2010 agreement providing China and other large emerging economies greater voting power in the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund .
In the meantime , the agreement has become obsolete ; China 's economy has nearly doubled in size since the deal was struck .
America 's reluctance – and that of France , Germany , and Italy – to give the emerging powers an appropriate voice in the established international financial institutions is counterproductive .
It drives the creation of new parallel institutions such as the AIIB and the New Development Bank , founded in 2014 by the BRICS countries ( Brazil , Russia , India , China , and South Africa ) .
In the coming days , I will be visiting China in my role as Chair of the British government 's Review on Antimicrobial Resistance , and also as a participant in the Boao Forum for Asia , an event similar to the annual gathering of the World Economic Forum in Davos .
I hope to encourage Chinese policymakers to make the fight against antimicrobial resistance a priority when China chairs the G-20 in 2016 .
And though I am not the British ambassador , I will be happy to state my belief that the UK government was wise to join the AIIB , and that the US administration , in voicing its opposition , was not .
China 's $ 10 trillion economy is bigger than those of France , Germany , and Italy combined .
Even if its annual output growth slows to 7 % , the country will add some $ 700 billion to global GDP this year .
Japan would have to grow at something like 14 % to have that type of impact on the world .
For anyone who wants to engage in global trade , it is thus vital to identify what China wants .
In the case of the UK , this obviously includes finance ( as well as sports , music , fashion , and perhaps health care ) .
The UK is simply being smart when it promotes its own interests by cooperating with China .
One of the few positive consequences of the 2008 financial crisis was the elevation of the G-20 's global role ; in principle , it is a far more representative forum for international leadership than the G-7 ever was .
There is , however , a downside to the G-20 's emergence : the large number of participants can make it difficult to reach agreements and get things done .
A new G-7 needs to be created within the G-20 , thereby providing China with a degree of influence that reflects its economic weight and requires it to assume a commensurate proportion of global responsibility .
Space at the table for China could be obtained if the eurozone countries , signaling their commitment to the common currency , agreed to surrender their individual seats in exchange for one representing the entire monetary union .
The US , too , would finally have to accept China 's heightened global role .
Later this year , the IMF will recalibrate the weights in its unit of account , the so-called Special Drawing Rights , which comprises a basket of currencies that currently includes the US dollar , the euro , the British pound , and the Japanese yen .
According to almost every economic and financial criterion , the SDR basket should now include China 's renminbi .
The US would be wise to not oppose such a move .
Otherwise , it would risk accelerating the decline of the established international financial institutions .
Similarly , the US Congress should ratify the agreed changes to the governance of the IMF and the World Bank .
By founding the AIIB and the New Development Bank , China and other emerging powers have signaled that they will not wait for their voices to be better heard .
And decisions like that of the UK – and France , Germany , and Italy – show that they are not alone .
