China ’ s Construction Fetish
NEW HAVEN – As we digest the implications of China ’ s $ 586 billion stimulus plan , it is intriguing to ponder why China chooses infrastructure , buildings , and big projects every time growth needs a boost .
Should , or can , China achieve long-term growth only by adding physical structures ?
If and when the time comes to pause or change course , will China ’ s existing political-economic institutions accommodate such a transformation ?
During a recent trip to Brazil , my taxi driver complained about Sao Paulo ’ s bumpy streets and highways .
I responded , “ I thought the high oil and iron ore prices had made Brazil boom … .Why hasn ’ t Brazil spent more on its infrastructure ? ”
He replied , “ The Brazilian economy has been doing well .
But , whenever the government has extra money , President Lula likes to give tax rebates and subsidies to people , instead of using it on the roads .
Why ? ”
“ Well , ” I said , “ Brazil is a democracy .
Imagine you were Lula and had $ 18 billion at your disposal .
Would you rather spend it on highways , or give each Brazilian $ 100 ? ”
“ Yes , give it to the people , just to win more votes . ”
In China , the government is not elected , so winning more votes is not part of the calculation , and returning money to the people is never the choice .
The government doesn ’ t just spend it , but seems always to favor tangible things like skyscrapers , fancy government buildings , highways , and big industrial projects .
This partly explains not only why democracies such as India and Brazil lag behind China in infrastructure , but also why China is focusing its new stimulus package on transport systems ( railroad projects alone will receive more than half of the $ 586 billion stimulus ) .
In a non-democracy , officials are held accountable to their superiors , not to voters .
And for one ’ s superiors , tangible projects are the easiest to recognize .
Indeed , while China ’ s new stimulus plan overwhelmingly emphasizes infrastructure , it gives short shrift to social programs , such as health care and education , even though they can reduce household saving pressure and increase private consumption .
This type of spending structure is nothing new to China .
In 2007 , government expenditure on health care , social security , and unemployment welfare programs totaled about $ 88 billion , or 15 % of the fiscal budget and 2.4 % of GDP ( far below the typical percentage in both developed and developing democracies ) .
Brazil ’ s government spends 4.7 % of GDP on health care alone .
China ’ s government expenditure on education is approximately 3 % of GDP , compared to 5.4 % in Brazil .
Due to the lack of public oversight on government budgeting , China ’ s political system is especially biased to favor big physical projects , and , through taxation and state ownership , the government maintains almost full control over much national income and wealth , maximizing the impact of this bias .
The wonderful Olympics sites in Beijing were no accident , but rather a result of the system .
Taxation power is hardly checked by the National People ’ s Congress or the media .
As a result , from 1995 to 2007 , inflation-adjusted government fiscal revenue increased 5.7 times .
In contrast , over the same period , the cumulative increase was 1.6 times for urban residents ’ per capita disposable income and 1.2 times for rural peasants ’ per capita income .
So , China ’ s “ socialism with Chinese characteristics ” is an economy where an increasing share of national income goes to the state .
Despite privatization , there are roughly 119,000 state-owned enterprises today , with a book value of about $ 4 trillion .
State-owned land is valued at more than $ 7 trillion .
Combined , these state-owned assets total almost three-quarters of China ’ s national productive wealth .
With the state owning so much , most of the gains in asset values experienced over the past 30 years have gone into the government ’ s coffers .
When most households own no productive assets , they cannot share any of the asset appreciation or property income .
For most citizens , wages are the only source of income .
But wages have grown at a far slower pace than GDP .
No wonder domestic consumption cannot grow in a manner commensurate with GDP .
Transforming China from an export-driven economy to one that relies on domestic consumption requires two fundamental reforms .
First , ownership rights to the remaining state assets should be distributed equally to China ’ s 1.3 billion citizens .
This can be done by putting these assets into national wealth funds and distributing the funds ’ shares to citizens at no cost .
Second , the government budgeting process must be opened up through both public hearings in the national legislature and public participation via the media .
Such increased accountability will shift government spending toward programs related to people ’ s needs and away from physical structures .
Without such structural reforms or returning fiscal surpluses to families through tax cuts and rebates , government investment-based stimulus efforts can provide , at best , a short-term economic boost .
They cannot transform China ’ s export- and investment-oriented political-economic system .
Indeed , even after the new stimulus package , China will still depend on investment and export for growth .
For 30 years , concentrating resources in the government ’ s hands through state ownership and taxes has served China well .
It provided a basis for China ’ s nation-building policy of “ Concentrate Resources and Do Big Things . ”
Today , however , China has decent infrastructure , impressive buildings , and an excessive industrial base .
What is missing is sufficient private consumption to power endogenous growth .
To correct this , China needs to boost its people ’ s sense of future financial security and affect a rise in private income commensurate with GDP growth .
Building a nation demands more than steel and concrete .
