China ’ s Triumph of the Will
MOSCOW – When the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympic Games begins in a few days , viewers will be presented with a minutely choreographed spectacle swathed in nationalist kitsch .
Of course , images that recall Hitler ’ s goose-stepping storm troopers are the last thing that China ’ s leaders have in mind for their Olympics ; after all , official Chinese nationalism proclaims the country ’ s “ peaceful rise ” within an idyll of “ harmonious development . ”
But , both aesthetically and politically , the parallel is hardly far-fetched .
Indeed , by choosing Albert Speer Jr . , the son of Hitler ’ s favorite architect and the designer of the 1936 Berlin Olympics , to design the master plan for the Beijing Games , China ’ s government has itself alluded to the radical politicization of aesthetics that was a hallmark of twentieth-century totalitarianism .
Like those regimes , whether fascist or communist , China ’ s leaders have sought to transform public space and sporting events into visible proof of their fitness and mandate to rule .
Speer Jr . ’ s commission was to lay out a master plan for the access to the Olympic complex in Beijing .
His design centered on the construction of an imposing avenue to connect the Forbidden City and the National Stadium in which the opening ceremony will take place .
His father ’ s plan for “ Germania , ” the name Hitler selected for the Berlin that he planned to construct after World War II , also relied on such a mighty central axis .
China ’ s rulers see the Olympics as a stage for demonstrating to the world the exceptional vitality of the country they have built over the past three decades .
And that demonstration serves an even more important domestic political objective : further legitimizing the regime ’ s continuing rule in the eyes of ordinary Chinese .
Given this imperative , an architectural language of bombast and gigantism was almost inevitable .
So it is no surprise that the Beijing Games may resemble the hubristic Games that beguiled the Führer and enthralled the German masses in 1936 .
Like the Beijing Games , the Berlin Olympics were conceived as a coming-out party .
Josef Goebbels ’ Nazi propaganda machine was fully deployed .
Athletic imagery – used to brilliant effect in Leni Riefenstahl ’ s acclaimed documentary – appeared to create a link between the Nazis and the ancient Greeks , and to confirm the Nazi myth that Germans and German civilization were the true heirs to the “ Aryan ” culture of classical antiquity .
While designing the master plan for the Beijing Games , Speer Jr . , an acclaimed architect and town planner , also sought , like his father , to create a futuristic global metropolis .
Of course , the language that he used to sell his scheme to the Chinese was very different from the words his father used to present his plans to Hitler .
Instead of emphasizing his design ’ s pomposity , the younger Speer insisted on its environmental friendliness .
The 2,000-year-old city of Beijing should be transported into hyper-modernity , whereas his father ’ s 1936 Berlin design was , in his words , “ simply megalomania . ”
Of course , the sins of the father should never be visited on the son .
But , in this case , when the son borrows essential elements of his father ’ s architectural principles and serves a regime that seeks to use the Games for some of the same reasons that animated Hitler , is he not willingly reflecting those sins ?
Totalitarian regimes – the Nazis , the Soviets in 1980 , and now the Chinese – desire to host the Olympics as a way to signal to the world their superiority .
China believes that it has found its own model to develop and modernize , and its rulers regard the Games in the same way as the Nazis and Leonid Brezhnev did , as a means of “ selling ” their model to a global audience .
Obviously , the Chinese were politically tone-deaf in choosing an architect whose name carried such dark historical connotations .
The name of Speer itself probably did not matter to the officials who chose him .
They sought to stage an Olympics that made manifest their image of themselves , and Speer Jr . , looking back to his father ’ s mastery of the architecture of power , delivered the goods .
The realization of Speer Jr . ’ s Olympic vision , and that of his patrons , marks the end of a welcome interlude .
For years following the end of the Cold War , politics had been removed from the Games .
A gold medal signified the sporting abilities and dedication of individual athletes , not the supposed merits of the political system that produced them .
But now we have returned to an aesthetic of political mesmerization , reflected in the host government ’ s declared aim that China should win more gold medals than any country before .
As the Olympic torch relay – itself a creation of the Nazis , first employed in the Berlin Games – makes its way down Speer Jr . ’ s avenue of power , the world will once again be made to witness a triumph of the totalitarian will .
