Childhood Lost
The cries of working children can be heard the world over .
The International Labor Organization ( ILO ) estimates that 90 million children between eight and fifteen years old work in the labor forces of developing countries ; worldwide the figure is higher .
They often labor under hazardous conditions , handling poisonous chemicals , inhaling noxious fumes , and hauling excessive weights .
They are usually overworked , underfed , and underpaid--if they are paid at all .
Though many countries have enacted laws forbidding the use--and abuse--of children in the work force , optimism about the conditions faced by working children is unwarranted .
That conclusion stems from an inescapable fact : the families of most working children depend on their labors to survive .
Because child labor means cheap labor , the young are often the most employable in developing and recession-plagued economies .
The director of a medium-size textile enterprise in Bangladesh admits without hesitation that 70 % of his employees are between the ages of 13 and 17 .
" They provide the same productivity as adults , " he says , " but for a fraction of the cost . "
Children , of course , are unlikely to organize or complain to authorities when they are overworked and underpaid . They are not aware of their legal rights .
It verges on slavery when children are locked up without proper lighting , food , and healthcare .
But they don 't question long hours and dire working conditions . Instead , most are grateful to be working at all .
In Asia and the Pacific , children routinely work endless hours , sleep on factory floors and subsist on scanty rations .
Young Indian factory workers who fail to follow instructions are sometimes regret branded with red-hot iron rods , and some teenage Thai prostitutes are disciplined by having acid thrown in their faces .
For thousands of South American , Caribbean , and African children rented out as maids and houseboys , there is no recourse when they are overworked , beaten , and raped .
As an official of Kenya 's Child Welfare Society concedes , " There is little we can do to help when a child is ill-treated unless the case becomes known to us or to the police . "
Even when an employer is reasonable , working conditions may still prove dangerous .
Children in Central America harvest crops sprayed with pesticides .
Colombian children squeeze through the narrowest shafts of coalmines .
Thai children toil in unventilated factories , working with glass heated to 1,500 degrees Celsius .
Indian children inhale large doses of sulphur and potassium chlorate to fashion flammable powder into matches . Youthful glassmakers in Brazil breathe toxic silicone and arsenic fumes .
Sometimes the physical damage from such labors is permanent .
Brazilian , Colombian , and Egyptian youngsters who work in brickyards often suffer irreparable spinal damage from carrying heavy loads .
More generally , children who spend long hours in factories all over the world often enter their teens with permanently deformed limbs .
If they live that long .
Thousands of children don 't .
In India safety conditions are so neglected in many factories that numerous children have died in electrical fires and chemical explosions .
Laws exist to protect children from hazardous conditions in many occupations , but they are seldom enforced .
The agricultural sector--the largest employer of children in both developing and industrialized countries--is particularly difficult to oversee .
There is little that officials can do to monitor or modify the children 's workloads on large farms or small family enterprises .
In fact , parents often appear to be the harshest taskmasters .
Indian fathers still sometimes repay debts by committing their children to bonded labor .
Pakistani parents occasionally maim their children to make them beguiling beggars .
Sadly , families are often the last to protest exploitation of their children .
The ILO contends that children suffer greatly when they are forced to perform as " small adults . "
" The child 's creativeness and ability to transcend reality are blunted , " states one ILO report , " and his whole mental world is impoverished . " The young worker does not learn how to play , or how to read and write ; worse , he smokes and , in the Caribbean , he drinks cane rum to keep going , as he doesn 't have enough to eat .
In 1973 , an ILO convention called for a worldwide minimum working age of 15 . In ten years , only 27 of the ILO 's 150 member nations ratified that convention .
Several more countries have laws that set the minimum work age between 12 and 16 , but the ILO cautions that few countries " have what could be considered a comprehensive prohibition of dangerous work for young children , " and that even fewer have " measures to protect young persons from moral degradation . "
Since laws are not the answer to child labor , many experts propose compulsory education as a means to curb it .
But education laws have proved elusive too .
In practically all impoverished societies , parents place wages above education .
As a result , the percentage of dropouts is rising at an alarming rate .
A recent study by UNESCO shows that in developing countries up to 60 % of children do not complete primary school .
Relief agencies agree that the total abolition of child labor is an unrealistic goal . So , for millions of such children , the future holds little promise or hope .
Working children are entitled to something better , regardless of whether they know it .
