China \ u0027s Silent Rural Revolution
When China 's National People 's Congress ( NPC ) concluded its annual meeting recently , it voted to enshrine protection of human rights and private property in the constitution .
But other major changes in China 's development strategies that appear to be taking place have attracted far less notice .
China 's current leadership , one year after coming to power , has criticized " the single-minded pursuit of GDP growth " over the past decade and unveiled a new approach to modernization characterized as " balanced , human-centered , and environmentally friendly . "
The change in priorities - and outsiders ' tendency to overlook it - is not difficult to understand .
The world is fascinated by China 's economic miracle , but it is much less interested in the costs associated with the country 's 8-9 % annual growth rate in the past 25 years .
For instance , the energy consumption of every unit of Chinese industrial output is close to three times the global average .
In may places , the environment has been devastated almost beyond recovery .
Similarly , a recent Chinese bestseller , A Survey of Chinese Peasants , reveals the tremendous human costs of China 's modernization drive .
The book caught the attention of both the elites and the mass public with its heart-breaking stories of the suffering endured by 900 million farmers and its bold criticism of the government 's rural policies .
Beyond the glamorous skyscrapers of Beijing , Shanghai , and other urban centers , the majority of Chinese who live in the countryside have gained little from the material progress of the past two decades .
On the contrary , the initial benefits that peasants gained from the rural reforms of the late 1970 's and early 1980 's have disappeared ; real income among farmers has dropped in recent years as their production costs rise and agricultural prices decline .
In most parts of China , farming can no longer sustain a respectable standard of living .
Most worrying is the ever-growing tax burden placed on the rural population .
While average agricultural income grew by 90 % in the 1994-97 period , the rural tax burden jumped by 800 % .
More than 300 taxes and fees have been imposed on peasants by all levels of government .
For example , some townships demand 14 kinds of fees to register a marriage .
Today , a farmer 's annual income is only one-sixth that of an urban dweller 's , but he has to pay three times more in taxes .
This comes in addition to many other financial burdens exacted at the local level .
Indeed , 25 years of reforms have changed nothing of China 's " one country with two systems " - a model that segregates China 's urban centers from its agricultural areas , with development of the former realized at the expense of the latter .
If we use what is called the " Gini coefficient " to measure this income gap , with " 0 " indicating perfect equality of income distribution and " 1 " meaning perfect inequality , the number for China is 0.454 in 2002 .
This is an internationally recognized level of " absolute disparity . "
India , long known for gross disparities between rich and poor , has a Gini coefficient that has hovered around 0.30 to 0.32 over the past five decades .
So today 's China is a much less equitable society than India .
A recent study by the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences concluded that China 's urban-rural income gap is the worst on earth , maybe only slightly better than Zimbabwe .
The irony here is that China is widely hailed as a success story , while Zimbabwe is generally viewed as a failed state .
Such an unfair distribution of wealth based on economic exploitation , social injustice and political exclusion has caused silent but persistent resistance by Chinese peasants .
They protest , they petition , and they participate in local riots when all other means are exhausted .
Yet little changes .
As a result , the " peasant question " is now threatening social stability and is potentially explosive in a way reminiscent of when Mao organized his revolution around peasant disaffection with the rural policies of the Nationalist government of Chiang Kai-shek .
In response , Premier Wen Jiabao announced a series of measures during the NPC , ranging from phasing out agricultural taxes over the next five years to measures aimed at increasing farmers ' income .
But while official attention to rural poverty is music to the ears of the poor , experience shows that such promises are usually inadequate .
Wen 's predecessor , Zhu Ronji , also said that his " biggest headache " was how to reduce the rural tax burden and increase peasant income .
Yet the situation only worsened .
China 's government must acknowledge that deep income inequality and rural poverty is no longer exclusively an economic problem , but threatens social peace and political stability .
Comprehensive reform is the only way out .
Unless China commits to greater political openness , allowing the poor and disadvantaged to voice their concerns , represent themselves , and monitor policy implementation , it will continue to be jeopardized by a false and perilous prosperity .
