China \ u0027s Asia Strategy
For over a decade , American strategic thinking has focused on China 's emergence as a great power in East Asia .
Such thinking is passé . China already is East Asia 's great power .
While America has struggled in Iraq this year , China has spent it on a diplomatic goodwill offensive in Asia .
The result ? In October , one day after President George W. Bush was booed in Australia 's parliament , Chinese President Hu Jintao received a standing ovation from the same parliamentarians .
China 's emergence as Asia 's dominant power , and the overall regional balance of power , are now matters that governments across the Pacific must reckon with carefully .
To be sure , the US remains Asia 's power broker , as it has been since the end of WWII .
But diplomacy regarding the Korean peninsula , in which all roads lead to Beijing , has opened the door to China as the new " go-to " guy .
Indeed , the six-party meetings in Beijing earlier this year to discuss North Korea 's nuclear challenge confirmed China 's emerging great power status , which is also reflected in its increasingly active--and effective--Asian diplomacy .
This includes even Japan , China 's traditional rival .
This past May , Chinese President Hu Jintao met with Japan 's Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi in St. Petersburg , Russia .
Hu 's move lifted bilateral relations out of the deep freeze , where China 's previous leadership had consigned them following Koizumi 's repeated visits to the Yasukuni Shrine , where the spirits of Japan 's war dead , including Class A war criminals , are enshrined .
Unlike former Chinese president Jiang Zemin , whose history lectures irritated Japan 's postwar generations , Hu focused on the future , avoiding the dreaded " Y " word in the meeting with Koizumi . The Japanese media took note .
In August , Japan 's Chief Cabinet Secretary , Yasuo Fukuda , attended ceremonies in Beijing marking the 25th anniversary of the China-Japan Friendship Treaty .
At the same time , China 's Foreign Minister , Li Zhaoxing , traveled to Tokyo .
In September , Japan 's Defense Minister visited China , resuming high-level defense contacts .
If all goes well , a Koizumi visit to China may be in the offing .
Koizumi has long sought an official visit , only to be stymied by Chinese opposition to his Yasukuni visits .
His interest is understandable .
Last year , Japan 's imports from China surpassed those from the US for the first time , while annual exports to China soared by 39.3 % .
Even as the SARS epidemic raged in China , Japanese companies kept their long-term investment bets on the promise of low-cost Chinese labor .
China has been equally active to its south and west .
In June , during the ASEAN Summit in Phnom Penh , China announced that it will sign the 1976 Treaty of Amity and Cooperation , ASEAN 's founding document .
China 's accession to ASEAN represents a major confidence-building step toward Southeast Asia .
It follows China 's 2001 proposal for a China-ASEAN free trade area and its active financial support for Thailand and Indonesia during the 1997-98 Asian Financial Crisis .
Talk of a " strategic partnership " is in the air .
Meanwhile in South Asia , after hosting Indian Prime Minister Vajpayee in Beijing , China and India signed a Declaration on Principles for Relations and Comprehensive Cooperation .
India acknowledges in the document that Tibet is part of China and proscribes anti-Chinese activities by Tibetans from Indian soil .
In November , the first ever India-China joint naval exercises were held off the Chinese coast .
If the US is looking to develop a post-Cold War strategic relationship with India to counter Chinese influence in South and Southeast Asia , the recent China-India agreements suggests that an alternative strategic calculus may exist in both China and India .
The US must recognize that , while the countries of the region look to the US to balance--or at least leaven--China 's growing influence , they are unlikely to be interested in getting caught up in any containment strategy .
For now , US and Chinese interests coincide on the war on terrorism , on a peaceful resolution of the nuclear question on the Korean peninsula , and on stability in East Asia .
Over the long-term , however , accommodation will be difficult on issues like Taiwan , Korean reunification , and the future of the US alliance structure in Asia .
Moreover , on the fundamental issue of freedom-- " the non-negotiable demand of human dignity , " in the words of the Bush administration 's National Security Strategy--American and Chinese visions conflict .
Clearly , the war on terrorism presented China with opportunities to strengthen both its relations with the US and its ties with nations across the Pacific .
The big question is whether today 's cooperation between China and the US will prove to be no more than a diversion from Asia 's enduring strategic reality--China 's emergence as the region 's dominant power .
The safest bet is that Asia 's realities outlast the war on terrorism , and that after Afghanistan and Iraq , when the US refocuses on Asia , it will find a very different China in a much-changed region .
