A French Presidential Primer
The late British Prime Minister Harold Wilson used to quip that “ a week is a long time in politics . ”
So , in the 30 or so weeks between now and the next French presidential election , any prediction made today could be reversed , and reversed again , before the vote .
But two candidates have emerged as clear and constant favorites in opinion polls : Nicolas Sarkozy on the right and Ségolène Royal on the left .
In fact , they have more in common than meets the eye , for each speaks of a rupture with the past while incarnating a form of continuity .
For Sarkozy , “ rupture ” reflects both mundanely tactical and deeply personal choices .
The 12 years of Jacques Chirac ‘ s presidency , together with France ’ s tradition of alternation in power , suggests a victory for the left .
Positioning himself as the candidate who represents a sharp break with today ’ s unpopular politics is the only means to escape that fate .
This is reflected in Sarkozy ’ s openly pro-American stance – an act of political courage in a France where anti-Americanism is running high .
Sarkozy ’ s message is that Chirac and Villepin were right in substance to oppose America ’ s military adventure in Iraq , but that their style was disastrously wrong .
Thus , his deep admiration for “ American values , ” while sincere , implies no embrace of President George W. Bush .
It also reassures the French business community , which was shocked by Dominique de Villepin ’ s flamboyant opposition to the United States when he was Chirac ’ s foreign minister .
At home , Sarkozy has aimed his message particularly at the young , issuing a patriotic call to the values of work and discipline , a counter-revolutionary revolution .
The revolution that must be overcome is that of May 1968 , whose leaders and supporters , according to Sarkozy , may have lost politically to de Gaulle , but deeply weakened France over the succeeding decades with their emphasis on “ false values . ”
By contrast , rebelling against one ’ s parents ’ generation and rediscovering traditional moral stances will save France – a message that is highly applicable to issues , such as education and immigration , that may dominate the electoral campaign .
In the case of Royal , the meaning of “ rupture ” is both more obvious and more visible .
She is seeking to become the first woman President of the French Republic .
To achieve her goal , she prefers to emphasize her “ essence , ” thereby countering Sarkozy ’ s stress on his record as a “ doer . ”
Her appeal to voters is simple : “ I am a woman , and you have never tried a woman , so be modern and try one now . ”
Hiding behind the originality ( in French presidential politics ) of her gender , Royal has avoided specifying a detailed program .
When challenged by inquisitive journalists demanding greater precision about her policy agenda , her highly effective line of defense ( so far ! ) has been : “ You would not dare to ask me such a question if I were not a woman ! ”
Thus , Royal ’ s program is her popularity .
In foreign policy , one can only guess what her priorities would be .
As far as Europe is concerned , she seems as “ agnostic ” as Sarkozy , who , like her , incarnates a new generation of “ post-European ” leaders .
In terms of values , Royal , too , seems to represent a rupture with May 1968 , with her emphasis on discipline and family .
According to public opinion polls , Royal is the clear favorite of the left and the only candidate able to defeat Sarkozy .
Her support is particularly strong among women voters .
For the Socialist Party , which is eager to return to power but has not yet recovered from the humiliating defeat of Lionel Jospin in the first round of the presidential election in 2002 , the question is whether it can afford to resist the wave of favorable public opinion behind Royal .
In the opinion of Royal ’ s many opponents among Socialist leaders and militants , the dominance of the media in the political process is leading to mediocrity : the qualities required to be elected are becoming nearly incompatible with those needed to govern .
According to Royal ’ s Socialist critics , the “ Hollywoodization ” of politics from which she benefits entails a new approach in which leaders follow and followers lead .
But the same criticism can be directed at Sarkozy .
Moreover , both candidates embody continuity – with Chirac ’ s Gaullist side for Sarkozy and with François Mitterrand for Royal – as much as rupture .
Royal openly claims Mitterand ’ s legacy as she searches for legitimacy , while Sarkozy ’ s rejection of Chirac ’ s legacy has more to do with form than substance .
To a large extent , Sarkozy can be seen as Chirac with more , whereas Royal is clearly Mitterrand with less .
When the voters decide in the spring of 2007 , their choice may depend more on negative than positive considerations , as it did in 2002 , when Chirac faced the odious nationalist Jean-Marie Le Pen in the second round .
As in 2002 , the winner next year will be whomever the electorate dislikes or fears less .
But one way or the other , personalities will prevail over programs .
