A Chinese Dinner for Two
LONDON – A great deal of water has flowed through the Taiwan Strait in the 70 years since the leader of China ’ s Communists , Mao Zedong , met the leader of his nationalist opponents , Chiang Kai-shek .
So the recent meeting in Singapore between their heirs , President Xi Jinping of the People ’ s Republic and his Taiwanese counterpart , Ma Ying-jeou , could legitimately be described as historic .
The diplomatic negotiation that preceded the meeting was exquisitely complex , even covering who should pay for dinner ( they split the bill ) .
But , after a brief exchange of views behind closed doors , no joint statement was issued and only a heavily sanitized account of the meeting was made available to China ’ s state media .
So why did the meeting happen , and what does it portend ?
Ever since Mao ’ s Communists won the civil war ( which the last meeting between the parties , in 1945 , had been called to try to avert ) and Chiang Kai-shek ’ s Kuomintang forces withdrew to Taiwan , relations between the two sides have smoldered without ever really catching fire .
While there was no love lost between the United States and the Kuomintang leadership , the US gave Taiwan assurances of military protection , which deterred China from trying to unify the island with the mainland by force .
Mao ’ s adventures on the Korean peninsula , supporting the North against the South and its Western allies , helped to cement the Washington-Taipei axis , which , thanks to some nifty diplomatic footwork , survived President Richard Nixon ’ s rapprochement with China in the early 1970s .
America recognized the communists in Beijing as China ’ s legitimate government , while helping to sustain Taiwan in a limbo between sovereignty and the practical exercise of statehood .
The island ran its own affairs , becoming a rambunctious democracy in the 1980s , but never insisted on international recognition as a full-fledged sovereign state .
For China ’ s rulers , Taiwan was a “ renegade province , ” and it steadily picked off members of the international community who tried to treat it as anything more than this .
But there has also been a recognition of reality – especially economic reality – along the way .
People remember 1989 for the Tiananmen Square killings .
But that May and June , ministers like me flew to Beijing for what seemed to us all to be a positive and truly historic occasion .
China allowed Taiwan to attend the Asian Development Bank ’ s annual board meeting for the first time , provided it was called “ Taipei , China . ”
Some years later , when I was a European Union commissioner , after we had negotiated World Trade Organization membership with both the People ’ s Republic and Taiwan , we wanted to set up an EU office in Taipei to monitor the island ’ s compliance with the WTO ’ s rules .
Before doing so , I made a point of telling the Chinese government what we were doing – opening a commercial regulator , not an embassy .
Money of course talks for both China and Taiwan , and their economies are now closely linked , with large numbers of Taiwanese living and working in China ( especially in the Shanghai area ) and huge Taiwanese investments in Chinese manufacturing .
Taiwan ’ s Foxconn , the world ’ s largest electronics manufacturer ( including Blackberries , iPhones , and Kindles ) , has 12 factories in China , including one in Shenzhen that employs hundreds of thousands of workers .
But , though Taiwanese politics is naturally dominated by the island ’ s relationship with the mainland , the reality of deep commercial ties between China and Taiwan has had no diplomatic equivalent .
The Kuomintang ( also called the Chinese Nationalist Party ) wants to improve relations without surrendering Taiwan ’ s independence .
Its opponent , the Democratic Progressive Party , wants to strike a more autonomous posture , though whether it would ever really go for anything more substantial than tweaking China ’ s nose is doubtful .
A survey three years ago suggested that 80 % of Taiwan ’ s 25 million people would support a formal declaration of independence , provided that it did not prompt a Chinese invasion .
That is a rather large caveat .
China regularly warns Taiwan against any such reckless action , and the US puts the squeeze on the island ’ s leaders whenever they seem to be getting too uppity with the mainland .
There appear to be two reasons why Xi and Ma met .
First , they are clearly worried that the Kuomintang , which lost last year ’ s local elections in a landslide , will lose the general election in January as well .
Both hope that showing that China and Taiwan can get along without too much trouble will bring electoral benefits for the Nationalists .
In addition , at a time when the Chinese economy is slowing and regional tensions are rising because of China ’ s muscle flexing in the South and East China Seas , Xi seems eager to radiate peace-loving ambitions .
Having unsettled many of his neighbors , not just the Americans , his upcoming visit to Vietnam , and his prime minister Li Keqiang ’ s visit to South Korea , are of a piece with his dinner-hour diplomacy with Ma .
China ’ s real , long-term intentions are not entirely obvious , and maybe that ’ s part of its strategy : ambiguous signals play an important role in diplomacy .
But two things are clear .
First , Xi ’ s initiative shows the extent to which he dominates Chinese politics .
A weaker leader could not have taken such an ambitious step , which represents a real break with past Communist orthodoxy .
Second , peaceful reunification of the mainland and Taiwan remains unlikely , unless it takes place – as China continues to promise – on the basis of “ one country , two systems . ”
But the Taiwanese cannot be very reassured by what they see happening today in Hong Kong , which was promised the same thing before its return to China in 1997 .
Taiwan ’ s system is democratic ; China ’ s is not .
What the example of Hong Kong suggests is that China would have to force Taiwan to give up democracy and the rule of law – or embrace both itself – before it could welcome its “ renegade province ” back into the fold .
