Conservatives for Obama
SAN FRANCISCO & # 45 ; & # 45 ; John McCain , the likely Republican presidential nominee for president , likes to say that he was a “ foot soldier ” in the Reagan Revolution .
So was I , working out of the Hoover Institution at Stanford University .
But , unlike McCain , a good man and a true American hero , I don ’ t intend to vote Republican this November .
I am voting for Barack Obama .
Meritocracy is at the core of American conservative beliefs .
So let ’ s face it : George W. Bush has been the worst US president in memory .
His administration has been inept , corrupt , and without accomplishment .
After this performance , why give the Republicans another turn at the helm ?
Let ’ s give the other party a chance , even if its policies are not exactly what conservatives may like .
In America , we call it “ throwing the bums out . ”
When meritocracy is downgraded , as it has been during the Bush years , bad things happen .
Worst of all , racism has flourished , because productivity and social utility have become less effective in protecting targets of discrimination .
Nowhere is this better illustrated than in America ’ s current debate over illegal immigration .
It is not so much the illegality of their entrance into the US that riles many conservative Republicans ; it ’ s the migrants themselves , especially Hispanics who can ’ t speak English .
Never mind that Hispanic migrants are among the hardest-working people in the US .
It is a bitter irony that John McCain , the war hero , is considered a traitor by the conservative wing of his party because he has a compassionate attitude towards undocumented immigrants .
Sadly , the Republican Party has been hijacked during the Bush years by sloganeers using code phrases like “ illegal immigration ” and “ protecting the middle class ” to mask their racism , and “ economic incentive effects ” to justify tax policies that are blatantly tilted to the rich .
Responding to this politics of hate , Obama likes to call himself a “ hope monger , ” not a “ hate monger . ”
It ’ s a great line and it applies .
Hope always sells well in America .
Reagan understood that , and it is one of the reasons he was a great and beloved president , even if some of his policies were flawed .
As Hillary Clinton , Obama ’ s rapidly fading rival for the Democratic nomination is finding out to her dismay , policies can be an overrated commodity in presidential elections that really matter .
The hope that Obama is holding out for Americans is one of reconciliation – racial , political , between the wealthy and the poor , and between America and its allies .
This is powerful stuff , and dwarfs the narrow technocratic instincts of Mrs. Clinton , whose schoolgirl approach to the campaign has justly earned her defeat after defeat in the primaries .
Just as Reagan had his “ Reagan Democrats ” who were attracted by his message of hope after the malaise of the Jimmy Carter years , Obama will have his “ Obama Republicans , ” attracted by the hope of national reconciliation and healing .
Non-Americans must understand that there is yet another revolution brewing in the US , and that Senators Clinton and McCain are both likely to be swept away by it .
When conservative Republicans support liberal Democrats ( Obama has been rated the most liberal member of the US Senate ) , “ the times they are a-changin ’ , ” as Bob Dylan wrote 45 years ago .
Moreover , a crucial difference today is that the generational conflict that so characterized the 1960 ’ s – “ Your sons and your daughters are beyond your command , ” as Dylan put it – is absent .
The young may be taking the lead – what Obama calls “ a revolution from the bottom up ” – but there is little opposition from today ’ s parents .
Indeed , I personally know a successful US hedge fund manager who is quite conservative and consistently votes Republican , but who is thinking of supporting Obama .
His daughter dates an African-American , and , to his credit , he believes in racial reconciliation .
True , an Obama victory would certainly increase his own taxes , but some things – for example , the promise of a multi-cultural America – are simply more important .
There appear to be many Republicans and independents who feel the same way .
Obama can lose these people , however , if he forgets that he is a reconciler , not a class warrior , and goes from tilting towards the poor to soaking the rich .
In any case , America ’ s allies should feel relieved by how the presidential election is shaping up .
America needs Obama , but McCain is a reasonable alternative .
He is no Bush , and conservative Republicans ’ hatred of him is his badge of honor .
He would stand up to the haters at home ( including those in his own party ) and to the terrorists abroad .
That ’ s a lot better than what we have today .
