From Beethoven to Beijing
LONDON – On July 1 , 17 years ago , I was sailing on Britain ’ s Royal Yacht away from Hong Kong where , at midnight the previous day , China assumed sovereignty under the terms of an international agreement with the United Kingdom ( tabled at the United Nations ) known as the Joint Declaration .
That agreement guaranteed Hong Kong ’ s way of life for 50 years under Deng Xiaoping ’ s slogan “ One country , two systems . ”
The rule of law and the freedoms associated with pluralism – due process and the freedom of speech , assembly , and worship – were to remain the bedrock of Hong Kong ’ s prosperity and stability .
Fast forward to this year .
On a date that meant so much to me personally as the colony ’ s last governor , and much more to the citizens of Hong Kong , I attended a magnificent production of Beethoven ’ s “ Fidelio ” on the grounds of a country house near Oxford .
Beethoven ’ s only opera , written in 1805 ( the year of Napoleon ’ s victory at Austerlitz ) and rewritten in 1814 ( when Napoleon abdicated ) , is one of the supreme cultural expressions of fundamental human values – freedom and opposition to tyranny – that resonate in every society .
“ Fidelio ’ s ” most dramatic moment comes when political prisoners are briefly released from their dungeons .
“ Oh Heaven !
Salvation !
Happiness , ” they sing .
“ Oh Freedom !
Will you be given us ? ”
As they sang of liberty , the setting sun ’ s rays dazzled the prisoners and the Oxfordshire audience .
Nature underlined the importance of the message .
Much of the history of the two centuries since Beethoven composed his opera has centered on that quest for freedom : the fight against colonial powers , the campaigns for basic human rights , the resistance to modern totalitarian and authoritarian regimes .
On the whole , liberty has triumphed .
But the struggle is not yet over ; it continues on every continent and takes many forms .
Consider the victims of torture from Central America to Côte d ’ Ivoire to Pakistan ; the legal harassment – not least of journalists – in Egypt ; the persecution of gays in Russia and Uganda ; human trafficking , prevalent even in developed countries ; and the abduction of young Christian women in northern Nigeria .
In many countries , political dissidents ( like the captives in “ Fidelio ” ) are locked up – or worse – in defiance of the clear and open procedures that should ensure the rule of law .
The extent to which concern for human rights should be a consideration in setting foreign policy is a contentious issue in most democracies , which often believe that their own record entitles them to lecture others .
Sometimes it does ; often it does not .
For example , the United States ’ own record , at Guantánamo Bay and elsewhere , has undermined American politicians ’ credibility on this subject .
There is also the question of consistency .
One cannot credibly thump the table about human rights in one country , but keep one ’ s opinions to oneself in another – an all-too-common occurrence when , say , a trade deal might suffer .
A lack of consistency has been one of the European Union ’ s sins in attempting to establish a value-based foreign policy .
The EU sought to build a partnership of economic and political cooperation in the Mediterranean region , for example , in which financial assistance and trade liberalization would be contractually linked to progress in advancing human rights and developing democratic institutions .
This sensible objective was sabotaged by the tendency to overlook what was actually happening in some countries .
Many suspect that some EU member states , while insisting on robust human-rights clauses in bilateral agreements with countries known to torture prisoners , secretly aided in the rendition of suspected terrorists to these same countries .
I have no doubt that it is in the national interest of democracies to promote freedom and human rights .
Though these values cannot be imposed by force or manufactured like instant coffee , the world is likely to be more peaceful , stable , and prosperous the more that countries treat their own citizens decently .
This is not a prescription for a soggy policy that denies the demands of the real world .
But reliance on realpolitik as the guiding light of foreign policy has a pretty shabby track record .
Realpolitik brought us the bombing of Cambodia and the mass killings under Pol Pot .
Moreover , “ realist ” assumptions often turn out to be remarkably implausible .
Trade deals often are not secured or sustained by political kowtows .
Countries buy what they need and sell what they can at the best price they can get , regardless of whether another country has or has not written a ministerial communiqué .
Rather , all relevant policies – from aid to political and security cooperation – should be related to strengthening the institutions and values to which one adheres .
All of this brings me back to July 1 of this year .
While I was listening to “ Fidelio , ” tens of thousands of Hong Kongers ( organizers say hundreds of thousands ) were demonstrating for liberty .
They want a fair and open system for electing their government , and to defend the freedom and rule of law that make Hong Kong so special and successful , a genuinely liberal – in the classical sense – society .
Eventually , Hong Kong ’ s people will get what they want , despite China ’ s objections ; freedom invariably wins in the end .
But China ’ s rulers would take a giant step forward by recognizing that such aspirations are not a threat to the country ’ s wellbeing .
For now , however , China , a great country and a growing power , is handling its economic affairs with more sophistication and a surer touch than it is addressing its political challenges .
