Coming to Grips with Man-Made Climate Change
CAMBRIDGE : This month the United States Government issued a path-breaking report on the impact of long-term climate change on America 's society and environment .
We know that human activity is causing serious and complex changes in the global climate , mainly through the effects of burning fossil fuels like oil and gas , and the effects of deforestation .
These activities raise the level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere , which in turn has many effects : a rise in average temperature , a rise in the water level of the oceans , significant changes in the global patterns of rainfall , and an increase in " extreme weather events " such as hurricanes and droughts .
The new US study is the first systematic attempt to understand the long-term consequences of these climatic trends in a single country .
It is a project of such significance and scope that it should quickly be followed up by similar studies in other parts of the world .
The new report , " Climate Change Impacts on the United States " ( available on the website www.gcrio.org ) is a remarkable accomplishment , even though it is really only one step in a long-term effort to understand the interactions of climate , environment , and human society .
It was produced by a huge team of scientists working in different disciplines and different parts of the United States .
If there is one main lesson , it is that long-term climate change is for real , and is likely to have major impacts on US society .
If there is a second lesson , it is that those impacts are complex and varied , and depend very much on the characteristics of particular regions .
What is good for one part of the country , or indeed one part of the world , might be a disaster for another .
The report stresses that climate change will have several interacting elements .
The rise of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere B which is the main cause of the long-term climate change B might actually have some directly beneficial effects , since a higher concentration of carbon dioxide can stimulate the faster growth of some types of forests and some crops .
On the other hand , the effects on temperature , rainfall , ocean levels , flooding and droughts , and other climate patterns , will hurt some regions , while even helping some others .
Northern regions , for example , could enjoy a longer growing season for some crops , while more Southerly regions , which are already hot , might suffer from the adverse effects of rising temperatures .
A major novelty of the study is to analyze the impacts of climate change on several different regions of the US , and on several different sectors such as agriculture , health , water management , forestry , and coastal resources ( many of which will be submerged or damaged by rising ocean levels and the increased severity of storms ) .
There are strong hints of what might go right or wrong , but also clear warnings in the report that much more scientific work will be needed to get more accurate results .
For example , the report relies on two different mathematical models of the atmosphere .
These models point in similar directions about long-term trends , but they often give very different specific predictions .
Also , little is known about how fast our societies will be able to adjust to the future changes if we can see them coming .
The problem of climate change is undoubtedly one of the toughest global issues to address .
First , it is truly a global problem .
One country can 't protect itself by behaving well ( for example using energy efficiently ) if other countries are not taking similar actions .
Second , it is a very huge problem , since the climatic changes in the coming decades are likely to be quite sizeable .
Third , it is a very complicated problem .
The scientific understanding of long-term climate change is still very limited , and even when it is understood , the effects of climate on society are complicated .
And fourth , nations are likely to differ widely in their particular interests in this issue .
Some countries are major contributors to the problem ; others are major victims .
Victims and perpetrators might not be the same .
It is now vital for other countries to carry out " national assessments " of the effects of long-term climate change , following the example of the US study .
There is good scientific reason to believe that many tropical regions will experience vastly more damage from global warming than will temperate-zone countries like the US .
For example , the effects of global warming on Africa and India could be very severe , even though their economies have contributed very little to the overall problem ( since Africa and India use so little energy per person , they also contribute very little to the build up of atmospheric carbon dioxide ) .
Some regions - especially in the tropics - might be big losers in this process , even though they themselves have done little to cause the problems .
Ironically , it is the poorest countries that have the least resources to carry out the needed analyses .
Donor agencies such as the World Bank should therefore help to fund such studies .
Unless these studies are done , poor countries might find themselves continuing victims of worsening climatic shocks , such as severe hurricanes , droughts , and flooding , without realizing that the events are not accidental , but the result of long-term patterns of global energy use .
By understanding those linkages better , poor countries will have a much better idea of how to prepare for the likely climatic changes in the future , and how better to represent their own interests in the future negotiations over global responses to climate change .
This , in turn , should help us to reach more realistic and sound global responses to this tremendous challenge .
