A Climate Apollo Program
LONDON – In 1961 , when the United States was faced with the threat of falling behind the Soviet Union in the space race , President John F. Kennedy called for a program – eventually known as Project Apollo – to put a man on the moon before the end of the decade .
The program ’ s clearly articulated vision – and the resources and effort mustered in its service – ensured its success .
Just eight years after Kennedy ’ s announcement , astronaut Neil Armstrong pressed his footprint into the lunar dust .
As representatives from 196 countries prepare to gather in Paris at the end of the year to craft an agreement to tackle global warming , it is becoming clear that we need a similar project .
In early June , I joined David King , a former chief scientific adviser to the British government , former BP CEO John Browne , and several other co-authors in a call for a Global Apollo Program .
Until now , the diplomatic effort to prevent dangerous climate change has focused on coordinating national cuts in greenhouse-gas emissions .
But what is needed is more spending , not just more coordination .
The decade-long effort we propose would require the whole planet to work together to make a breakthrough in the fight against climate change .
It would seek to reduce the cost of electricity from sources that do not emit greenhouse gases below that of coal power by 2025 .
In order to achieve this , countries joining the program would pledge to devote at least 0.02 % of their GDP toward the effort .
David Attenborough , the British naturalist and broadcaster , has said of the proposal , “ at last , we have an authoritative , practical , and comprehensive plan that could avert the catastrophe that is threatening our planet . ”
Bjørn Lomborg , known for his skepticism toward traditional approaches to fighting climate change , has described this idea as “ a much smarter approach and more likely to actually succeed . ”
Indeed , the most frequently floated proposals leave much to be desired .
Many in Paris will argue in favor of putting a price on carbon , which most economists believe would channel consumption away from carbon-intensive fuels .
But there are doubts about whether such a policy would be political feasible .
John Watson , CEO of Chevron , recently rejected carbon pricing as unworkable .
“ It ’ s not a policy that is going to be effective , because customers want affordable energy , ” he said .
“ They want low energy prices , not high energy prices . ”
Similarly , national leaders in the developing world – where some three billion people do not have access to affordable energy – are under immense pressure to deliver standard-of-living improvements .
They are likely to shy from policies that raise the cost of energy .
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi , for example , has called for global public investment in clean energy .
“ We are more likely to succeed if we offer affordable solutions , not simply impose choices , ” he argues .
“ This requires access to more resources and better technology . ”
A Global Apollo Program would help the world reduce its CO2 emissions and cut its energy bills .
The price of solar energy is already plummeting : the National Bank of Abu Dhabi has noted that a large solar installation in Dubai could produce energy at a price that would be competitive with oil at $ 10 per barrel .
But there are significant obstacles to the widespread use of solar energy and other sources of renewable electricity , including a desperate need for cheaper , more efficient means of energy storage and transmission .
Currently , only 2 % of the world ’ s investment in research and development is allocated to clean energy ; at this rate , solutions to these problems are unlikely to be found anytime soon .
The Global Apollo Program would double these investments and coordinate the effort to bridge the technological gaps , bringing forward the day when we could eliminate coal and other carbon-intensive fuels .
Following the recent G-7 summit in Germany , the leaders of the world ’ s largest economies issued a pledge to “ work together and with other interested countries to raise the overall coordination and transparency of clean energy research , development , and demonstration , highlighting the importance of renewable energy and other low-carbon technologies . ”
But an initiative like the Global Apollo program will succeed only if the world ’ s emerging powers , such as China and India , throw their weight behind it .
They will have a chance to do so at the G-20 summit in Turkey in November .
The 2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris must produce an agreement to introduce a price on carbon worldwide .
But that approach will not work without a coordinated strategy to reduce the cost of carbon-free energy .
If countries sign up to the Global Apollo Program as part of the agreement in Paris , the meeting might just mark one giant leap for mankind in the fight against climate change .
