Colombia at Peace ?
BOGOTÁ – The Framework Agreement for the End of the Armed Conflict in Colombia that has just been announced by President Juan Manuel Santos is a historic landmark for his country and all of Latin America .
It is also a tribute to diplomatic resourcefulness and negotiating skill .
The agreement with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia , better known as the FARC , came after long years of failed attempts by Colombian governments of all political shades to reach an accommodation with the last , and among the most odious , guerrilla movement to have operated in Latin America .
Never before has the FARC – a monumental apparatus of terror , mass murder , and drug trafficking – agreed to discuss disarmament , its fighters ’ social and political reintegration , victims ’ rights , an end to drug production , and participation in “ truth and responsibility ” commissions to examine the crimes committed during a half-century of conflict .
But now it has .
This momentous shift reflects the decimation of the FARC following long years of struggle , the resilience of Colombian society , and , perhaps most important , Santos ’ s brilliant regional policy .
By weakening the so-called Bolivarian Axis ( Venezuela , Ecuador , and Bolivia ) , the FARC guerrillas were left without a supportive regional environment .
As with peace processes in the Middle East and Central America following the Cold War ’ s end , regional changes created the conditions for the start of the Colombian process .
But , in the Middle East and Central America , external actors – the United States and the Soviet Union – produced the change ; in the case of the Colombian process , the change came from within .
Prior to engaging the FARC in secret talks in Cuba , Santos ’ s regional diplomacy shifted the region ’ s politics from saber rattling to the hard work of cooperation .
He turned Venezuela and Ecuador , which had long been safe havens for the FARC , into friendly neighbors willing to bring an end to the archaic tradition of revolutionary wars .
In fact , in what is perhaps the most remarkable diplomatic turnaround , Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez has become a key facilitator in the resolution of the Colombian conflict .
The talks with the FARC evolved as regional détente was followed by an ambitious initiative to address the root causes of the Colombian conflict .
Most notably , Santos signed the Victims and Land Restitution Law in June 2011 , in the presence of United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon .
The law provides reparation for the victims of human-rights violations in the course of a 60-year conflict , as well as restitution of millions of hectares stolen from peasants .
The law thus puts Colombia on a path to peace by blunting the FARC ’ s appeal to land reform to justify its untold atrocities .
The law is undeniably complex , and by no means without shortcomings .
But , if implemented as planned , it could bring about a profound social revolution .
It also represents a novel approach to peace , given that such laws are normally introduced only after a conflict has ended .
In this case , returning land to dispossessed peasants and offering financial reparation to the victims and those who were displaced by the conflict became the way to peace .
Indeed , it was none other than Alfonso Cano , a former FARC leader , who called the law “ essential to a future of reconciliation ” and a “ contribution to a real solution to the conflict . ”
Skeptics and opponents of the negotiations do have a case , however .
The FARC ’ s record in previous peace talks reveals a penchant for manipulating negotiations to gain national and international legitimacy without actually being willing to strike a deal .
Santos could , therefore , have been tempted to choose the Sri Lanka way – a ruthless military onslaught to defeat the insurgents , at the price of major human-rights violations and the destruction of civilian communities .
Instead , Santos opted for the path of least expedience .
After all , war , in Colombia and elsewhere , frequently unites nations , while peace divides them .
The repercussions of a genuine end to the Colombian armed conflict would be felt far beyond the country ’ s borders .
If Chávez ’ s Venezuela has become a narco-state in which the regime ’ s acolytes are drug lords , this reflects their privileged relations with the FARC .
Repercussions would also be felt in Mexico , where drug cartels are tearing apart the country , and the US , the world ’ s largest source of demand .
West Africa , too , would be affected , having become in recent years the main transit point for South American drugs headed to Europe .
Formidable difficulties still lie ahead , and a final agreement is by no means certain .
But Santos nonetheless has a fair chance of burying , once and for all , the specious mystique of violent revolutionary change that has held back Latin America ’ s political and economic modernization for so long . & nbsp ;
