China Stuck in the Net
There is nothing " virtual " about the problems China 's communist rulers confront with the internet .
Although critical to China 's goals of modernization and globalization , the internet threatens the political status quo .
So no surprise at the government 's often schizophrenic response to it : while broadly encouraging the internet 's development , some party factions seek to suppress it by arresting IT entrepreneurs and web dissidents .
Nonetheless , China 's more than 35 million internet users - a number that doubles every nine months - have access to a wide variety of previously censored information , including sites that are officially banned .
Staggering changes have already occurred .
When , a little over a year ago , 42 elementary school children and teachers in impoverished Jiangxi ( south central China ) were killed in an explosion , China 's domestic newspapers and internet sites reported the explosion as the result of an appalling child-labor scheme : nine-year-old children had been forced to install detonators in firecrackers so that teachers could sell fireworks to supplement their salaries .
Two days later , Premier Zhu Rongji denied the reports .
He claimed that the explosion was the result of a " deranged man . "
Typical of China , state-owned media that carried the original story instantly retracted their reports to parrot the party line .
Atypical of China , however , the true story refused to die .
In internet forums and chat rooms , Chinese citizens continued to express their outrage about what they saw as a government cover up .
Evidence that party leaders were lying , including interviews with witnesses , was posted on the net .
Some websites deleted the information , others refused .
Links to obscure websites with uncensored news about the catastrophe could even be found on the government newspaper 's official website , People 's Daily .
A few days later , the breaking news from China was astonishing . " Responding to reports on the internet and elsewhere , Premier Zhu Rongji apologized for an explosion that gutted an elementary school in rural China , " read a report .
Zhu said that the government bore " unshirkable responsibility " for the imbroglio and ordered an investigation .
The turnaround was unprecedented .
Premier Zhu apologized primarily in response to the public outcry on the internet .
Though still in its infancy , the internet has shown that it has the power to shake China loose from its stagnant , isolated and repressive past .
Historically , information in China was controlled by the Communist Party , making popular opinion irrelevant .
Now the internet provides ordinary Chinese what they never had before : uncensored information . A voice .
So the Communist Party is trapped in the internet , because the government cannot pull the plug on it without hamstringing the economy .
Furthermore , China will probably need to ease up on the restrictions it has already imposed if it wants to gain all of the internet 's benefits ; that is , unless the conservative factions who feel most threatened by the internet consolidate their power in the upcoming leadership succession .
When I first visited China a few years ago , US President Clinton had just departed Beijing , where he charmed the Chinese people in an historic televised discussion with President Jiang Zemin .
Since the April 2001 US-China spy-plane crisis , when China demanded an apology and US President Bush refused to give one , the Bush administration has been alienating the Chinese .
The implications go beyond public relations .
The Communist Party is preparing to change its old-guard leadership over the next two years .
Hardliners who feel most threatened by the internet 's free flow of information were the people emboldened by the nationalistic waves of anti-American sentiment that swept China .
In the aftermath of the terrorist attack on America on September 11 , angry and vengeful messages appeared in some Chinese chat rooms .
" I 'm glad that the USA was attacked , " read one .
Why not atomic bombs , " read another .
Were these the xenophobic rants of extremist rightists or did they reflect a majority sentiment of the Chinese ?
In China , like the US , reactionary groups often congregate on line , but with one important difference .
In China , only the educated and relatively privileged can take part in online discussion .
Thus , they can 't all be written off as a purely lunatic fringe .
For the first time , as the explosion at Jaingxu school and the response to the attacks of September 11 th proved , China 's public can use the internet to both gain information and express views that may influence the government .
Now that popular opinion is emerging as a force in China , the Chinese people as well as its government will need to be wooed by those wishing to influence China .
The internet has provided ordinary Chinese with access to the real story as well as to a public voice , which means that they can be a powerful ally in efforts to effect change in the most populace nation on earth .
