China ’ s India Land Grab
NEW DELHI – Stoking tensions with Japan , Vietnam , and the Philippines over islands in the South and East China Seas has not prevented an increasingly assertive China from opening yet another front by staging a military incursion across the disputed , forbidding Himalayan frontier .
On the night of April 15 , a People ’ s Liberation Army ( PLA ) platoon stealthily intruded near the China-India-Pakistan tri-junction , established a camp 19 kilometers ( 12 miles ) inside Indian-controlled territory , and presented India ’ s government with the potential loss of a strategically vital 750-square-kilometer high-altitude plateau .
A stunned India , already reeling under a crippling domestic political crisis , has groped for an effective response to China ’ s land-grab – the largest and most strategic real estate China has seized since it began pursuing a more muscular policy toward its neighbors .
Whether China intends to stay put by building permanent structures for its troops on the plateau ’ s icy heights , or plans to withdraw after having extracted humiliating military concessions from India , remains an open – and in some ways a moot – question .
The fact is that , with its “ peaceful rise ” giving way to an increasingly sharp-elbowed approach to its neighbors , China has broadened its “ core interests ” – which brook no compromise – and territorial claims , while showing a growing readiness to take risks to achieve its goals .
For example , China has not only escalated its challenge to Japan ’ s decades-old control of the Senkaku ( Diaoyu ) Islands , but is also facing off against the Philippines since taking effective control of Scarborough Shoal last year .
What makes the Himalayan incursion a powerful symbol of China ’ s aggressive new stance in Asia is that its intruding troops have set up camp in an area that extends beyond the “ line of actual control ” ( LAC ) that China itself unilaterally drew when it defeated India in the 1962 Chinese-initiated border war .
While China ’ s navy and a part of its air force focus on supporting revanchist territorial and maritime claims in the South and East China Seas , its army has been active in the mountainous borderlands with India , trying to alter the LAC bit by bit .
One of the novel methods that the PLA has employed is to bring ethnic Han pastoralists to the valleys along the LAC and give them cover to range across it , in the process driving Indian herdsmen from their traditional pasturelands .
But the latest crisis was sparked by China ’ s use of direct military means in a strategic border area close to the Karakoram Pass linking China to India .
Because the LAC has not been mutually clarified – China reneged on a 2001 promise to exchange maps with India – China claims that PLA troops are merely camping on “ Chinese land . ”
Yet , in a replay of its old strategy of furtively encroaching on disputed land and then presenting itself as the conciliator , China now counsels “ patience ” and “ negotiations ” to help resolve the latest “ issue . ”
China is clearly seeking to exploit India ’ s political disarray to alter the reality on the ground .
A paralyzed and rudderless Indian government initially blacked out reporting on the incursion , lest it come under public pressure to mount a robust response .
Its first public statement came only after China issued a bland denial of the intrusion in response to Indian media reports quoting army sources .
To add to India ’ s woes , Salman Khurshid , the country ’ s bungling foreign minister , initially made light of the deepest Chinese incursion in more than a quarter-century .
The garrulous minister called the intrusion just “ one little spot ” of acne on the otherwise “ beautiful face ” of the bilateral relationship – a mere blemish that could be treated with “ an ointment . ”
Those inept comments fatally undercut the government ’ s summoning of the Chinese ambassador to demand a return to the status quo ante .
With Prime Minister Manmohan Singh ’ s corruption-tainted government tottering on the brink of collapse , there has been no official explanation of how India was caught napping in a militarily critical area where , in the recent past , China had made repeated attempts to encroach on Indian land .
In fact , the government inexplicably replaced regular army troops with border police in 2010 to patrol the mountain-ringed plateau into which the PLA has now intruded .
Known as Depsang , the plateau lies astride an ancient silk route connecting Yarkand in Xinjiang to India ’ s Ladakh region through the Karakoram Pass .
India , with a military staging post and airstrip just south of the Karakoram Pass , has the capacity to cut off the highway linking China with its “ all-weather ally , ” Pakistan .
The PLA intrusion , by threatening that Indian base , may have been intended to foreclose India ’ s ability to choke off supplies to Chinese troops and workers in Pakistan ’ s Gilgit-Baltistan region , where China has expanded its military footprint and strategic projects .
To guard those projects , several thousand Chinese troops reportedly have been deployed in the rebellious , predominantly Shia region , which is closed to the outside world .
For India , the Chinese incursion also threatens its access to the 6,300-meter-high Siachen Glacier , to the west of Depsang .
Pakistan claims the Indian-controlled glacier , which , strategically wedged between the Pakistani- and Chinese-held parts of Kashmir , served as the world ’ s highest and coldest battleground ( and one of the bloodiest ) from the mid-1980 ’ s until a cease-fire took effect in 2003 .
India ’ s nonmilitary options to force a Chinese withdrawal from Depsang range from diplomatic ( suspension of all official visits or reconsideration of its recognition of Tibet as part of China ) to economic ( an informal boycott of Chinese goods , just as China has hurt Japan through a nonofficial boycott of Japanese-made products ) .
A possible military response could involve the Indian army establishing a camp of its own on Chinese territory elsewhere that China ’ s leaders regard as highly strategic .
But , before it can exercise any option credibly , India needs a stable government .
Until then , China will continue to press its claims by whatever means – fair or foul – it deems advantageous .
