Chávez at Bay
SÃO PAULO – The recent opposition victories in Venezuela ’ s municipal and state elections , together with the international financial crisis , have begun to set limits on the powers of President Hugo Chávez for the first time in the decade he has been in power .
Indeed , the elections demonstrated that Chávez ’ s control of the country is no longer total .
There is now a solid opposition in Venezuela and less distance between those who rule and those who want to rule .
This is important progress , considering that the opposition is still paying a price for its boycott of the 2005 elections that gave Chávez absolute control of Parliament .
The growing strength and coherence of the opposition is not due to the number of disaffected Chávez supporters alone .
In fact , those who once hoped for the creation of a “ third pole ” in Venezuelan politics were pushed aside by the traditional polarization between Chávez ’ s supporters and opponents .
Instead , the opposition grew because of a return to its 1998 and 2001 levels of popular support – around 40 % – and because it was able to bring back into the fold some of the abstainers and undecided , including important popular factions .
The opposition is now represented mostly by professional democratic politicians who not only united a wide group of factions , but also displaced the “ Salvadores de la Patria ” ( the Nation ’ s Saviors ) – a group accustomed to leading the opposition from the reception rooms of the capital ’ s hotels .
The opposition ’ s new leadership also displaced those who wanted to supplant “ populist ” leaders with an anti-political discourse .
Thus , the opposition achieved its objective : a beachhead in Venezuelan politics with real and significant popular support .
This political rebalancing – in terms of both votes and institutions – could create higher barriers against any authoritarian deviation , wherever it might come from .
Chávez and his partisans must now learn what it is like to rule within limits .
The president had hoped to repeat his role as Great Campaigner in previous elections , and so personally led his own campaign , ignoring criticism that he was unfairly taking advantage of the powers of his office .
But in the end , that advantage , and his usual verbal threats , mattered less than the desire of voters in some cities and regions to punish his regime because of its mismanagement .
The paradox of this jolting election is that it will actually stabilize politics in Venezuela , at least for now , and will favor a renewal of democracy .
This is important for the opposition , because their new influence is arising at a time when the economic downturn and slumping oil revenues will make it difficult for the government to continue to buy support through subsidies and handouts .
This does not mean that Chávez ’ s revolutionary and anti-imperialist rhetoric has lost all its appeal .
But it is no longer enough to guarantee his unchecked power .
Indeed , the shadows of militarism that have appeared over the Chávez regime may well have unnerved a majority of Venezuelans , who wonder who the next adversary to be pursued will be .
Nevertheless , it is clear that Chávez will continue with his tropical socialism , proclaiming the value of Venezuela ’ s participatory democracy and insisting on his anti-imperialist creed .
The opposition , meanwhile , will try to expand on its victory , which , though partial , was significant in its political symbolism .
Between these extremes , Venezuela ’ s people will watch events develop , unwilling to compromise their democracy or lose the economic privileges they have attained .
Chávez now faces a new electoral reality , one first established in December 2007 when he lost the advisory referendum he had called in order to secure a new Constitution .
The electoral results of November 2008 , and a global financial crisis that has strained Chávez ’ s ability to pay for his radical policies , may now limit his chances to continue dividing a country whose inhabitants , like most people , want to live in a peaceful and prosperous democracy .
