China \ u0027s Virtual Revolution
After eight years of explosive growth , there are now almost as many internet users in China as there are members of the 70-million-strong Communist Party .
China 's " information elite , " the largely urban , educated , professionals who are China 's internet surfers , are becoming a force of equal size to the ruling political power base .
What will this new center of power mean for the transformation of Chinese society ?
Since the mid-1990s , China 's government has promoted the rapid growth of the internet for its economic benefits .
But it has also been developing a sophisticated political and technological system to control online information .
The government employs a host of new legal regulations , a shadowy internet police force , and a powerful hardware-based national information filtering system .
Control also relies on the demography of internet users , most of whom belong to China 's economic elite and are more likely to adopt the internet as part of a newfound consumer lifestyle than as a tool for political or social revolution .
What is surprising is that the government 's control mechanisms have been largely effective .
But it is also prompting profound social changes that are rooted in a rising rights consciousness within society , something strengthened--and amplified-- not only by the growth of the economy , but by the rapid spread of the internet .
After two and a half decades of market-oriented economic reform , Chinese citizens are increasingly aware of how to protect their economic and social interests by using the language of rights .
When confronting abuses of power , people are increasingly using a new term , " weiquan " ( defending rights ) , to challenge the system .
Another new term , " zhi qing quan " ( right to know ) , has also entered public discourse .
The new terminology inspired by the information technology revolution was especially prevalent after the SARS outbreak last spring , when the government covered up the epidemic until after it had spread throughout China and beyond .
The momentum of this rising demand in China for " rights " can also be seen in the coverage of other major events in the traditional media .
For example , when covering a natural disaster , a major industrial accident , or an urgent public health issue , journalists in the traditional media are not allowed to investigate and report without official sanction .
But the internet is helping to change these rules .
Journalists now learn how to evade government guidelines by distributing and collecting information online , making it more difficult for propaganda bosses to silence the spread of information considered " sensitive . "
Ordinary internet users can also write about events they witness and broadcast their reports online , making the suppression of important breaking news almost impossible .
Moreover , the authorities have a difficult time tracking down and punishing people who spread this kind of " subversive " information--a term frequently used by the government to suppress political dissent--online .
Because Chinese internet users are now more likely to find out about a breaking story in real time and question why the official press hasn 't covered it , China 's conventional media now feel pressure from the public to cover events that they might otherwise dodge .
Online discussion of current events , especially through internet bulletin boards , is another new phenomenon .
One recent survey shows that the number of users registered with China 's ten most popular bulletin boards , which focus on news and political affairs , range from 100,000 to 500,000 .
Mainly through bulletin boards , email mailing list services and an emerging " Web log " community , the internet has begun to provide an alternative public sphere that did not exist in China a few years ago .
Under the state censorship system , most discussions are limited to politically acceptable topics , such as legal reform and anti-corruption efforts .
However , within these boundaries , internet-enabled activism , such as online petitions , have not only expanded the boundaries of traditional media reporting , but presaged some interesting new political consequences as well .
When college student Sun Zhigang was beaten to death by the police in the southern city of Guangzhou this spring , for example , it inspired a storm of online calls for " weiquan , " and provoked debates over the " custody and repatriation system . "
That form of " administrative detention , " used primarily against migrant workers , was the basis for Sun 's detention .
The online protest that ensued undoubtedly played a role in the government 's decision to abolish the system and arrest the officials involved in the case .
Despite government efforts to control the internet , a space to support the rising rights consciousness within Chinese society has been carved out .
As the pervasiveness and flexibility of the new medium weakens traditional media censorship , internet-enabled social activism plays an increasingly influential role in China 's legal reform and the development of its nascent civil society .
China 's 70 million " netizens " may now be in a prime position to guide the transformation of society and determine the country 's future .
But the outcome of this grand experiment , which pits an authoritarian government dedicated to controlling politics against an information technology inherently resistant to such controls , is far from certain .
Ultimately , what happens may tell us as much about the inherent nature of the internet in our evolving world as about a changing China .
