After China \ u0027s Party
BEIJING : China has now finished celebrating the 50th anniversary of Mao 's revolution , but the hangover cure that so many people in the West have been urging upon the country -- a healthy dose of devaluation -- is unlikely to be swallowed .
Instead , the government has put forward a fresh round of fiscal stimulation , including a RMB60 billion new bond issue and the introduction of a new 20 % tax on the interest on savings .
Devaluation , indeed , remains a taboo .
Why are China 's leaders so adamant against devaluing the RMB ?
First , Prime Minister Zhu Rongi and his advisors are very uncertain about the short-run benefits to be gained from any devaluation .
Any boost to competitiveness , for example , is likely to be small and brief , as over 50 % of China 's exports are part of re-export industries using a great deal of imported materials or semi-finished goods .
For these sectors , devaluation means an increase in costs , rather than a gain in competitiveness .
Secondly , devaluation of the RMB may incite tit-for-tat retaliation by other Asian economies .
The decline of China 's exports have been mainly caused by a 20 % decrease in exports to other Asian markets since 1998 .
But as these regional economies are now starting to recover , China 's exports to them are starting to grow .
Although a devaluation of the RMB may not have as much impact on the regional markets as before , it is impossible to calculate what way may deliver higher export growth : devaluation or not disturbing the region 's increasing stabilization .
Doing nothing seems the safer bet .
Moreover , devaluation will impose heavy burdens on China , for example , it will certainly increase the cost of servicing China 's debts and may also worsen the overall balance of payment .
The only foreseeable benefit to be gained through a devaluation is a reduction in uncertainty as an end will be put to the rampant speculation on when the RMB will be devalued .
This may help to increase the foreign investment and reduce the capital flights .
Today , the real issue for China is not devaluation but " de-pegging " – ie , a return to the former " managed float regime " of foreign exchange that prevailed between 1994 and 1997 -- which means giving up the de facto fixed-rate regime which actually pegs the RMB to the US dollar .
Such a break is the only way to prevent over-speculation in the RMB , although de-pegging may cause some initial devaluation under current market conditions .
But the question is : when and how ?
The world-wide dilemma over exchange rate management is that when market pressure is not high necessary changes no longer seem so urgent .
People lack the determination to take the action .
But when pressure is high , government leaders charged with financial management feel trapped in a corner during any currency crisis .
For Chinese policy makers , today 's market pressures are not high enough to force them to take action , as China still enjoys a decent surplus in its balance of payments , both on current account and capital account .
In addition , China 's foreign reserve are rising at an accelerating path in recent months , up to $ 150 billion at the end of July , 1999 .
Last but not the least as a reason not to devalue , China is struggling with deflation and a slowdown in the country 's growth rate .
This is mainly caused by domestic problems ( the bloated state owned enterprises and the government 's failure to reform them , the huge number of non-performing loans on the books of state banks , restrictions to private investment , among many other causes .
External conditions are playing little part in China 's slowdown .
So devaluation is unlikely to be effective in boosting the overall rate of growth .
In any case , devaluation of the RMB in real terms or in terms of competitiveness in relationship with major Asian currencies has been already been occurring over recent months : All Asian currencies , including the Japanese yen , are appreciating ; and domestic prices continue to deflate .
If the US dollar weakens in relation with other major currencies , China may not need to adjust RMB 's nominal rate for quite a while .
Sun Tzu and other Chinese military theorists long ago counseled that doing nothing is sometimes the best way to win in the end .
Today 's Chinese leadership has adopted that bit ancient wisdom to currency management .
