Cristina Kirchner ’ s Choice
BUENOS AIRES – Bolstered by Argentina ’ s economic stability and widespread sympathy for her widowhood , President Cristina Kirchner ’ s easy re-election has confirmed that she can , indeed , govern a complex , contentious , and at times self-destructive society without her husband , Néstor .
His presidency paved the way for hers , but she is a leader in her own right .
The question now is what kind of leader she will want to be in today ’ s more difficult domestic and international context .
The Kirchners lifted Argentina out of the deep crisis of 2001 , presiding over GDP growth rates similar to those of China .
They partly restored Argentina ’ s social and political fabric , which had been weakened by the brutal adjustments made during that crisis , which triggered a president ’ s fall from power , default on the country ’ s debts , and a dramatic decline in living standards that left more than half of the population below the poverty line .
Their management of the economy , which included a deluge of subsidies , reduced unemployment and poverty .
The opposition underestimates the Kirchners ’ achievements , arguing that the international context , particularly high commodity prices – and thus strong export revenues – bailed them out .
While that is true , high export prices alone were no guarantee for success .
But that tailwind may have been squandered , because the Kirchners have yet to make the structural changes – in industry , in the country ’ s energy policy , in education , and elsewhere – needed to free Argentina from extreme dependence on commodity prices .
As a result , if the price of soy continues to fall , subsidies – a source of corruption and patronage – will be an increasingly heavy burden for public spending .
According to unofficial figures , subsidies already represent 5 % of GDP , and only painful adjustments can reduce them .
But what was an emergency remedy has become a long-term policy , because there is no economic activity to take its place .
Few in Argentina , which is enjoying a consumer boom , are worried about inflation .
But prices are already rising at a 20 % annual pace , which , if unchecked , will lead to conflict with the powerful Peronist unions .
Moreover , given the country ’ s history of high inflation ravaging the economy , the problem needs to be addressed soon , before it gets out of hand .
Relations with Brazil expose other difficulties .
Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff ’ s government , which began its term this year with an understanding that economic growth will slow sharply , devalued the real in order to shore up the country ’ s competitiveness .
That was bad news for Argentina , because Brazil , its main trading partner , will now buy less and sell more , undermining Argentina ’ s external position .
In this difficult international context , Cristina Kirchner will need to rebuild relations with the United States and Europe , which have been impaired since the default in 2001 .
Subsequent actions by her husband ’ s administration and her own have blocked improvement .
Néstor ridiculed President George W. Bush in front of the world : host to a summit of heads of state , he organized a parallel anti-summit with supporters of Fidel Castro and Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez .
More recently , Cristina ’ s foreign minister presided over the requisitioning of a US military plane on Argentinean soil .
These spectacles were intended for national consumption , but the Americans deeply resented them .
As for Europe , the Kirchner ’ s have not yet paid off Argentina ’ s debt – pending since the default – to the Paris Club of sovereign creditors .
All of this hinders foreign investment and access to international credit .
In the meantime , the US is opposed to concessionary loans for Argentina from the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank .
In this context , Argentina ’ s rich and powerful vote with their wallets and send their dollars overseas .
This year , the outflow is nearly $ 20 billion – almost a record .
Argentina is a country that lives in an almost continual state of emergency .
Its history has seen many coups , tens of thousands of people missing , a war with Great Britain , bouts of hyperinflation , a brutal economic crisis , default on foreign debt , and its most vulnerable citizens going hungry .
But there is also a theatrical intensity about the Argentine character : we are dramatic like the tango and somber like the novels of Ernesto Sábato .
That exceptional spirit benefited her husband , but the country ’ s institutions paid a high price .
Néstor convinced Parliament to allow him to modify the budget .
Later , he took the liberty of manipulating official statistics in order to hide inflation .
And , while building a system that would do whatever the government wanted , he began a struggle against critical journalism that continues under his wife .
With hard times approaching , will Cristina try to be a twenty-first-century Evita and create an epic by exploiting Argentines ’ flamboyant tendencies , armed with an exceptional power or will she adopt Rouseff ’ s sensible attitude and combat inefficiency and corruption while strengthening governmental institutions ?
If she chooses Rouseff ’ s approach , she will first have to resist the temptation of perpetual re-election .
She and her husband had hit upon a novel scheme : alternating power between them every four years .
Now a widow , she is exposed to the lame-duck syndrome , since she can ’ t be re-elected again .
The same Peronist caudillos that have obeyed her until now could start a war of succession if she does not find a way to continue in office .
If she wants to retain power four years from now , she might do just that .
After all , she now holds absolute control over a docile parliament .
In Argentina , as in many Latin American countries , presidents have so much power that other governmental institutions ’ authority fades , eradicating the boundaries between the executive and the state .
If the only limits on Cristina are her own , Argentina will not weather the coming storm well .
