Defeating Communism Isn \ u0027t Enough for Ukraine
NEW YORK : Leonid Kuchma may have trounced his nearest contender -- the Communist Petro Simonenko -- but his recent election to a second five-year term as Ukraine 's president is no victory for democracy .
Nor is it a victory for Ukraine .
Indeed , Kuchma seems to have torn a page from Boris Yeltsin 's 1996 campaign manual , employing strong-arm tactics to intimidate and silence the opposition , as well as a tainted privatization process to buy support from Ukraine 's powerful and corrupt oligarchs .
While election day itself was relatively free from fraud and thuggery , the process leading up to the ballot was fraught with abuse .
President Kuchma 's administration has proved a jealous overseer of Ukraine 's media , particularly the electronic outlets .
Out of four national television stations , two are directly controlled by Kuchma , and a third by his allies .
The fourth , STB , initially tried to present a balanced picture but was intimidated by tax police raids and forced to become yet another pro-government organ .
In this environment of intimidation , those who yet dared oppose the President got a clear warning through official channels .
Partisan abuse of the country 's administrative structures to discourage dissent is widespread , particularly the use of tax collectors to harass opponents .
On November 1 , the day after the first round of voting that later pitted Kuchma against Simonenko , three governors were unceremoniously dismissed when returns in their oblasts did not favor Kuchma .
While opponents are silenced and maginalized , the President 's supporters grow richer and more powerful .
Victor Pinchuk , a powerful figure from Kuchma 's home town of Dnipropetrovsk , and the boyfriend of the President 's daughter , secured a profitable metalworks in a September round of privatization .
And Oleksander Volkov , who headed one of Kuchma 's campaign teams is a key figure in the President 's camp , with access to inside information despite the fact that investigators in Brussels have frozen his foreign assets and Ukraine 's own Parliament has repeatedly targeted him as part of an " anti-mafia " campaign .
The result for ordinary Ukrainians has been disappointing .
They voted for Kuchma not because they approve of his policies -- his administration 's economic record is dismal -- but because they did not want to see a return of communism .
Young people , who this time turned out in droves , voted for Kuchma because he promised them market reform and integration with Europe .
Their hopes should not be dashed .
President Kuchma must move fast to use his 56 % victory at the polls to distance himself from greedy oligarchs and institute long-promised economic and political reform .
The President needs to be put on notice that the Western governments that have supported him will not tolerate a continuance of the status quo .
A bloated , inefficient , and corrupt government has been able to survive with international help provided largely on account of Ukraine 's geopolitical position .
But a system of crony capitalism that enriches a tiny elite while the vast majority of the country 's 50 million beleaguered citizens live in poverty and are bullied by bureaucrats cannot be sustained in the long run .
The West must make it clear that Ukraine 's geopolitical position isn 't enough to guarantee continued support .
The most important action that can be undertaken is to make continued assistance conditional on political and economic reform .
Ukraine has $ 3.1 billion in debt payments coming due in the year 2000 .
Most of that is owed to the International Monetary Fund , which is rightly insisting on a more transparent privatization process , administrative reform , deregulation , anti-corruption and other measures before allowing the country to borrow new cash or roll over its current debt .
Further assistance should also be made conditional on greater freedom of the mass media and an end to intimidation .
Political conditions are as important as this or that economic target .
I have been deeply committed to helping the development of democracy and open society in Ukraine for over a decade .
I established a nonprofit foundation there in 1989 , two years before the country became independent in 1991 .
I shall continue my support for that foundation .
And I urge other donors to maintain or increase their support for building an open society in Ukraine .
But financial support to the government must be strictly conditioned on performance .
The weeks ahead will be decisive .
Kuchma has appointed Yevhen Marchuk , a former KGB man who was a presidential candidate , to head Ukraine 's National Security Council .
Will Marchuk begin to clean the stables as many Ukrainians hope ?
He needs to break the stranglehold of the crony capitalists if he is to survive in his position .
Or will he be co-opted by corruption as Kuchma himself has been ?
In that case it is better to withdraw support than to allow the same disreputable tactics to be used in two years time when the next parliamentary elections are due .
