Deconstructing Yeltsin
PRINCETON : Around the world commentators fondly insist that Boris Yeltsin 's relations with reality are episodic , unpredictable , erratic , maybe even insane .
Sacking your entire cabinet when everyone thinks you are home sick in bed only adds to this impression .
But those who subscribe to it are very wrong .
True , Yeltsin is not the healthiest president Russia has ever had , but his actions in dismissing his government are neither strange nor the result of illness .
They are very Russian .
The sheer " Russianness " of Russia ’ s president should not be hard for outsiders to grasp .
The problem is that , for years , the world has misinterpreted Yeltsin .
By declaring himself anti-communist a decade ago , Yeltsin earned the nearly unconditional support of the United States and the West .
But being a democrat does not make Yeltsin any less Russian .
Every time he does something typically Russian , the world ( America most of all ) seems genuinely stunned .
Rash and rushed attempts are made to explain away his behavior as caused by bad advisers , old age , failing health , and / or a feeble mental capacity .
It is , of course , difficult to make sense of someone who declares himself just like you and then acts in ways you can scarcely fathom .
Look again at Yeltsin 's actions over the past five years , however , and each makes perfect sense from the point-of-view of an authoritarian Russian leader a little modernized and democratized by the existence of open borders .
In 1993 Russia ’ s president ordered his tanks to open fire at his own Parliament , excusing this as necessitated by a threat to democracy .
In 1994 Yeltsin started a war in Chechnya , insisting that guns were the only means with which to deal with uppity nationalist rebels .
In 1995 at the United Nations he declared that Russia would not support an American presence in Bosnia ; after a personal meeting with President Clinton , however , he suddenly agreed to back up the American president , apparently for the sake of the presidential buddy system .
After being out of his office for almost a year because of illness , on his return in March 1997 Yeltsin sacked practically his entire cabinet , accusing them of not working , and claiming that a little anxiety was a good way to teach Russians how to do their jobs .
This year ’ s cabinet dismissals are a familiar sort of deja-vu , at least through Russian eyes , and not only because these mass firings happened two years running .
Russians remember that when Stalin felt that things were getting too quiet , he would shake people up with a purge .
Granted , Stalin 's urges were bloody and violent , but the impulse to upset the applecart on a whim remains incredibly familiar to Russians .
Russian leaders ( as do ordinary Russians ) like drama ; they lack patience .
This is why Russians prefer revolutions : it is easier to fix the blame on someone for the world ’ s imperfections than bring about change in a steady , persistent way .
To achieve most things you need a clear strategy .
But Russians are not good at stratagizing .
They act on impulse ; wait to see what happens ; hoping that things will turn out right .
Yeltsin , I believe , has no clear understanding of what his government should do or be .
He felt an urge , and now the chips will fall and only he can pick up the pieces .
One other thing to keep in mind about Yeltsin is this : Russian leaders are not prepared mentally to leave office in their lifetime .
Chernomyrdin , an acting president whenever Yeltsin took to his sick bed , acquired excessive power insofar as Yeltsin was concerned .
More and more Chernomyrdin appeared anointed the president 's successor .
It became a question of Boris Nikolaevich 's honor to show " who is a master in the house . "
So he did , and in a very clever way .
Yeltsin didn 't simply fire his prime minister , allowing Chernomyrdin to go into opposition and become a real threat , which is the mistake Gorbachev made with Yeltsin in 1989 .
No , Yeltsin gently shifted his premier into managing a future presidential campaign , most likely Yeltsin 's own .
As for Sergei Kirienko , the 35- year-old acting prime minister , the message is obvious : it doesn 't matter who governs , as long as I , President Yeltsin , am in charge .
All of this tumult is mere prelude .
Any number of articles in the Russian press suggest the possibility of Yeltsin running once more for president in 2000 .
Russia ’ s Constitutional Court will decide about the legality of this come October .
Although the constitution limits the president to 8 years in office , just when the clock started on Yeltsin is in question : did it begin when he was elected president of a Russia still part of the USSR , or did it only begin in July 1996 , after he won the first presidential campaign conducted by the Russian Federation ?
I ’ m no constitutional scholar , but I see all sorts of escapes for Yeltsin within his constitution .
So imagine what kind of loopholes a real lawyer can discover if the president asks him nicely to find them ?
In a country where law is the man in power , this remains probable .
Instead of seeing Yeltsin ’ s actions as erratic , we should recognize them for what they are : declarations that he remains strong and powerful , and planning to stay high up for years to come .
Yeltsin may lack the stamina to complete another 6 years as president , but that doesn ’ t matter .
He will insist on serving his country until his dying breath , on leaving this world only from his Kremlin office .
In this , Boris Yeltsin is a most typical Russian leader .
