Creativity , Corporatism , and Crowds
NEW HAVEN – Economic growth , as we learned long ago from the works of economists like MIT ’ s Robert M. Solow , is largely driven by learning and innovation , not just saving and the accumulation of capital .
Ultimately , economic progress depends on creativity .
That is why fear of “ secular stagnation ” in today ’ s advanced economies has many wondering how creativity can be spurred .
One prominent argument lately has been that what is needed most is Keynesian economic stimulus – for example , deficit spending .
After all , people are most creative when they are active , not when they are unemployed .
Others see no connection between stimulus and renewed economic dynamism .
As German Chancellor Angela Merkel recently put it , Europe needs “ political courage and creativity rather than billions of euros . ”
In fact , we need both .
If we are to encourage dynamism , we need Keynesian stimulus and other policies that encourage creativity – particularly policies that promote solid financial institutions and social innovation .
In his 2013 book Mass Flourishing , Edmund Phelps argues that we need to promote “ a culture protecting and inspiring individuality , imagination , understanding , and self-expression that drives a nation ’ s indigenous innovation . ”
He believes that creativity has been stifled by a public philosophy described as corporatism , and that only through thorough reform of our private institutions , financial and others , can individuality and dynamism be restored .
Phelps stresses that corporatist thinking has had a long and enduring history , going back to Saint Paul , the author of as many as 14 books of the New Testament .
Paul used the human body ( corpus in Latin ) as a metaphor for society , suggesting that in a healthy society , as in a healthy body , every organ must be preserved and none permitted to die .
As a public-policy credo , corporatism has come to mean that the government must support all members of society , whether individuals or organizations , giving support to failing businesses and protecting existing jobs alike .
According to Phelps , Pope Leo XIII advocated a corporatist view in his 1891 encyclical Rerum Novarum , and Pope Pius XI amplified these ideas in his 1931 encyclical Quadragesimo Anno .
But , in reading these works , I do not find a clear or persuasive statement of any economic doctrine , except for basic notions of fairness and Christian charity .
In fact , an Ngrams search of books shows that the term corporatism began to become popular only after the mid-1930s , and achieved broad currency by the 1970s and 1980s .
The term seems to have been used most often by critics , often to denounce the defunct Fascist philosophy , or by those extolling elements of a “ new ” corporatism .
Surely , elements of corporatist thinking persist today .
People who might not stress that the government should protect failing businesses or redundant workers still have sympathies that might often lead to such outcomes .
Historically , an important spur toward corporatist thinking was Gustave Le Bon ’ s 1895 book The Crowd , which coined the terms “ crowd psychology ” and “ collective mind . ”
For Le Bon , “ An individual in a crowd ” – not only angry mobs on the street , but also other psychologically interconnected groups of people – “ is a grain of sand amid other grains of sand , which the wind stirs up at will . ”
Le Bon believed that crowds need strong leaders , to distance them from their natural madness and transform them into civilizations of splendor , vigor , and brilliance .
Mussolini and Hitler both took inspiration from his book , and incorporated his ideas into Fascist and Nazi ideology ; and those ideas did not die with those regimes .
Still , the word “ crowd ” has taken on an entirely different meaning – and political valence – in our century .
Crowdsourcing and crowd-funding have created new kinds of crowds , of the sort that Le Bon never could have imagined .
As Le Bon emphasized , people cannot easily do great things as individuals .
They need to operate together within organizations that redirect crowd psychology , facilitate creativity , and are led by people of integrity .
Any such organizational technology , however , is subject to error and requires experimentation .
When the crowd-sourced Wikipedia was started in 2001 , its success was not obvious .
Even one of its founders , Jimmy Wales , found it a little hard to believe : “ It ’ s kind of surprising that you could just open up a site and let people work . ”
When the United States ’ Jumpstart Our Business Startups ( JOBS ) Act , which facilitated true crowd-funding of enterprises , was signed by President Barack Obama in 2012 , it was an experiment , too .
Many critics said that it would result in the exploitation of naive investors .
We still do not know whether that is true , or how well the experiment will work .
But if the JOBS Act does not succeed , we should not abandon the idea , but try to modify it .
Ultimately , we need economic institutions that somehow promote the concerted creative actions of a wide swath of the world ’ s people .
They should not be corporatist institutions , dominated by central leaders , but should derive their power from the fluid actions of modern crowds .
Some of those actions will have to be disruptive , because the momentum of organizations can carry them beyond their usefulness .
But there must also be enough continuity that people can trust their careers and futures to such organizations .
Acknowledging the need to experiment and design new forms of economic organization must not mean abandoning fairness and compassion .
