Defending Japanese Defense
Japan ’ s government and National Security Council plan to revise the country ’ s National Defense Program Outline ( NDPO ) by the end of this year .
A draft of proposed changes submitted to Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi assigns three key tasks to the Self-Defense Forces ( SDF ) : effective response to new threats , participation in international peacekeeping activities , and defense against invasion .
Today ’ s complex security environment , with terrorist attacks by non-state actors occurring alongside traditional state-to-state wars , demands a nimble , integrated strategy . The draft revision of the NDPO seems to recognize this , emphasizing the need for Japan ’ s own defense efforts , cooperation through the Japanese-US alliance , and contributions to multilateral missions .
Moreover , the National Security Council has indicated the need to introduce a new plan for multi-functional flexible defense forces .
Unfortunately , key components of Japan ’ s emerging security strategy remain vague and contradictory .
For example , while the likelihood of an invasion threat is judged to be low , the Defense White Paper of 2004 argues that the SDF ’ s “ most fundamental function ” is to prepare for the worst , because sufficient defensive power cannot be developed overnight .
In other words , Japan will clearly assert its will to defend the nation , and to prevent invasion in combination with the Japan-US security system .
On the other hand , the National Security Council proposes “ scaling down the size of defense forces , ” implying mitigation of the will to defend .
Indeed , the failure to suggest any possibility of an “ emergency expansion ” of the SDF compounds this anxiety .
To be sure , the government is ultimately responsible for determining the appropriate scale of defense power in line with fiscal considerations .
But it is also the responsibility of the government to prepare a detailed and realistic policy aimed at securing the necessary level of defense capability in the event of unforeseen threats .
Japan ’ s government should thus give a clear indication of a true will to defend the country ’ s security .
Of course , defense capability cannot be judged solely according to force levels .
The draft NDPO ’ s vision of a new , more adaptable , mobile , flexible , and multi-purpose SDF , with advanced technological resources and information gathering capacity , calls for a fundamental reassessment of the existing organization and equipment .
In conformity with the international community ’ s efforts to secure peace and stability , the draft also creates a core unit within each of the military branches , and establishes an integrated operational system .
The military reorganization that the NDPO envisages is far-reaching . Japan ’ s ground forces are to reorient their current structure , which is geared to combat capability in response to large-scale invasion , toward increased adaptability for military action in less severe circumstances .
The navy is to shift its focus away from the anti-submarine warfare ( ASW ) capability of the Cold War era , creating a structure aimed at defending islands , monitoring and responding to ballistic missiles , and combating illegal spy ship activities .
The air force is to continue its monitoring activities in neighboring airspace and maintain response readiness against air attack , while modifying invasion response tactics somewhat as the likelihood of an attack from the air diminishes .
One problem is the dilution of ASW capability .
Japan needs to develop well-balanced defense forces with the capacity needed to respond to new threats , such as the rapid build-up of China ’ s navy , especially its submarine forces .
The importance of ASW capability in the Western Pacific has not waned .
On the contrary , recent illegal violation of Japanese territorial waters by Chinese nuclear submarines suggests that , rather than being reduced , ASW capability should be built up further .
If Japan does decide to scale down its defense forces in this respect , a bold and qualitative change is inevitable .
In particular , this could mean the introduction of what has so far been viewed as somewhat taboo equipment , such as light aircraft carriers or nuclear submarines .
In this age of uncertainty , when even the nature of the threats that nations face is uncertain , Japan ’ s strategic and military planners must continue to seek ways to adapt the SDF to today ’ s myriad current threats .
But they must do so in a way that provides genuine direction , and that Japan ’ s people , military , and neighbors find convincing .
