Cyber Insecurity
CAMBRIDGE – In August 2008 , Russian troops moved into Georgia .
Observers dispute who fired first , but there was a little noticed dimension of the conflict that will have major repercussions for the future .
Computer hackers attacked Georgian government Web sites in the weeks preceding the outbreak of armed conflict .
The Russia-Georgia conflict represents the first significant cyber attacks accompanying armed conflict .
Welcome to the twenty-first century .
Cyber threats and potential cyber warfare illustrate the increased vulnerabilities and loss of control in modern societies .
Governments have mainly been concerned about hacker attacks on their own bureaucracy ’ s information technology infrastructure , but there are social vulnerabilities well beyond government computers .
In an open letter to the US president in September 2007 , American professionals in cyber defense warned that “ the critical infrastructure of the United States , including electrical power , finance , telecommunications , health care , transportation , water , defense , and the Internet , is highly vulnerable to cyber attack .
Fast and resolute mitigating action is needed to avoid national disaster . ”
In the murky world of the Internet , attackers are difficult to identify .
In today ’ s interconnected world , an unidentified cyber attack on non-governmental infrastructure might be severely damaging .
For example , some experts believe that a nation ’ s electric power grid may be particularly susceptible .
The control systems that electric power companies use are thought vulnerable to attack , which could shut down cities and regions for days or weeks .
Cyber attacks may also interfere with financial markets and cause immense economic loss by closing down commercial Web sites .
Some scenarios , including an “ electronic Pearl Harbor , ” sound alarmist , but they illustrate the diffusion of power from central governments to individuals .
In 1941 , the powerful Japanese navy used many resources to create damage thousands of miles away .
Today , an individual hacker using malicious software can cause chaos in far-away places at little cost to himself .
Moreover , the information revolution enables individuals to perpetrate sabotage with unprecendented speed and scope .
The so-called “ love bug virus , ” launched in the Phillipines in 2000 , is estimated to have cost billions of dollars in damage .
Terrorists , too , can exploit new vulnerabilities in cyberspace to engage in asymmetrical warfare .
In 1998 , when America complained about seven Moscow Internet addresses involved in the theft of Pentagon and NASA secrets , the Russian government replied that phone numbers from which the attacks originated were inoperative .
The US had no way of knowing whether the Russian government had been involved .
More recently , in 2007 , China ’ s government was accused of sponsoring thousands of hacking incidents against German federal government computers and defense and private-sector computer systems in the US .
But it was difficult to prove the source of the attack , and the Pentagon had to shut down some of its computer systems .
In 2007 , when Estonia ’ s government moved a World War II statue commemorating Soviet war dead , hackers retaliated with a costly denial-of-service attack that closed down Estonia ’ s access to the internet .
There was no way to prove whether the Russian government , a spontaneous nationalist response , or both aided this transnational attack .
In January 2008 , President George W. Bush signed two presidential directives that called for establishing a comprehensive cyber-security plan , and his 2009 budget requested $ 6 billion to develop a system to protect national cyber security .
President-elect Barack Obama is likely to follow suit .
In his campaign , Obama called for tough new standards for cyber security and physical resilience of critical infrastructure , and promised to appoint a national cyber adviser who will report directly to him and be responsible for developing policy and coordinating federal agency efforts .
That job will not be easy , because much of the relevant infrastructure is not under direct government control .
Just recently , Donald Kerr , the US deputy director of national intelligence , warned that “ major losses of information and value for our government programs typically aren ’ t from spies .... In fact , one of the great concerns I have is that so much of the new capabilities that we ’ re all going to depend on aren ’ t any longer developed in government labs under government contract . ”
Kerr described what he called “ supply chain attacks ” in which hackers not only steal proprietary information , but go further and insert erroneous data and programs in communications hardware and software – Trojan horses that can be used to bring down systems .
All governments will find themselves exposed to a new type of threat that will be difficult to counter .
Governments can hope to deter cyber attacks just as they deter nuclear or other armed attacks .
But deterrence requires a credible threat of response against an attacker .
And that becomes much more difficult in a world where governments find it hard to tell where cyber attacks come from , whether from a hostile state or a group of criminals masking as a foreign government .
While an international legal code that defines cyber attacks more clearly , together with cooperation on preventive measures , can help , such arms-control solutions are not likely to be sufficient .
Nor will defensive measures like constructing electronic firewalls and creating redundancies in sensitive systems .
Given the enormous uncertainties involved , the new cyber dimensions of security must be high on every government ’ s agenda .
